CODE OF THE CITY OF ROCKY MOUNT 
____________ 
Published in 1989 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted February 26, 1990 
Effective February 26, 1990 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF ROCKY MOUNT 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Frederick E. Turnage 
Mayor 
____________ 
Josh Munden 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Helen P. Gay 
Donald R. Armstrong 
Leonard Wiggins 
William E. Broughton 
Jimmie G. Armstrong 
James T. Hubbard 
City Council 
____________ 
William H. Batchelor 
City Manager 
____________ 
Richard J. Rose 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Jean M. Bailey 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Rocky Mount, North Carolina of a general and permanent nature. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1967 Code, as supplemented through July 13, 1987, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1967 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 2 is numbered 2-1 and the third section of Chapter 4 is 4-3. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 5-1 and 5-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 5-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 6 and 7, it will be designated as Chapter 6.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
    The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date periodically. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Successfully keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Supervising Editor, and Laura Johnson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to William H. Batchelor, city manager, and Jean Bailey, city clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 0-90-13 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF ROCKY MOUNT; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF ROCKY MOUNT: 
      Section 1. The Code entitled the "Code of the City of Rocky Mount" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 22, each inclusive, is adopted. 
      Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 26, 1988, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
      Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
      Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding thirty (30) days. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
      Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
      Section 6. Ordinances adopted after September 26, 1988 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
      Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective February 26, 1990. 
     Passed and adopted by the City Council this 26th day of February, 1990. 
/s/ Frederick E. Turnage 
      Mayor   /s/ Jean M. Bailey 
      Clerk   Certificate of Adoption 
     I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the City Council of the City of Rocky Mount held on the 26th day of February, 1990. 
/s/ Jean M. Bailey 
      Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance 
Number Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supplement 
Number O-2009-12  2- 8-10 Omitted 66 O-2009-126 12-14-09 Included 66 O-2010-84 10-11-10 Included 67 O-2010-111 12-13-10 Included 67 O-2011-21  3-14-11 Included 68 O-2011-25  3-14-11 Included 68 O-2011-29  3-28-11 Included 68 O-2011-32  4-11-11 Included 68 O-2011-37  5- 9-11 Included 68 O-2011-70  7-11-11 Included 69 O-2011-85  9-12-11 Included 69 O-2011-92 10-31-11 Included 69 O-2011-103 11-14-11 Included 69 O-2011-111 11-28-11 Included 70 O-2011-117 12-12-11 Included 70 O-2012-18  4- 9-12 Included 71 O-2012-61  6-25-12 Included 71 O-2012-71  7-23-12 Included 72 O-2012-85  8-27-12 Included 72 O-2012-100 11-12-12 Included 73 O-2012-104 11-26-12 Included 73 O-2013-28  5-28-13 Included 74 O-2013-89  9-23-13 Included 75 O-2014-13  3-24-14 Included 76 O-2014-14  3-24-14 Included 76 O-2013-71  6-24-13 Included 77 O-2014-8  2-10-14 Included 77 O-2014-40  6- 9-14 Included 77 O-2014-58  6-23-14 Included 77 O-2014-61  7-14-14 Included 77 O-2014-73  9-22-14 Included 77 O-2015-4  1-12-15 Included 78 O-2015-21  4-13-15 Included 79 O-2015-86  8-24-15 Included 79 O-2016-32  5- 9-16 Included 80 O-2016-60  7-25-16 Included 80 O-2016-62  8- 8-16 Included 80 O-2016-63  8- 8-16 Included 80 O-2016-95 12-12-16 Included 81 O-2017-4  1-11-17 Included 81 O-2017-13  2-27-17 Included 81 O-2017-95 11-13-17 Included 82 O-2017-96 11-13-17 Included 82 O-2018-2  1- 8-18 Included 82 O-2017-79  8-28-17 Included 83 O-2018-54  6-11-18 Included 83 O-2018-71  7- 9-18 Included 83 O-2018-78  8-13-18 Included 83 O-2018-79  8-13-18 Included 83  
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS 
SUBPART A - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the City's Charter as enacted by Session Law 2003-327, H.B. 313, ratified July 19, 2003, effective Jan. 1, 2004. Amendments are indicated by history notes following the affected sections. The format of the Charter, including chapters, articles, section numbers has been retained. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Words added for clarification have been added in brackets. 

CHAPTER I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Charter, the following words are hereby defined to mean as set forth, unless otherwise clearly required by the context: 
(a)  City. The word "City" shall mean the City of Rocky Mount. 
(b)  City Council. The words "City Council" shall mean the City Council of the City of Rocky Mount. 
CHAPTER II. - ORGANIZATION AND POWERS 
ARTICLE I. - CITY BOUNDARIES 

Section 2. - Existing City Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the City shall be those existing at the time of the effective date of this Charter until modified in accordance with law. 
Section 3. - Wards. 
    The City shall be divided into seven single-member electoral districts (referred to in this Charter as "wards"), each ward representing the same number of persons as nearly as possible. The City Council shall have the authority to revise the ward boundaries for the purposes of: 
(1)  Accounting for territory annexed to or excluded from the City; and 
(2)  Correcting population imbalances between the wards shown by a new federal census or caused by exclusions or annexations. Changes in the ward boundaries shall be made by a five-sevenths vote of all the members of the City Council. 
ARTICLE II. - CORPORATE POWERS 

Section 10. - General Rights and Powers. 
    The inhabitants of the City are a body corporate and politic under the name City of Rocky Mount. The City has all of the powers, duties, rights, privileges, and immunities conferred and imposed on cities by the Constitution of North Carolina and the General Statutes of North Carolina. In addition to the powers conferred as stated above, the City shall possess the following powers and authority: 
(1)  To regulate or prohibit the sale, use, and storage of gunpowder, dynamite, gasoline, naphtha, and all other dangerous, explosive or combustible substances within the corporate limits of the City, or within one mile thereof; to regulate or prohibit the discharge of firearms or the firing or setting off of fireworks or other explosives within such corporate limits or within one mile thereof. 
(2)  To regulate or prohibit all sports, theatrical exhibitions, agricultural or other fairs, circuses, tent revivals, and other public performances and exhibitions within the corporate limits of the City. 
(3)  To regulate public ways as follows: No person (natural or corporate) or combination or association of any such persons shall use the public streets, street rights-of-way, or alleys of the City for nonstreet or nonvehicular purposes, except upon the grant of a franchise, license, or easement by the City Council. 
(4)  To promote the right of gainful employment, industrial and commercial opportunities, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City, either directly or through such instrumentalities or agencies as exist or may exist (including the City of Rocky Mount Business Development Authority) for the public purpose of alleviating unemployment with its resulting spread of indigence and economic stagnation, by fostering and promoting business and industry, and developing commerce and trade, and inducing the location of manufacturing, industrial and commercial enterprises in or about the City by advertising, establishing industrial parks, extending electric, natural gas, and water and sewer lines, and by acquiring real and personal property, owning, improving, equipping, and maintaining the same, and selling, leasing, exchanging, and conveying such property in furtherance of any such purposes. 
(5)  To regulate or prohibit junkyards and other places where junked automobiles, scrap metal, and other junk are dismantled or stored within the corporate limits of the City or within two miles thereof. 
(6)  To regulate or prohibit boxing and wrestling matches or exhibitions. 
(7)  To do any and all things as are deemed by the City Council necessary and requisite to establish, promote, advance, and maintain the general welfare, culture, and economy of the City, its environs and inhabitants. 
(8)  To regulate and control by ordinance the use of all lands owned by the City and any waters covering such lands either within or without the corporate limits, including, but not limited to, use by the public of any body of water covering lands owned by the City, wherever the same may be located. 
Section 11. - Form of Government. 
    The City shall operate under the council-manager form of government as provided in G.S. 160A-147, et seq. 
Section. 12. - Method of Elections. 
    City elections and runoff elections shall be conducted using the nonpartisan election and runoff election method as provided in N.C.G.S. § 163-293. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-27, § 1, adopted 4-25-05, eff. 5-27-05) 
ARTICLE III. - AMENDMENTS 

Section 21. - How Charter Amended. 
    The Charter shall be amended only by an act of the General Assembly of North Carolina or as otherwise provided by law. 
CHAPTER III. - GOVERNING BODY 
ARTICLE I. - CITY COUNCIL 

Section 31. - Composition. 
    The City Council shall consist of seven members. One [City] Council member shall be apportioned to each of the respective wards of the City. The qualified voters of each ward shall elect a [City] Council member for the seat apportioned to that ward. 
Section 32. - City Council Members; Terms; Qualifications; Vacancies. 
(a)  Terms of Office. [City] Council members shall serve staggered terms of four years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. The terms of the [City] Council members in office on the effective date of this Charter shall not be affected by the adoption of this Charter. 
(b)  Qualifications. No person shall be eligible to file for, or be elected to, the City Council, or to serve thereon, unless such person is a qualified voter, 21 years of age, a resident of the City and of the ward from which he seeks to be elected, and has not been disqualified as provided in the Constitution of North Carolina. 
(c)  Change of Residence. If any elected [City] Council member shall cease to reside in the ward from which elected, such [City] Council member shall thereafter be disqualified from serving as a [City] Council member from such ward, and the City Council shall name a successor; however, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply in the event of changes in the ward boundaries. Any [City] Council member who becomes a resident of a different ward as a result of a relocation of boundaries shall continue to represent the ward from which elected until the expiration of the term for which he was elected. 
Section 33. - Organization, Powers, and Procedures of City Council Members. 
(a)  Oath. Any [City] Council member-elect who shall not be present at the organizational meeting of the City Council may take the oath of office at any time thereafter. 
(b)  Other Powers and Procedures. Except as otherwise specifically provided by this Charter, the City Council shall have authority to adopt rules of procedure and generally regulate the manner and method of the exercise of its powers. All meetings shall be held within the City of Rocky Mount, except in case of an emergency. If the City Council deems it desirable to hold a joint meeting with the governing body of another municipality or political subdivision of the State of North Carolina, the City Council may at its election, meet with the other governing body at a designated place, within the area subject to the jurisdiction of the other governing body. 
Section 34. - Quorum, Votes, Attendance of [City] Council Members. 
(a)  Quorum; Attendance. A majority of the members elected to the City Council shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a less number may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members by ordering them to be taken into custody. 
(b)  Ordinances. All ordinances offered for adoption shall be in writing, and no ordinance shall be passed finally on the date on which it is introduced unless by a vote of five-sevenths of the entire membership of the City Council or the unanimous consent of those present whenever there are less than five-sevenths of the membership present. 
(c)  Votes. All final votes of the City Council involving the making of assessments or levying of taxes, and all votes where requested by a [City] Council member, shall be by roll call. The Mayor shall announce the result of each vote of the [City] Council. 
Section 35. - Ordinances, Rules and Regulations. 
    In addition to the other powers conferred upon it by this Charter, the City Council may adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, rules and regulations not inconsistent with law, as may be necessary or appropriate for the preservation and promotion of the comfort, culture, economy, convenience, good order, better government, and general welfare of the City and its inhabitants. 
Section 36. - Removal of [City] Council Members. 
    The City Council shall have the power on the vote of five-sevenths of its members to remove any one of its members for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance of office, after a hearing of the matter before the City Council, at which time the subject of such hearing may be present and represented by counsel. Notice of such hearing shall be served on the subject thereof at least two weeks in advance of the hearing in person, if possible, and if not possible, by publication. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR 

Section 61. - Qualifications and Term of Office. 
(a)  Term of Office. The Mayor shall serve a term of four years and until a successor is duly elected and qualified. The term of the Mayor in office on the effective date of this Charter shall not be affected by the adoption of this Charter. 
(b)  Qualifications. No person shall be eligible to be elected Mayor, or to serve as Mayor, unless such person is a qualified voter, 21 years of age, a resident of the City, and has not been disqualified as provided in the Constitution of North Carolina. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY MANAGER 

Section 81. - Appointment; Duties; Removal. 
(a)  Appointment; Removal. The City Council shall appoint the City Manager, who shall be the administrative head of the City government and shall serve at the pleasure of the [City] Council. In the event of removal, the City Manager may demand and shall be entitled to a public hearing thereon before the City Council prior to the date on which his final removal shall take effect and may there be represented by counsel; but the decision of the [City] Council shall be final, and pending such hearing, the [City] Council may suspend the City Manager from duty. 
(b)  Administrative Service. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service of the City through the City Manager. No member of the City Council shall give orders to or attempt to influence the action of any subordinate of the City Manager either publicly or privately. Where this Charter or any ordinance or statute gives to the City Manager the power to appoint or to employ persons in the administrative service of the City, neither the City Council nor any of its members shall attempt to in any manner influence the City Manager in the appointment or employment of any such person or persons. The City Manager shall have the power to suspend and dismiss any person appointed, and such action in every case shall be final. 
(c)  General Authority and Duties. The City Manager shall, except when clearly inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, exercise supervision and control over all departments and divisions of the City. The City Manager shall keep the City Council at all times advised as to the conditions and efficiency of the various departments of the City under said City Manager's direction and control and of the needs and conditions of the City. The City Manager shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or be required by ordinance or resolution of the City Council. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY ATTORNEY 

Section 90. - Appointment. 
    The City Council shall appoint an attorney or firm of attorneys to serve as City Attorney. The City Attorney shall be the City's legal advisor and shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Council. 
Section 91. - Other Attorneys. 
    The City Council or City Manager may employ such other attorneys as they deem advisable. 
ARTICLE V. - CITY CLERK 

Section 100. - Appointment; Powers and Duties. 
    The City Council shall appoint a City Clerk who shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Council. The City Clerk shall be the custodian of all records, documents, papers, and other articles committed to the office and shall surrender the same to any successor. The City Clerk shall be the custodian of the common seal of the City and shall attest the execution of and affix the common seal to all legal documents executed by the Mayor in behalf of the City and shall perform any other duties as may be prescribed by law or assigned by the [City] Council. 
ARTICLE VI. - CITY TREASURER 

Section 110. - Appointment; Powers and Duties. 
    The City Council shall appoint from its membership a City Treasurer who shall hold office at the pleasure of the [City] Council. All notes, bonds, or other evidences of indebtedness of the City shall bear the City Treasurer's signature, which, when authorized by the City Treasurer in writing, may also be by facsimile signatures. 
CHAPTER IV. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Section 140. - Appointment, Powers and Duties of Chief of Police and Police Officers. 
(a)  Chief. The City Manager shall appoint the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall have immediate direction and control of the Police Department, subject to the supervision of the City Manager, and to such rules, regulations, and orders as the City Manager may prescribe. 
(b)  General Powers. The Chief of Police and each member of the police force shall have, for the purpose of enforcing City ordinances and regulations, or preserving the peace of the City, and of suppressing disturbances, and apprehending offenders, the powers of peace officers vested in sheriffs and constables. 
(c)  Public Peace. The Chief of Police and other police officers of the City shall have the power, and it shall be their duty, to suppress all breaches of the public peace, and all disturbances of the quiet and good order of the City, and they may, with or without warrant, arrest, anywhere within the corporate limits of the City, or within one mile thereof, any person charged with the violation of any ordinance of the City, or with any other offense whatsoever against the public peace, and the quiet and good order of the community. 
(d)  Other Duties. In addition to the foregoing, the Chief of Police and other police officers shall perform such other duties as may from time to time be prescribed by the City Manager not inconsistent with the Constitution and laws of the State of North Carolina and the provisions of this Charter. 
Section 141. - Police Emergency Lines. 
    The Chief of Police or other police officer in charge at the scene of a parade, accident, disturbance, crime scene, natural or artificial disaster, or emergency, or any large gathering of people shall have authority to provide barricades, ropes, signs, or other means of restraint, and it shall be unlawful for any person other than a law enforcement officer, firefighter, or other person having official business at the scene to cross such a line without express permission of the police officer at the scene. 
CHAPTER V. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Section 150. - Appointment, Powers and Duties of Fire Chief. 
(a)  Appointment; General Authority. The City Manager shall appoint a Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall have immediate direction and control of the Fire Department, subject to the supervision of the City Manager and to such rules, regulations, and orders as the City Manager may prescribe. 
(b)  Destroying Property at Fires. The Fire Chief, and in the Fire Chief's absence, any assistant, may order the blowing up, tearing down, or other destruction of any building when it is deemed necessary to stop the progress of a fire. No person shall be held liable, civilly or criminally, for acting in obedience to their orders, nor shall the Fire Chief or any assistant, the City, the Mayor, the City Manager, or the City Council be held liable, civilly or criminally, for the giving of such orders or for damages to property ordered destroyed. 
(c)  Fire, etc., Emergency Lines. The Chief of Police or other police officer, or the Fire Chief or any assistant, in charge at the scene of a fire, accident, disturbance, natural or artificial disaster or emergency, or any large gathering of people, shall have authority to provide barricades, ropes, signs, or other means of restraint, and it shall be unlawful for any person other than a law enforcement officer, firefighter, or other person having official business at the scene to cross such a line without express permission of the person in charge at the scene. 
(d)  Other Duties. The Fire Chief and other firefighters shall perform such other duties in addition to those provided in this Charter as may be prescribed by law or City ordinances, or that may from time to time be prescribed by the City Manager. 
CHAPTER VI. - AUXILIARY POLICE OFFICERS AND FIREFIGHTERS 

Section 160. - Authorized. 
    The City Council may provide for the organization, recruiting, training, equipping, and appointing of auxiliary police officers and auxiliary firefighters for the City. 
Section 161. - Civil Liability. 
    The City shall be entitled to the same immunities with respect to the action of auxiliary police officers and auxiliary firefighters in the performance of their duties or training or otherwise, to which it is entitled with respect to the actions of regular City police officers and firefighters in the performance of their duties. 
CHAPTER VII. - SPECIAL PROCEDURES AND REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - EMINENT DOMAIN 

Section 360. - Condemnation Procedure. 
(a)  Generally. The City shall possess the power of eminent domain and may acquire, either by purchase, gift, or condemnation, any real estate, right of access, right-of-way, water right, privilege, easement, restrictive covenant, or any other interest in or relating to real estate, water or improvements, either within or without the City limits, for any lawful public use or purpose. In the exercise of the power of eminent domain, the City is hereby vested with all power and authority now or hereafter granted by the laws of North Carolina applicable to the City, and the City shall follow the procedures now or hereafter prescribed by such laws; provided that, notwithstanding the provisions of G.S. 160A-240.1 and G.S. 40A-1, in the exercise of its authority of eminent domain for the acquisition of property or any interest in property to be used for streets and highways; water supply and distribution systems; sewage collection and disposal systems; electric power generation, transmission and distribution systems; and gas storage, transmission, and distribution systems, the City is hereby authorized to use the procedure and authority prescribed in Article 9 of Chapter 136 of the General Statutes of North Carolina, as now or hereafter amended or recodified; provided further, that whenever the words "Department of Transportation" appear in such Article 9 they shall be deemed to include the "City of Rocky Mount," and whenever the words "Secretary of Transportation" appear in such Article 9 they shall be deemed to include the "City Manager of the City of Rocky Mount." The powers granted to the City in this Charter for the purpose of acquiring property by eminent domain shall be in addition to and supplementary to those powers granted in any other local act or in any other general statute, and in any case in which the provisions of Article 9 of Chapter 136 are in conflict with the provisions of any local act or any other provision of any general statute, then the City Council may in its discretion proceed in accordance with the provision of such local act or other general statute, or, as an alternative method of procedure, in accordance with this Charter provision and Article 9 of Chapter 136. 
(b)  Limitation. Nothing in this section shall be construed to enlarge the power of the City to condemn property already devoted to public use. 
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS 

Section 380. - Authority to Make Local Improvements. 
    The City Council shall have authority to make the local improvements described in this Charter or otherwise permitted by law, and to assess the cost against benefited property. The procedure set forth in this Article shall not be exclusive, but shall be in addition to any other procedures provided by the General Statutes of North Carolina or other provisions of law. 
Section 381. - Separate Proceeding Not Required. 
    One or more local improvements may be ordered in a single proceeding, and assessments for one or more local improvements may be combined. 
Section 382. - Definitions. 
    Certain words and phrases will be used with the following meanings with reference to local improvements, unless some other meaning is plainly intended: 
(1)  A "roadway" is the part of a street that is used, or to be used, for vehicular traffic. 
(2)  A "sanitary sewer" is an underground conduit for the passage of wastewater and may include a pumping station and force main. 
(3)  The word "sewer" includes both sanitary and storm sewers unless a contrary intention is shown. 
(4)  A "sewer lateral" is an underground conduit connecting a residential or nonresidential property to a sanitary sewer main. 
(5)  A "sidewalk" is the part of a street used, or to be used, for pedestrian traffic. 
(6)  A "storm sewer" is a conduit above or below ground for the passage of storm water, and may include natural and constructed channels, swales, ditches, drainage-ways, ponds, pipes, inlets, catch basins, headwalls, pumping stations, and other physical works needed to control, convey or carry off storm water. 
(7)  "Storm water" is rainfall or snowmelt that runs off the ground or impervious surfaces and drains into natural or manmade drainage-ways. 
(8)  A "street" is the entire width between property lines of every way or place, of whatever nature, when any part thereof is dedicated or open to the use of the public as a matter or right for the purpose of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(9)  "Wastewater" is water containing solid and soluble wastes and other pollutants carried from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, mobile sources, treatment facilities and institutions together with any groundwater, surface water and storm water that may be present that is collected for treatment at the wastewater treatment plant. 
(10)  A "water main" is an underground conduit for the transmission of potable water to public and private hydrants for public and private use and consumption. 
(11)  A "water service" is a pipe connecting a residential or nonresidential property to a water main and may include a meter and/or backflow prevention device. 
Section 383. - Improvements Described. 
    The City Council shall have authority to make the following local improvements: 
(1)  Roadway paving improvements, which shall include the grading, regrading, paving, repaving, and widening of roadways, or the improvement thereof with any treatment designed to provide an improved wearing surface, with necessary drainage, storm sewer inlets, manholes, and catch basins and the construction or reconstruction of retaining walls made necessary by any change of grade incident to such improvement, and in any case where the improvement is made upon petition if the petition so requests, or in any case where the improvement is made without petition if the City Council so directs, it may include the construction or reconstruction of curbs, gutters, drains, and sidewalks. 
(2)  Water main improvements, which shall include the following: 
a.  Laying or construction of water mains and, in cases where the property abutting such mains is divided into lots by map or plat which is either recorded in the office of the register of deeds of the county in which such land lies or is unrecorded but approved by the City of Rocky Mount Planning Board, such improvements may, where the City Council so directs, include a tap for each lot shown on such map or plat except in cases where a tap has been previously constructed to serve such lot from another main; 
b.  The relaying where necessary of parts of paved roadways and sidewalks torn up or damaged by the laying or construction of such mains; 
c.  In any case where the improvement is made upon petition and the petition so requests, or in any case where the improvement is made without petition and the [City] Council so directs, the laying of water laterals. 
(3)  Sanitary sewer improvements, which shall include the following: 
a.  Laying or construction of a sanitary sewer main and, in cases where the property abutting such mains is divided into lots by map or plat which is either recorded in the office of the register of deeds of the county in which such land lies or is unrecorded but approved by the City of Rocky Mount Planning Board, such improvements may, where the [City] Council so directs, include a tap for each lot shown on such map or plat, except in cases where a tap has been previously constructed to serve such lot from another main; 
b.  The repairing where necessary of parts of paved roadways and sidewalks torn up or damaged by the laying or construction of such mains; 
c.  In any case where the improvement is made upon petition and the petition so requests, or in any case where the improvement is made without petition and the [City] so directs, the laying of sanitary sewer laterals. 
(4)  Storm sewer improvements, which shall include the laying or construction of storm sewers, the relaying, where necessary, of parts of paved roadways and sidewalks torn up or damaged by the laying or construction of such sewers, and in any case where the improvement is made upon petition and the petition so requests, or in any case where the improvement is made without petition and the [City] Council so directs, the laying of storm sewer laterals. 
(5)  Sidewalk improvements, which shall include the grading, regrading, construction, reconstruction and repair of paved or other improved sidewalks, the construction or reconstruction of retaining walls made necessary by and incident to such improvements, and in any case where the improvement is made without petition if the [City] Council so directs, it may include the construction or reconstruction of curbs, gutters, drains, and retaining walls and the construction or reconstruction of all such portions of driveways as in the judgment of the [City] Council ought to be laid in the street area. 
(6)  Grass plot improvements, which shall include the grading and planting of grass plots and medians in a street. 
Section 384. - Water and Sewer Mains Between Streets. 
    Whenever the City Council finds it in the public interest, water, sanitary sewer, or storm sewer mains, or all or any of these, may be constructed between streets rather than in a street and the cost of construction of such water or sewer mains and the laterals or storm sewer mains shall be assessed according to the street frontage in the same manner and to the same extent that it would be assessed if the improvements were constructed in a street; provided that the City shall provide the rights-of-way for construction and maintenance of such mains at its own expense without assessing the cost thereof. 
Section 385. - Assessment Against Property Abutting One Side of the Street. 
    Any proceeding may include making any one or more local improvements in or on a street or streets and for the assessment of the cost thereof wholly against the property abutting one side of such street or streets or otherwise against such abutting property as the City Council may determine in any of the following cases: 
(1)  In any case where there is park land or unimproved land abutting one side, or a part of one side, of a street. 
(2)  In any case where the land abutting one side, or a part of one side, of a street is of such a nature or is devoted to such a purpose that a special assessment against it cannot be made or, if made, would probably exceed the value of the land assessed. 
(3)  In any case where the owners of all the property to be assessed agree thereto. 
Section 386. - The Petition; Certificate of Sufficiency. 
(a)  Petition. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, the petition for any local improvements shall designate by a general description the improvement proposed and shall request that such proportion of the cost of each of such improvements as may be specified in the petition be specially assessed against the property abutting on the street or part thereof in which or on which such improvements are proposed to be made. The petition shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
(b)  Assessments of Portions of Street. In any case where: 
(1)  The improvement is to be made on one side of a street only, the petition shall request that the assessment be made only against the property abutting that side of the street whereon the improvement is to be made. 
(2)  It is proposed to assess the cost of any local improvement covering the entire width of a street against the land abutting one side of the street only or against any lands less than all of those abutting the improved portion of the street, such petition shall designate the lands to be assessed. 
(c)  Signatures-Generally. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d) of this section, the petition shall be signed by at least a majority in number of the owners, which majority must own at least a majority of all lineal feet of frontage of the lands abutting the street or streets or part of a street or streets proposed to be improved, excluding street intersections. 
(d)  Signatures-Portions of Streets. Any petition for the making of: 
(1)  Local improvements on one side of a street only need be signed only by a majority in number of the owners of land abutting the side of the street whereon such improvements are to be made, which majority must at least own a majority of all the lineal feet of frontage of the lands abutting such side of the street, excluding street intersections. 
(2)  Any improvements covering the entire width of a street and the assessment of the cost thereof against land abutting one side of the street only or against any lands less than all of those abutting the improved portion of the street shall be signed by all of the owners of the lands thus proposed to be assessed. 
(e)  Rules of Construction. For the purpose of: 
(1)  The petition, all owners of an undivided interest in any land shall be deemed and treated as one person and such land shall be sufficiently signed for when the petition is signed by one of the owners of such undivided interest. 
(2)  This section, the word "owner" shall be considered to include the owners of any life estate, of any estate by the entirety, or of the estate of inheritance and shall not include mortgagees, trustees of a naked trust, trustees under deeds of trust to secure the payment of money, lienholders, or persons having inchoate rights in the property. 
(f)  Sufficiency. Upon the filing of such petition, the City Clerk shall investigate the sufficiency of the petition and, if it is found to be sufficient, shall certify the same to the [City] Council. 
Section 387. - When No Petition Shall be Necessary. 
    No petition shall be necessary for the following: 
(1)  Any local improvement for which the City bears the entire cost without assessment. 
(2)  In the cases set forth in subsections (3) through (8) of this section where in the judgment of the City Council the abutting property to be assessed will be benefited in an amount at least equal to such assessment. 
(3)  Street paving improvements: When in the judgment of the City Council: 
a.  Any street or part of a street is unsafe; or 
b.  The improvement of a street or part of a street not more than three blocks in length is necessary to connect streets already paved; or 
c.  The improvement of a street or part of a street is necessary to connect a paved street, or portion thereof, within the City with a paved highway beyond the City limits; or 
d.  The improvement of a street or part of a street is necessary to provide a paved approach to a railroad or street grade separation or any bridge; or 
e.  Any street or part of a street should be widened; or 
f.  The improvement of a street or part of a street should be made in the public interest. 
(4)  Water main improvements: When in the judgment of the City Council any street or part of a street, or any property within the City, is without adequate public water supply, and can be served, and water service should be provided in the public interest. 
(5)  Sanitary sewer improvements: When in the judgment of the City Council any street or part of a street, or any property within the City, is without an adequate public sanitary sewer system and can be served, and sanitary sewer service should be provided in the public interest. 
(6)  Storm sewer improvements: When in the judgment of the City Council any street or part of a street, or any property within the City, is without adequate storm sewer facilities, and can be served, and storm sewers should be provided in the public interest. 
(7)  Sidewalk improvements: When in the judgment of the City Council any street or part of a street is without sidewalks and sidewalks should be provided in the public interest or that any existing sidewalk is unsafe and should be repaired. 
(8)  Curb and gutter improvements: When in the judgment of the City Council any street or part of a street is without curb and gutter and curb and gutter should be provided in the public interest. 
(9)  In any other case when, in the judgment of the City Council, the abutting property to be assessed will be improved in an amount at least equal to such assessment. 
Section 388. - Notice of Hearing. 
(a)  Preparation; Contents. Upon the presentation of a sufficient petition for local improvements, or when it is proposed to make improvements authorized to be made without petition, a notice shall be prepared by the City Clerk containing substantially the following: 
(1)  A statement that a sufficient petition has been filed for the making of the improvements or, if it is proposed to make the improvements without petition, a statement of the reasons proposed for the making thereof. 
(2)  A brief description of the proposed improvements. 
(3)  A statement of the proportion of the cost of the improvements to be assessed and the terms of payment. 
(4)  A statement of the time and place of a public hearing on the proposed improvements. 
(5)  A statement that all objections to the legality of the making of the proposed improvements shall be made in writing, signed in person or by attorney, and filed with the City Clerk at or before the time of the hearing and that any objections not so made will be waived. 
(b)  Publication; Service. The notice shall be published one time in a newspaper published in the City which is qualified to carry legal notices, or, if there is no such newspaper, the City Clerk shall cause to be posted in three public places in the City, the date of publication or posting to be not less than 10 days prior to the date fixed for the hearing. In addition, at least 10 days prior to the hearing, the City Clerk shall cause a copy of the notice to be mailed to the owners, as shown on the county tax records, of all property subject to assessment if the project should be undertaken. The certificate of the person designated to mail the notices that such notices were mailed shall be conclusive in the absence of fraud. The word "owners" as used in this section has the same meaning as in Section 386. 
Section 389. - Public Hearing. 
    At the time for the public hearing, or at some subsequent time to which such hearing shall be adjourned, the City Council shall consider any objections to the improvements made in compliance with Section 388(a)(5), together with objections to the policy or expediency of the making of the improvements, and the [City] Council shall thereafter determine whether it will order the making of the improvements. Any objections to the making of the improvements not made in writing, signed in person or by attorney, and filed with the City Clerk at or before the time or adjourned time of the hearing shall be considered as waived. If any such objection shall be made and shall not be sustained by the [City] Council, the adoption of the resolution ordering the making of the improvements shall be the final adjudication of the issues presented, unless within 10 days after the adoption of the resolution proper steps shall be taken in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure relief. 
Section 390. - Resolution Ordering Improvements; Publication. 
    After the public hearing, if the City Council determines to make the improvements proposed, it shall adopt a resolution that shall contain: 
(1)  If the improvements are to be made by petition, a finding by the [City] Council as to the sufficiency of the petition, which finding shall be final and conclusive. 
(2)  If the improvements are to be made without petition, a finding by the [City] Council of such facts as are required in order to authorize improvements without petition. 
(3)  A general description of the improvements to be made and the designation of the street or streets or parts thereof where the work is to be done. 
(4)  If the improvement directed to be made is the paving of a roadway or part thereof wherein a railroad company has tracks, a direction that such company pave that part of the street occupied by its tracks, the rails of the tracks, and 18 inches in width outside such tracks, with such material and in such manner as the City Council may prescribe, and that unless such paving is completed on or before a day specified in the resolution, the City Council will cause the same to be done. Where such railroad company shall occupy such street or streets under a franchise or contract which provides otherwise, such franchise or contract shall not be affected by this section except insofar as it may be consistent with the provisions of such franchise or contract. 
(5)  If the improvement directed to be made includes the construction of water mains, sanitary sewers, or storm sewers and, in order to provide the mains or sewers in the street or streets to be improved, it is necessary to extend them beyond the limits of the street or streets, the resolution shall contain a provision for the necessary extension of such mains or sewers and a further provision that the cost of such extension shall eventually be assessed against the lots or parcels of land abutting the street or streets in which such extensions are made but that assessments shall not be made until such time as the City Council shall thereafter determine by appropriate resolution. 
(6)  If the improvement directed to be made is the paving of a roadway or part thereof, or the construction of sidewalks, the resolution may, but need not, contain a direction that the owner of each lot abutting the part of the street to be improved connect such lot with the water mains or sewer pipes, or any one or more thereof, located in the street adjacent to his premises. 
(7)  A designation of the proportion of the cost of the improvements to be assessed against abutting property and of the number of equal annual installments in which assessments may be made. 
(8)  The resolution after its passage shall be published at least once in some newspaper published in the City that is qualified to carry legal notices, or, if there is no such newspaper, the resolution shall be posted in three public places in the City for at least five days; except that in any case where the [City] Council directs that the notice should be mailed instead of being published, the resolution ordering the improvements need not be either published or posted. 
Section 391. - Determination as to Cost of Improvements. 
    Upon completion of the improvements, the City Council shall ascertain the total cost. In addition to other items of cost, there may be included therein the cost of all necessary legal services, the amount of interest paid during construction, the amount of damages paid or to be paid for injury to property by reason of any change of grade or drainage, including court costs and other expenses incidental to the determination of damages, and the cost of retaining walls, sidewalks, or fences built or altered in lieu of cash payment for property damage, including the cost of moving or altering any building. The determination of the [City] Council as to the total cost of any improvement shall be conclusive. 
Section 392. - Preliminary Assessment. 
(a)  Determination. Having determined the total cost, the [City] Council shall make a preliminary assessment. The preliminary assessment shall be advisory only and shall be subject to modification. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, the preliminary assessment shall be as follows: 
(1)  Roadway paving: The total cost of any roadway paving improvement, excluding the cost incurred at street intersections, may be specially assessed against the lots and parcels of land abutting the street containing the roadway paved, according to the frontages thereon by an equal rate per foot of frontage, except that, where the petition so requested, the cost shall be assessed against the lands on one side of the street only or against such lands as were designated in the petition. 
(2)  Water mains, sanitary sewers, and storm sewers: The cost of water mains, sanitary sewers, and storm sewers in such amount as is determined by the [City] Council within its discretion but according to a predetermined policy may be assessed against the abutting property. Such cost may be assessed against the lots and parcels of land according to their respective frontages thereon by an equal rate per foot of such frontage. If the resolution ordered the construction of any pumping station, outfall, septic tank, or disposal plant, no part of the cost of the same shall be specially assessed except when an outfall tap is permitted. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to limit the power of the [City] Council to contract with any property owner or owners for the construction of any pumping station, outfall, septic tank, or disposal plant or for the construction of water mains or storm or sanitary sewers and for the assessment of the cost thereof according to the terms of such contract. The entire cost of each water and sewer lateral may be specially charged against the particular lot or parcel of land for or in connection with which it was constructed, except that the assessment shall be calculated as if the lateral were laid from the center of the street. The cost of installing storm sewers may, however, be assessed as part of the cost of roadway paving. 
(3)  Sidewalks: The total cost of constructing or reconstructing sidewalks may be assessed against the lots and parcels of land abutting that side of the street upon which the improvements are made according to their respective frontages thereon by an equal rate per foot of such frontage, the lots within a block being deemed to abut upon a sidewalk although the latter extends beyond the lot to the curb line of an intersecting street. The total cost of constructing portions of driveways within the street area may be assessed against the lots for which they are constructed. 
(4)  Grass plots: The entire cost of grading or otherwise improving or of planting the grass plots in any street or part thereof may be assessed against the lots and parcels of land abutting the street or part thereof where or whereon the improvements are made by an equal rate per front foot of such frontage; provided that this subsection shall be construed to mean that when a grass plot in any street is graded or planted or otherwise improved, the cost thereof may be assessed against all of the property abutting the side of the street within the block where such grass plot is located. 
(b)  Proportion of Cost. If the petition (or the resolution in those cases where the improvement was ordered made without petition) specified that there should be specially assessed against the abutting property a smaller proportion of the cost of any improvement than that set forth in subsection (a)(2) of this section, there shall be assessed against abutting property only the proportion of the cost as was specified in the petition (or in such resolution). No restriction or denial of access to an abutting street shall affect the levy or collection of any assessment for local improvements. 
(c)  State Property. The cost of paving, water, sewer, and sidewalk improvements upon, in, or to any portion of a right-of-way or any property owned by the State of North Carolina, or any agency or subdivision thereof, shall be assessed against the right-of-way or property and shall be paid by the State or any agency or subdivision thereof. 
Section 393 - Corner Lot Exemptions. 
    The City Council shall have authority to determine the amount and applicability of assessment exemptions for corner lots and to distinguish between different classifications of property uses. The exemptions for paving, sidewalk, storm sewer, water main, and sanitary sewer improvements shall be in accordance with the provisions of G.S. 160A-219. If the corner formed by two intersecting streets is rounded into a curve or is foreshortened for the purpose of providing sight distance or for any other purpose of construction, the frontage for assessment purposes shall be calculated to the midpoint of the curve or foreshortened corner. 
Section 394. - Preliminary Assessment Roll. 
    The City Council shall cause to be prepared a preliminary assessment roll on which shall be entered a brief description of each lot or parcel of land assessed, the amount assessed against each lot, the name or names of the owner or owners of each lot (as defined in Section 386) as far as the same can be ascertained; provided, that a map of the improvements on which is shown the frontage and location of each affected lot, together with the amount assessed against each lot and the name or names of the owner or owners thereof, as far as the same can be ascertained, shall be a sufficient assessment roll. If the resolution directed the making of more than one improvement, a single preliminary assessment roll for all the improvements authorized by such resolution shall be sufficient, but the cost of each improvement to each lot affected shall be shown separately. After the preliminary assessment roll has been completed, it shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk, and there shall be published in some newspaper published in the City which is qualified to carry legal notices, or, if there is no such newspaper, the City Clerk shall cause to be posted in three places in the City a notice of the completion of the assessment roll, setting forth a description in general terms of the improvements, the amount of each assessment, and stating the time fixed for the meeting of the [City] Council for the hearing of objections to the special assessment, such meeting to be not earlier than 10 days after the first publication or from the date of posting of such notice. Any number of assessment rolls may be included in one notice. In addition, at least 10 days prior to the hearing, the City Clerk shall cause a copy of the notice to be mailed to the owners, as shown on the county tax records, of all property subject to assessment. The certificate of the person designated to mail the notices that such notices were mailed shall be conclusive in the absence of fraud. 
Section 395. - Hearing; Revision; Confirmation; Lien. 
    At the time appointed for that purpose or at some other time to which it may adjourn, the City Council shall hear objections to the preliminary assessment roll of all persons interested who may appear and offer proof in relation thereto. Then or thereafter, the City Council shall either annul or sustain, or modify in whole or in part, the assessment either by confirming the preliminary assessment against any or all lots or parcels described thereon, or by canceling, increasing or reducing the same, according to the special benefits which the City Council decides that each of the lots or parcels has received or will receive on account of the improvements, except that assessments against railroads because of contract or franchise obligations shall be in accordance with such obligations. If any property is omitted from the preliminary roll, the [City] Council may place it on the roll and levy the proper assessment. The [City] Council may thereupon confirm the assessment roll, and assessments so confirmed shall be in proportion to the special benefits, except in the case of franchise obligations of railroads. Whenever the governing body shall confirm assessments for local improvements, the City Clerk shall enter on the [City] Council minutes and on the assessment roll the date of confirmation, and from the time of confirmation, the assessments shall be a lien on the property assessed of the same nature and to the same extent as County and City taxes and shall be superior to all other liens and encumbrances. After the assessment roll is confirmed, a copy shall be delivered to the City Collector of Revenue. 
Section 396. - Appeal to Superior Court. 
    If the owner of, or any person interested in, any lot or parcel of land against which an assessment is made is dissatisfied with the amount of the assessment, such person or owner may, within 10 days after the confirmation of the assessment roll, give written notice to the [City] Council that an appeal will be made to the superior court of the county in which such land is situated, in which case such owner or person shall, within 20 days after the confirmation of the assessment roll, serve on the Mayor a statement of facts upon which the appeal is based. The appeal shall be tried as other actions at law. The remedy provided in this section for any person dissatisfied with the amount of the assessment against any property of which such person is the owner, or in which such person is interested, shall be exclusive. 
Section 397. - Power to Correct Error in Assessment. 
    If it shall appear after confirmation of any assessment roll that an error has been made, the City Clerk shall cause to be published one time in some newspaper published in the City, or, if there is no such newspaper, the City Clerk shall cause to be posted at three public places in the City, a notice referring to the assessment roll in which the error was made, naming the owner or owners of the lot or parcel of land affected by the error, if the same can be ascertained, and naming the time and place fixed for a hearing by the [City] Council for the correction of the error, such meeting not to be earlier than 10 days from the publication or from the date of the posting of the notice. In addition, at least 10 days prior to the hearing, the City Clerk shall cause a copy of the notices to be mailed to the owners, as shown on the county tax records of all property affected by the error. At the time fixed in the notice or at some subsequent time to which the [City] Council may adjourn, the [City] Council, after giving the owner or owners of the property affected and other persons interested therein an opportunity to be heard, may proceed to correct the error, and the assessment then made shall have the same force and effect as if it had originally been properly made. No notice and hearing shall be necessary if the correction does not increase an assessment against any property not owned by the City or if all of the property owners affected by the correction waive notice in writing. 
Section 398. - Reassessment. 
    The City Council shall have the power, when in its judgment there is any irregularity, omission, error, or lack of jurisdiction in any of the proceedings relating thereto, to set aside the whole of the local assessment made by it, and thereupon to make a reassessment. In such case there shall be included, as a part of the cost of the improvement involved, all interest paid or accrued on notes or certificates of indebtedness or bonds issued by the City to pay the expenses of such improvement. The proceeding shall, as far as practicable, be in all respects as in the case of original assessments, and the reassessment shall have the same force as if it had originally been properly made. 
Section 399. - Publication of Notice of Confirmation of Assessment Roll. 
    After the expiration of 20 days from the confirmation of the assessment roll, the City Clerk shall cause to be published one time in some newspaper published in the City which is qualified to carry legal notices or, if there is no such newspaper, shall cause to be posted at three public places in the City a notice of confirmation of the assessment roll and that assessments may be paid at any time before the expiration of 30 days from the date of publication or posting of the notice, without interest from the date of confirmation of the assessment roll, but that if such assessment is not paid in full within such time, all installments thereof shall bear interest at the rate provided by law from the date of confirmation of the assessment roll. 
Section 400. - Payment of Assessments in Cash or by Installments. 
    The property owner or railroad company assessed shall have the option of paying for improvements in cash or in not less than two, nor more than five, equal annual installments as may have been determined in the resolution ordering the improvement. If paid in installments, installments shall bear interest from the date of confirmation of the assessment roll at the rate provided by law. If any assessment is not paid in cash, the first installment, with interest, shall become due and payable 30 days after the publication or posting of the notice of confirmation, and one subsequent installment with interest shall be due and payable on the same day of the month in each successive year until the assessment is paid in full; provided, however, that if the City Council shall so direct, installments shall become due and payable on the same date when property taxes of the City are due and payable. If any installment with interest is not paid when due, it shall be subject to the same penalties as are prescribed by law for unpaid taxes, in addition to the interest herein provided for. The whole assessment may be paid at any time by the payment of the full amount due with accrued interest. 
Section 401. - Enforcement of Payment of Assessments. 
    Upon the failure of any property owner to pay any installment when due and payable, all of the installments remaining unpaid shall immediately become due and payable, and the property and rights-of-way may be sold by the City under the same rules and regulations, rights of redemption, and savings as are prescribed by law for the sale of land for unpaid taxes. Unpaid assessments, interest, and penalties owed by railroad companies and the State of North Carolina, its agencies, or subdivisions may be collected by writs of mandamus issued by the superior court of the county in which such land is situated. Collection of assessments with interest and penalties may also be made by the City by proceedings to foreclose the lien of assessments as a lien for mortgages is or may be foreclosed under the laws of the State, and it shall be lawful to join in any bill for foreclosure any one or more lots or parcels of land by whomsoever owned, if assessed for an improvement ordered by the same resolution, after default in the payment of any installments. The payment of such installment, together with interest and penalties due thereon, before the lot or parcel of land, against which the same is a lien, is sold or such lien is foreclosed shall bar the right of the City to sell the land or to foreclose the lien by reason of default. 
Section 402. - Assessment of Cost of Water Main, Sanitary Sewer, and Storm Sewer Extensions. 
    If the resolution ordering the making of any improvement or improvements included a provision for any necessary extension of a water main, sanitary sewer, or storm sewer beyond the limit of a street or streets, at such time after the completion of such extension or extensions as, in the judgment of the City Council, circumstances justify the assessment of the cost thereof, the City Council shall cause a preliminary assessment to be made and the procedure thereafter to be followed with respect to such assessment, and the force and effect thereof shall be as already prescribed for other assessments. 
Section 403. - Apportionment of Assessments. 
    In any case where one or more special assessments have been made and property has been or is about to be subdivided, and it is desirable that the assessments be apportioned among the subdivisions of such property, the [City] Council may, upon application by the owner or owners, apportion the assessments among the subdivisions. Thereafter, each subdivision shall be relieved of any part of the original assessment except the part apportioned to the subdivision, and the part of the original assessment apportioned to any subdivision shall be of the same force and effect as the original assessment. 
Section 404. - Change of Ownership. 
    No change of ownership of any property or interest therein after the passage of a resolution ordering the making of a local improvement shall affect subsequent proceedings, and the improvement may be completed and assessment made as if there had been no change in ownership. 
Section 405. - Lands Subject to Assessment. 
    No lands in the City, including railroad company lands and rights-of-way and property of the State of North Carolina, its agencies or subdivisions, shall be exempt from special assessments, except lands belonging to the United States which are exempt under provisions of federal statutes, and the officers, boards of directors, trustees, or other governing bodies of all incorporated or unincorporated bodies in whom is vested the right to hold and dispose of real property shall have the right by authority duly given to sign the petition for any local improvements. 
Section 406. - Proceedings In Rem. 
    All proceedings for special assessments shall be proceedings in rem, and no mistake or omission as to the name of any owner or person interested in any lot or parcel of land affected thereby shall be regarded as a substantial mistake or omission. 
Section 407. - [City] Council May Hold Assessments in Abeyance. 
(a)  Procedure. The owner of any abutting lot included on the preliminary assessment roll may file a petition with the City Clerk, not later than five days prior to the date fixed for the hearing, stating that the improvement will not be used by the owner and requesting that the assessment be held in abeyance. The City Council, after confirming such assessment, may, if it determines that the improvement will not be used, provide by resolution that the assessment be held in abeyance without the payment of interest thereon. The resolution shall require that the owner of the lot execute a statement, which shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds of the county in which the property is located, acknowledging that an assessment has been confirmed against the property but is being held in abeyance until such time as the [City] Council, upon not less than 10 days' prior written notice to the owner and following a public hearing, determines by resolution that the use, character, or ownership of the lot has changed. Upon such determination the assessment shall be paid in accordance with the terms set out in the confirming resolution. One or more of such assessments or any portion of a single assessment may be held in abeyance as provided in this section without holding all of such assessment or assessments in abeyance. 
(b)  Statutes of Limitations. All statutes of limitations are hereby suspended during the time that any assessment is held in abeyance without the payment of interest as provided in subsection (a) of this section. Such time shall not be a part of the time limit for the commencement of action for the enforcement of the payment of any such assessment, and such action may be brought at any time within 10 years from the date of the adoption of a resolution by the [City] Council determining that the period of abeyance has ended, and the assessment shall be paid in accordance with the original resolution confirming it. 
(c)  Actions Barred. Nothing in this section shall be construed to revive any right of action that has heretofore been barred by the statute of limitation. 
Section 408. - Abutting Property Outside City Limits. 
    If any lots or parcels of land abutting any local improvements are located outside the City limits, the City Council may continue and delay the levy of assessments against such property until the City limits are extended to include such property, or the [City] Council may provide that no water or sewer service connections shall be made to such property, pending the annexation thereof, until all assessments thereon are paid. Upon annexation, if not paid prior thereto, the City Council may levy assessments for such local improvements against such property, and the procedure shall be the same as provided in this Charter. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit or restrict the City Council and a property owner from entering into an agreement for payments in lieu of assessments. 
Section 409. - Procedures Not Exclusive. 
    The procedures set forth in this article for making improvements shall not be exclusive but shall be in addition to the procedures for the same provided municipal corporations by the General Statutes of North Carolina as now existing or as may from time to time be amended or to any other procedure provided by law. 
ARTICLE III. - FRANCHISES 

Section 450. - Public Utility Franchises. 
    The City Council may grant franchises for the operation of public utilities within the City and for the use of the streets, street rights-of-way, and alleys of the City by such utilities for nonstreet and/or nonvehicular purposes for such terms and upon such conditions as the public welfare demands, and in its discretion may hold special elections on the question of granting franchises; provided, however: 
(1)  The terms of such franchises shall not exceed 60 years, unless renewed at the end of the period granted. 
(2)  All such franchises shall be revocable by the City Council for violation of their conditions by the franchisees if not corrected within a reasonable time after written notice from the City of such violation. 
(3)  No franchise so granted may be transferred without the prior approval of the City Council. 
(4)  Such franchises shall contain such reasonable provisions as the City Council in the exercise of its sound discretion deems proper, unless prohibited by law. 
Section 451. - Annexation and Expiration of Franchise. 
    In the event: 
(1)  There is annexed to the City an area within which a utility service is being furnished; or 
(2)  A public utility is operating within the City without previously having had a franchise granted to it by the City; or 
(3)  A public utility is operating within the City under a franchise granted by the City and such franchise expires and is not renewed or a new franchise is not granted to the utility by the City, and the City is at such time furnishing the same utility service to its residents or is allowed by law to and has elected to begin furnishing the same to its residents; the City may, at its election: 
a.  Acquire the facilities and properties of the public utility located within the corporate limits of the City used or useful in providing particular service from such public utility by negotiation and the payment of just compensation; or 
b.  Direct the public utility to remove such facilities and properties from the public streets, street rights-of-way, alleys, parks, or other rights-of-way belonging to the City, subject to the provisions of Section 452. 
Section 452. - Necessity of Franchise. 
    No public utility shall commence or continue to operate or do business in the City unless such utility shall have first had granted to it a franchise by the City under the provisions of this Charter, unless such public utility shall have in effect a valid and enforceable franchise granted by the City, in which event it shall not be necessary that it have granted to it a franchise under the provisions of this Charter until such previously granted franchise shall have expired; provided, however, if a public utility shall have been granted a franchise by the City and such franchise shall have expired, such public utility shall continue to operate under the terms of the expired franchise until: 
(1)  A new franchise is granted to the same public utility; or 
(2)  A franchise is granted to another public utility to furnish the same service; or 
(3)  The City elects to and is in a position to render the same service and the same is allowed by law. If the City elects to grant a franchise under subsection (1) or (2) of this section, but the City and the public utility after due negotiation are unable to agree upon the terms thereof, the matter shall be submitted by both parties and heard by the North Carolina Utilities Commission under the provisions of Article 4 of Chapter 62 of the North Carolina General Statutes as if the parties thereto had agreed to such submission in writing. 
Section 453. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to electric, natural gas, water and sewer, telephone, pay television, pay television antennae, intracity buses, ambulances, and all other public utilities for which the City may grant franchises. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRAFFIC REGULATION 

Section 460. - Authority of City Council to Adopt Regulations. 
(a)  Generally. Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, the City Council may adopt ordinances regulating the speeds of vehicles upon any City streets and may establish truck routes (or other required routes for limited classes or vehicles or traffic) applicable to any City streets. As used in this section, the term "City streets" includes all public highways, roads, and streets within the City limits, including numbered State highways, and highways, roads, and streets maintained, repaired, constructed, reconstructed, or widened in whole or in part with State funds. 
(b)  Certification. All ordinances concerning vehicle speeds, truck routes, or other required routes that apply to numbered State highways shall not become effective until certified to the North Carolina Department of Transportation by the City Clerk after adoption; provided, however, all such ordinances shall be prima facie deemed to have been so certified by the City Clerk upon submission of an affidavit to that effect. 
(c)  General Law. The authority granted in this section to the City Council shall be in addition to any authority conferred by general law upon the City Council or the City to regulate vehicles, traffic, or the use of City streets. 
Section 461. - Power to Regulate Ambulances and Wreckers. 
    The City Council may establish regulations governing the operation of ambulances, wreckers, and other motor vehicles used in connection with emergencies, disasters, or accidents, and may provide for the operation of an ambulance service or a wrecker service, or may enter into a contract or contracts for the providing of such service by a private person or persons. 
Section 462. - Power to Regulate Obstruction of Alleys. 
    If, in the opinion of the City Council, a fire hazard is created by the obstruction of private alleys, the City Council may adopt regulations prohibiting the obstruction of private alleys, either by reason of the parking of motor vehicles or otherwise, but such regulations shall not be construed so as to restrict or limit the legal right of the owners of interests in a private alley to close the alley or to exercise other property rights therein. 
Section 463. - Location of Traffic Control Devices. 
    The City Council may authorize the City Manager to designate the location of official traffic control devices, upon a determination by the City Manager in writing certified to the City Council: 
(1)  That their installation at the location in question is necessary in order to control traffic congestion or is in the interest of public safety; or 
(2)  If such a device is to be moved or removed from a particular location, that the device is no longer required at such location for control of traffic congestion or in the interest of public safety. An "official traffic control device" as used in this section is a sign, signal, stoplight, marking, or device, including a parking meter, which is intended to regulate vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
Section 464. - [City] Council May Accept Civil Fines in Lieu of Criminal Penalties for Traffic Violations. 
    Authority is hereby granted to the City Council, by ordinance, to accept civil fines in such amounts as may be deemed reasonable by the [City] Council in lieu of satisfaction of the criminal penalties provided for the violation of traffic ordinances. The City shall pay no State taxes to the State of North Carolina for civil fines accepted in lieu or satisfaction of the criminal penalties referred to in this section. All civil penalties so collected shall be paid into the General Fund of the City. 
ARTICLE V. - FISCAL AFFAIRS 

Section 471. - Director of Finance. 
    The City Manager shall appoint a Director of Finance who shall have all powers and perform all duties provided by law. 
Section 472. - Collector of Revenue. 
    The City Manager shall appoint a Collector of Revenue who shall serve under the direction of the Director of Finance. All funds, including tax funds, owed to the City shall be collected by the Collector of Revenue and delivered to the Director of Finance. 
Section 473. - Bonds. 
    The City Manager, Director of Finance, and Collector of Revenue and such other persons handling funds of the City as the City Council deems advisable shall, before entering upon their respective offices, give bonds payable to the City in such amounts, according to such terms and with such sureties as the [City] Council shall direct. The premiums for all such bonds shall be paid by the City. 
ARTICLE VI. - ORDINANCE PROCEDURE 

Section 484. - Power to Adopt Ordinances. 
    In addition to the powers and authorities granted municipal corporations by the Constitution and General Statutes of North Carolina relative to the adoption of ordinances having the effect of law, the City Council is hereby authorized and empowered to enact ordinances having the effect of law for the government of the City, to establish, promote, advance, and maintain the general welfare, culture, and economy of the City, its environs and inhabitants and to maintain the public peace, quiet, and good order, such ordinances to be enforceable within the City and for a distance of one mile in all directions of the City limits, and to repeal or modify the same. The City Council may further provide for the enforcement of such ordinances as provided by law. 
Section 485. - Code of Ordinances. 
(a)  Generally. The City Council may adopt and provide for the publication and distribution of a codification of the City ordinances, to be known and cited as the "Code of the City of Rocky Mount." Each Code shall consist of two separate parts. The first part shall be known as "General Ordinances", and shall include all ordinances not designated "Technical Ordinances." The second part shall be known as "Technical Ordinances", and shall include all ordinances regarding the construction of buildings, the installation of plumbing, the installation of electric wiring, the installation of oil appliances or gas appliances and equipment, and other technical ordinances designated as such by the City Council. 
(b)  Official Copy. The official copy of the Code of the City of Rocky Mount, including all ordinances amending or supplementing the Code, shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk. 
Section 486. - Codification of Certain Zoning, Traffic and Related Ordinances by Appropriate Entries Upon Official Map Books. 
(a)  Generally. Every ordinance concerning the matters enumerated in subsections (b) and (c) of this section may be codified by appropriate entries upon official map books to be retained permanently in the office of the City Clerk. Such entries shall be made by or under the direction of the City Manager. In conjunction with the introduction of every proposed ordinance concerning any of these matters, a map of the affected area shall be presented to the City Council. 
(b)  Zoning. The ordinances referred to in subsection (a) of this section include all ordinances establishing or amending boundaries of any district under zoning regulations. 
(c)  Vehicles. The ordinances referred to in subsection (a) of this section also include all ordinances: 
(1)  Designating the location of official traffic control devices; 
(2)  Designating areas or zones where restrictions, prohibitions, or other controls are applied with respect to parking, loading, bus stops, and taxicab stands; 
(3)  Establishing speed limits; 
(4)  Designating the location of through streets, stop intersections, yield right-of-way intersections, waiting lanes, one-way streets, and truck traffic routes; and 
(5)  Establishing restrictions, prohibitions, or other controls upon vehicle turns at designated locations. 
Section 487. - Ordinances of Limited Application. 
    The City Council shall have the power to enact ordinances which shall be effective only in certain districts or sections of the City, or ordinances which may except from their operations any districts or sections of the City, if in the judgment of the City Council the condition in such sections or districts requires them to be included in or excepted from the provisions of any such ordinance. 
ARTICLE VII. - PERSONNEL 

Section 490. - Appointment and Removal of Department Heads and Employees; Compensation; Duty of [City] Council. 
(a)  Appointments; Removals. The City Manager, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, shall appoint and may suspend and remove all City employees and heads of departments and, with the approval of the City Council, may employ consultants of any kind when needed. The City Manager shall report to the City Council every appointment and removal of a department head at the next City Council meeting following the appointment or removal. 
(b)  Compensation. All pay and compensation plans shall be approved by the City Council. 
(c)  Duty of [City] Council. Neither the City Council nor any of its members shall take any part in the appointment or removal of department heads and employees in the administrative service of the City. The City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager, and neither the City Council nor any member thereof shall give specific orders to any subordinates of the City Manager, be it publicly or privately. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ULTIMATE STREET IMPROVEMENTS 

Section 510. - Intent and Purpose. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this article to provide a method whereby the City of Rocky Mount may make provisions for the ultimate widening or extension, or both, of existing streets and highways and for the opening of new streets and highways by the establishment of proposed street lines, and for the gradual acquisition of the lands necessary for such improvements. 
Section 511. - Platting of Street Lines. 
    From and after the time of adoption of a major transportation plan by the City Council and the North Carolina Department of Transportation pursuant to provisions of G.S. 136-66.2, the City Council shall have the power to request, make, or cause to be made, from time to time, surveys for the exact location of the lines of proposed extended, widened, or narrowed streets and highways in the whole or any portion of the City and the area within one mile outside of its corporate boundaries. Personnel making such surveys are empowered to enter upon lands, make examinations or surveys, and place and maintain necessary monuments thereon, at reasonable times and with due care for the property. A plat or plats of the area or areas thus surveyed shall be prepared on which are indicated the locations of the lines recommended as the planned or mapped lines of proposed streets, street extensions, street widening, or street narrowing. The preparation of such plat or plats shall not in and of itself constitute or be deemed to constitute the opening or establishment of any street or the taking or acceptance of any land for street purposes. 
Section 512. - Establishment of Proposed Street Lines. 
    Following the preparation of such plats, the City Council shall officially adopt a map or maps of planned proposed streets and highways, widening, narrowing, or vacations, within the City and the area within one mile outside of its corporate boundaries. Before taking any such action, the City Council shall hold a public hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall have been given once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper published in the City or, if there is no newspaper published in the City, by posting such notice at four public places in the City and at four public places within any affected area lying outside of the corporate boundaries. Such notice shall be published or posted for the first time not less than 15 days prior to the date fixed for such hearing. Following adoption of such a map or maps, the City Council shall certify a copy to the Register of Deeds of Nash or Edgecombe County as the case may be, which copy shall be duly filed. The placing of any street or street line upon this official map or maps shall not in and of itself constitute or be deemed to constitute the opening or establishment of any street or the taking or acceptance of any land for street purposes. 
Section 513. - Right of City to Acquire Property Before Improvement. 
    From and after the time when any such map or maps shall have been adopted and certified to the Register of Deeds, it shall be unlawful to build upon any land within the lines of proposed streets shown thereon or to repair or otherwise improve any existing buildings within such lines until the City Council shall have been given an opportunity to purchase or otherwise acquire such property for street purposes as provided by this Article. To that end, any person proposing to build upon such land or to make repairs or improvements to any existing buildings on such land shall, in writing, notify the City Council of the nature and estimated cost of such buildings, repairs, or improvements. The City Council shall then determine whether it will take the necessary steps to acquire such land prior to the construction of such building or the making of such repairs or improvements. If it fails, within 60 days from the receipt of such notice, to acquire, adopt a formal resolution directing an appropriate officer to acquire, or institute condemnation proceedings to acquire such property, the owner or other person giving notice may proceed to erect the building or to make the repair or improvements described in such notice. 
Section 514. - Owner Failing to Give Notice Cannot Recover for Value of Improvements. 
    If any person, firm, or corporation builds upon any land included with such proposed street lines, or repairs or otherwise improves that part of any existing building within such lines, without giving the City Council an opportunity to acquire such land free from such improvements, as provided in this Charter, the City Council shall not be required to pay for the value of such building, repairs, or improvements in any proceeding subsequently brought to acquire the land for the purpose shown on the officially adopted map. 
Section 515. - Failure of City to Act Does Not Limit Power Subsequently to Condemn. 
    The failure of the City Council to take action under section 513 within 60 days after notice shall not have the effect of limiting the right of the City Council at any subsequent time to condemn the same. But in such case, the owner shall be entitled to full compensation as now provided by law for the building, repair, or improvements made after the giving of notice required by Section 513. 
Section 516. - Powers Hereby Conferred Are Supplementary. 
    The powers granted in this Article to the City of Rocky Mount are supplementary to any powers heretofore or hereafter granted by general or special laws for the same or a similar purpose; and in any case where the provisions of this article conflict with or are different from the provisions of any other act, the City Council may in its discretion proceed in accordance with the provisions of either act. 
SECTION 2. The purpose of this act is to revise the Charter of the City of Rocky Mount and to consolidate herein certain acts concerning the property, affairs, and government of the City. 
SECTION 3. The following acts or portions of acts, having served the purposes for which they were enacted, or having been consolidated into this act, are hereby repealed: 
Chapter 938, Session Laws of 1963 
Chapter 545, Session Laws of 1965 
Chapter 1068, Session Laws of 1965 
Chapter 427, Session Laws of 1969 
Chapter 943, Session Laws of 1973 
Chapter 365, Session Laws of 1975 
Chapter 122, Session Laws of 1983 
Chapter 328, Session Laws of 1989 
S.L. 2001-330 
SECTION 4. No provision of this act is intended, nor shall be construed, to affect in any way any rights or interests (whether public or private): 
(1)  Now vested or accrued, in whole or in part, the validity of which might be sustained or preserved by reference to any provisions of law repealed by this act. 
(2)  Derived from, or which might be sustained or preserved in reliance upon, action heretofore taken pursuant to or within the scope of any provisions of law repealed by this act. 
SECTION 5. No law heretofore repealed expressly or by implication, and no law granting authority which has been exhausted, shall be revived by: 
(1)  The repeal herein of any act repealing such law, or 
(2)  Any provision of this act that disclaims an intention to repeal or affect enumerated or designated laws. 
SECTION 6. All existing ordinances and resolutions of the City of Rocky Mount and all existing rules or regulations of departments or agencies of the City of Rocky Mount not inconsistent with the provisions of this act shall continue in full force and effect until repealed, modified, or amended. 
SECTION 7. No action or proceeding of any nature (whether civil or criminal, judicial or administrative, or otherwise) pending at the effective date of this act by or against the City of Rocky Mount or any of its departments or agencies shall be abated or otherwise affected by the adoption of this act. 
SECTION 8. If any part of this act or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this act which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this act are declared to be severable. 
SECTION 9. Whenever a reference is made in this act to a particular provision of the General Statutes and such provision is later amended, repealed, or superseded, the reference shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended General Statute or to the General Statute that most nearly corresponds to the statutory provision amended, repealed, or superseded. 
SECTION 10. This act becomes effective January 1, 2004. 
    In the General Assembly read three times and ratified this the 18th day of July, 2003. 
      Beverly E. Perdue 
      President of the Senate         Richard T. Morgan 
      Speaker of the House of 
      Representatives   
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE-ACTS 
 This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Year Chapter Section Section  
this Charter 1963 938 1-516 Subpt. A, Chs. I-IX 431 Subpt. B, Ch. 1051, § 1 431(10)(a) Subpt. B, Ch. 1051, § 5(b) 1965 310 Subpt. A, Ch. VII 542 Subpt. B, Ch. 1051, § 5(a) 1068 1 Subpt. A, § 10 10(c) Subpt. A, § 10 1967 437 1(a), 1(b) Subpt. A, § 301, Subpt. A, § 302 1969 181 3 Subpt. A, § 32 427 1(a) Subpt. A, § 10 1(b) Subpt. A, § 140 1(c) Subpt. A, § 302 1(d), 1(e) Subpt. A, § 383 1(f), 1(g) Subpt. A, § 387 1(h), 1(i) Subpt. A, § 431 433, 434 Subpt. B 1051 Subpt. B 5 Subpt. A, § 431(10)(a) 1190 Subpt. A, Ch. VII 1974 943 1 Subpt. A, § 301, Subpt. A, § 302  
SUBPART B - RELATED LAWS[1] 
CHAPTER 433, SESSION LAWS OF 1969 
AN ACT RELATING TO REPAIR, CLOSING AND DEMOLITION OF UNFIT DWELLINGS IN THE CITY OF ROCKY MOUNT. 
The General Assembly of North Carolina do enact: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- This subpart consists of certain Acts of the General Assembly of North Carolina relating to the city, but not enacted as specific amendments or additions to the Charter. This is not a complete compilation of all such Acts, but only of those which were deemed to be of such general interest and importance as to warrant inclusion herein. Each act is set out as enacted. However, to facilitate indexing, the editors have inserted catchlines which are shown in brackets. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Words added for clarification have been added in brackets. 

[Sec. 1. - Adoption of ordinance permitting hearing.] 
    That the City Council of the City of Rocky Mount may adopt an ordinance permitting the hearing described in sections 160-184(2) [160A-443(2)] of the General Statutes to be held at a place in the City of Rocky Mount, and said place need not be in the county in which the property about which the hearing is to be conducted is located. 
Editor's note- G.S. chapter 160 has been repealed. 
[Sec. 2. - Repealer.] 
    All laws and clauses of laws in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
[Sec. 3. - Effective date.] 
    This act shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption. 
In the General Assembly read three (3) times and ratified, this fifth day of May, 1969. 
CHAPTER 434, SESSION LAWS OF 1969 
AN ACT TO PROVIDE SUPPLEMENTAL RETIREMENT FUNDS FOR FIREMEN IN THE CITY OF ROCKY MOUNT AND TO MODIFY THE APPLICATIONOF G. S. 118-5, G. S. 118-6, AND G. S. 11877 [118-7] TO THE CITY OF ROCKY MOUNT. [2] 
The General Assembly of North Carolina do enact: 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- G.S. chapter 118 has been repealed. 

Sec. 1. - [Disbursements.] 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of G. S. 118-7 [now repealed], the Board of Trustees of the Local Firemen's Relief Fund of the City of Rocky Mount may as soon as practicable after July 1 of each year, but in no event later than September 1, divide the income earned in the preceding fiscal year upon investments of funds belonging to the local firemen's relief fund into equal shares and disburse the same as supplemental retirement benefits in accordance with section 1 of this act. 
Sec. 2. - [Supplemental retirement benefits.] 
(a)  Each retired full-time fireman of the city who retires subsequent to July 1, 1969 with thirty (30) years' service or more as a city fireman and who is also the current recipient of benefits under the Federal Social Security Act, and each retired full-time fireman of the city who retires prior to July 1, 1969 regardless of length of his service as a city fireman and who is a current recipient of benefits under the Federal Social Security Act, shall be entitled to and shall receive an annual supplemental retirement benefit equal to one share for each full year of service as a fireman of the city; provided, in no event shall any retired full-time fireman be entitled to or receive in any year an annual benefit in excess of six hundred dollars ($600.00). 
(b)  Each retired volunteer fireman of the city who retires subsequent to July 1, 1969 with thirty (30) years' service or more as a city volunteer fireman and who is a current recipient of benefits under the Federal Social Security Act or the Federal Civil Service Retirement Act, or the Railroad Retirement Act, and each retired volunteer fireman of the city who retires prior to July 1, 1969 with twenty-five (25) years service as a city volunteer fireman and who is a current recipient of benefits under the Federal Social Security Act, or the Federal Civil Service Retirement Act or the Railroad Retirement Act shall be entitled to and shall receive an annual benefit equal to one-half (1/2) of one (1) share for each full year of service as a volunteer fireman of the city; provided, in no event shall any retired volunteer fireman be entitled to or receive in any year an annual benefit in excess of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(c)  Any former full-time fireman of the city who is not otherwise entitled to supplemental retirement benefits under subsection (a) of this section, shall nevertheless be entitled to such benefits in any fiscal year in which the board of trustees makes the following written findings of fact: 
(1)  That he initially retired from his position as a fireman because of his inability, by reason of sickness or injury, to perform the normal duties of an active fireman; and 
(2)  That, within thirty (30) days prior to or following his initial retirement as a fireman, at least two physicians licensed to practice medicine in North Carolina certified that he was at such time unable, by reason of sickness or injury, to perform the normal duties of an active fireman; and 
(3)  That, at the time of his initial retirement as a fireman, there was not available to him in the fire department or in any other department of the city a position of employment the normal duties of which he was capable of performing; and 
(4)  That, since the preceding July 1, at least two physicians licensed to practice medicine in North Carolina have certified that he remains unable, by reason of sickness or injury, to perform the normal duties of an active fireman; and 
(5)  That, there is not available to him in the fire department or in any other department of the city a position of employment the normal duties of which he is capable of performing; 
provided, that the board of trustees, after initially making the findings of fact specified in (1), (2) and (3) of this subsection, need not specify such findings in subsequent fiscal years. 
Sec. 3. - [Intention.] 
    It is the intention of sections 1 and 2 of this act to authorize the disbursement as supplemental retirement benefits only the income derived in any fiscal year from investment of funds belonging to the local firemen's relief fund. 
Sec. 4. - [Investment of funds.] 
    The board of trustees is hereby authorized and directed to invest the funds of the local firemen's relief fund in one or more of the investments named in or authorized by G. S. 159-28.1 [now G.S. 159-30]. 
Sec. 5. - [Bond of treasurer.] 
    The board of trustees shall bond the treasurer of the local firemen's relief fund with a good and sufficient bond, in an amount at least equal to the amount of funds in his control, payable to the board of trustees, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties; such bond shall be in lieu of the bond required by G. S. 118-6 [now repealed]. The board of trustees shall pay from the local firemen's relief fund the premiums on the bond of the treasurer. 
Sec. 6. - [Severability.] 
    If any provision of this act shall be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions hereof which can be given effect without the invalid provision, and to this end the provisions of this act are declared to be severable. 
Sec. 7. - [Repealer.] 
    All laws and clauses of laws in conflict with this act are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 8. - [Effective date.] 
    This Act shall be effective upon its ratification. 
    In the General Assembly read three (3) times and ratified, this the fifth day of May, 1969. 
CHAPTER 1051, SESSION LAWS OF 1969 
AN ACT PERTAINING TO THE REGISTRATION OF VOTERS RESIDING WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS OF THE CITY OF ROCKY MOUNT. 
    WHEREAS, the City of Rocky Mount is located in both Nash and Edgecombe Counties; and 
    WHEREAS, registration and voting for county and State elections in the City of Rocky Mount are held under the supervision and authority of the Nash and Edgecombe County Boards of Election respectively, and voting for municipal elections in the City of Rocky Mount is held under the supervision and authority of the Rocky Mount Municipal Board of Elections; and 
    WHEREAS, it is also deemed desirable for all registration in the City of Rocky Mount to be held under the supervision of the Nash and Edgecombe Boards of Election; and 
    WHEREAS, all three (3) boards of election have adopted a full-time and permanent loose-leaf registration system; and 
    WHEREAS, for the convenience of the voters in both counties residing within the City of Rocky Mount, it is desirable for there to be a single place of registration, and for the county voting precincts to be the same as the city voting precincts within the City of Rocky Mount; Now, therefor, 
The General Assembly of North Carolina do enact: 
Sec. 1. - [Permanent, full-time registration office established, special registration commissioners.] 
    A permanent, full-time registration office shall be established at a convenient place within the City of Rocky Mount, either in Nash or Edgecombe County, which shall be a branch of the full-time and permanent registration office of both counties. The location shall be determined by the three (3) boards of election. Such office shall be deemed to be located in both counties for the purpose of complying with all provisions of Chapter 163 of the General Statutes of North Carolina respecting elections and election laws. Special Registration Commissioners appointed either by the Nash County Board of Elections or by the Edgecombe County Board of Elections shall be in charge of said office, and shall have the power and authority to register any Rocky Mount citizen irrespective of whether such citizen resides in Nash or Edgecombe County, provided said registrant is otherwise qualified by law to register. The position of permanent, full-time Registrar provided for the City of Rocky Mount in section 431 of Chapter 938 of the 1963 Session Laws is hereby abolished; and the duties and authority assigned by said chapter to said registrar are hereby assigned to said special registration commissioners. 
Sec. 2. - [Voting precincts.] 
    The Nash County Board of Elections and the Rocky Mount Municipal Board of Elections shall from time to time divide that portion of the City of Rocky Mount lying in Nash County into precincts which shall be the same for all elections; and the Edgecombe County Board of Elections and the Rocky Mount Municipal Board of Elections shall do the same for that portion of the City of Rocky Mount in Edgecombe County. In the event the city limits of Rocky Mount are extended, the annexed areas shall become parts of those voting precincts within the City of Rocky Mount as the Nash County Board of Elections and the Rocky Mount Municipal Board of Elections shall determine for those portions of Nash County annexed to the City of Rocky Mount, and as the Edgecombe County Board of Elections and the Rocky Mount Municipal Board of Elections shall determine for those portions of Edgecombe County annexed to the City of Rocky Mount. Prior to the effective date of such annexation, the city clerk of the City of Rocky Mount shall provide the affected county Boards of Election with a map showing the exact areas of such annexation. As soon thereafter as the annexed areas are assigned to voting precincts within the City of Rocky Mount, as provided above, the respective county board of elections shall transfer the registration cards of each voter residing in the newly annexed areas from the registration books of the old precinct in which the newly annexed area was previously located to the registration books of the appropriate voting precinct within the City of Rocky Mount. Each registered voter of the newly annexed area shall be notified by letter of the change in his voting precinct and polling place. 
Sec. 3. - [Office expense; salaries of special registration commissioners.] 
    The cost of maintaining and operating the permanent voter registration office, and of the salaries of the special registration commissioners shall be according to a budget approved by the three boards of election and the governing boards of the city and the two (2) counties. 
Sec. 4. - [Board of election decisions.] 
    Whenever any action or matter herein is to be determined by any two (2) or more of the three (3) boards of election, the same shall be determined by the unanimous decision of the affected boards of election, the decision of each separate board of election on the matter to be determined in the manner provided bylaw. 
Sec. 5. - [Repealed acts; effective date.] 
(a)  Chapter 542 of the 1965 Session Laws is hereby repealed. 
(b)  Subsection 10(a) of Section 431 of Chapter 938 of the 1963 Session Laws is hereby repealed. 
(c)  All laws and clauses of law in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(d)  The Act shall be effective from and after July 1, 1969. 
In the General Assembly read three (3) times and ratified, this the 26th day of June, 1969. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
 This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Charter 1973-6  4- 9-73 1 4 2 31 3, 4 32 1974-68  1-13-75 1 32 2 61 1985-11  2-25-85 1 4 2, 3 31, 32 2003-327(S.L)  1- 1-04 1       Rpld Char. Chs. I-IX       Added Char. Chs. I-VII 2005-27  4-25-05/5-27-05 1 Ch. II, art. II, § 12  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of the City of Rocky Mount," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1967, § 1-1) 
Charter reference- Authority to adopt Code of Ordinances, § 485. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Rocky Mount as printed in Part I, subpart A of this volume. 
    City. The word "city" shall mean the City of Rocky Mount, in the County of Edgecombe and the County of Nash and the State of North Carolina. 
    City limits. The words "city limits" or "corporate limits" shall mean the legal boundary of the City of Rocky Mount, North Carolina. 
    Code. Whenever the word "Code" is used it shall mean the Code of the City of Rocky Mount, North Carolina. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, it shall be excluded. 
    Council. The words "council" or "city council" shall mean the City Council of the City of Rocky Mount, North Carolina, constituting the governing body of the city. 
    County. The word "county" shall mean the County of Edgecombe or the County of Nash, whichever may be applicable under the circumstances, in the State of North Carolina. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code requires or authorizes an officer or employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
    Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the words "swear" and "sworn." 
    Officials, boards, commissions, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, committees and the like by title only, they shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Rocky Mount, North Carolina." 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner," when applied to buildings or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
    Personal property. The words "personal property" shall include every species of property, except real property as herein defined. 
    Plural, singular. Words importing the singular shall include the plural, and words importing the plural shall include the singular. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
    Real property. "Real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
    State. The word "state" shall mean the State of North Carolina. 
    Statute references; G.S. Whenever reference is made to G.S., it shall be construed to refer to General Statutes of North Carolina, as amended. 
    Street. The word "street" shall mean and include any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, path, viaduct, bridge or other public place and the approaches thereto within the city when any part thereof is open to the use of the public and established for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
    Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and the present. 
    Writing or written. The word "writing" or "written" shall include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1967, § 1-2) 
Charter reference- Definitions, § 1. 
State Law reference- Similar definitions and rules of statutory construction, G.S. § 12-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1967, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - References to chapters or sections. 
    All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
Sec. 1-5. - References and editor's notes. 
    The references and editor's notes appearing throughout the Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to assist the user of the Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
Sec. 1-7. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-8. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the city; 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinances providing for the levy of taxes or for adopting an annual budget; 
(8)  Any ordinance relating to local improvements and assessments therefor; 
(9)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the city or amending the boundaries of the city; 
(10)  Any ordinance regulating subdivision of land or dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(11)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or amending personnel rules or regulations; 
(12)  Any ordinance or resolution prescribing any utility rates, charges or fees; 
(13)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific streets, such as ordinances establishing speed limits or designating one-way streets, no parking areas, truck routes, stop intersections, intersections where traffic to be controlled by signals, etc.; 
(14)  Any ordinance establishing or amending zoning or land use regulations or the zoning map, or rezoning property; 
(15)  Any ordinance calling municipal elections or prescribing the manner of conducting the election in accordance with state law; 
(16)  Any ordinance prescribing any fee or payment of money to the city for cemetery lots, licenses or any other fee or tax; 
(17)  Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification, benefits or compensation of any city officers or employees, not inconsistent herewith; 
(18)  Any ordinance regarding the joint municipal electric power agency; 
(19)  Any ordinance which is temporary although general in effect; 
(20)  Any ordinance which is special although permanent in effect; 
(21)  Any ordinance containing any administrative provisions. 
All such ordinances shall remain in effect and are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. of 10-19-67, § 3) 
Sec. 1-9. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty of forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section or subsection number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of the City of Rocky Mount, North Carolina, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section or subsection not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of the City of Rocky Mount, North Carolina, is hereby amended by adding a section to be numbered _____, which section or subsection shall read as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  Repeal of any of the provisions of this Code may be effected by repealing such provisions by specific reference to the section or subsection number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of the City of Rocky Mount, North Carolina, is hereby repealed in its entirety." 
(e)  Every ordinance introduced which proposes to amend or repeal any portion of this Code shall show, by proper reference, the chapter, article and section proposed to be amended; or, if it proposes to add to this Code a new chapter, article or section, it shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this Code, the proper number of such chapter, article or section. 
(f)  Not more than one (1) chapter, article or section of this Code shall be amended, repealed or ordained by any one (1) ordinance unless such chapters, articles or sections are consecutive. 
(Code 1967, §§ 1-4-1-6) 
Charter reference- Authority to revise and codify ordinances of the city, § 10(3). 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(3)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Liability of corporate officers, agents and employees for violation of Code. 
    In the event of a violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city by a corporation, the officer, agent or employee thereof who performs the act constituting the violation or procures, aids or abets the performance of such act shall be subject to the same penalties as if he himself had committed such violation. 
(Code 1967, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-13. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1967, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-14. - General penalty for violation of Code; continuing violations. 
    Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or other ordinance shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding thirty (30) days. Each day that any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1967, § 1-10) 
State Law reference- Violation of city ordinances declared a class 3 misdemeanor punishable by fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), G.S. § 14-4. 
Sec. 1-15. - Sale of alcoholic beverages on Sunday morning. 
    Any licensed premises located within the corporate limits and holding an ABC permit issued pursuant to G.S. § 18B-1001 is allowed to sell alcoholic beverages beginning at 10:00 a.m. on Sunday pursuant to the licensed premises permit issued under G.S. § 18B-1001. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-79, § 1, 8-28-17) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Claims against the city, § 420 et seq.; sale of real property, § 442; sale of personal property, § 441; contracting, § 440; fiscal affairs, § 472 et seq. 
Cross reference- Health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; human relations, Ch. 12; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 13; personnel, Ch. 16; solid waste, Ch. 18; utilities, Ch. 21; vehicles for hire, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference- Cities and towns, G.S. ch. 160A; administrative offices, G.S. 160A-146 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Corporate seal. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted as the official corporate seal of the city a seal consisting of the embossed impression of a circular disk, containing in the outer rim the words "City of Rocky Mount, State of North Carolina" and containing in the center the numerals "1867" and "1907." 
(b)  The official corporate seal shall be placed in the custody of the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, §§ 2-1, 2-2) 
Secs. 2-2-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Governing body, ch. 3; city council, § 31 et seq.; mayor, § 61 et seq. 

Sec. 2-26. - Boundaries of electoral districts. 
    The city shall be divided into seven (7) single-member electoral districts, more commonly known as wards, each ward representing the same number of persons as nearly as possible. The ward boundaries may be revised by the city council as provided by law. 
(Code 1967, § 2-10; Ord. No. O-2010-18, § 1, 3-8-10) 
Sec. 2-27. - Filing of ordinances. 
    Every ordinance passed by the city council shall be immediately filed in a book of ordinances provided for this purpose by the council which shall be known as the official Code of the City of Rocky Mount, under the proper chapter and article, according to context, and shall be placed and assigned the proper section number. 
(Code 1967, § 1-7) 
Charter reference- Ordinance procedure, § 484 et seq. 
Sec. 2-28. - When ordinances effective. 
    Every ordinance enacted by the city council shall be in force and effect as soon as passed, published or posted, unless otherwise ordered. 
(Code 1967, § 1-8) 
Sec. 2-29. - Rules of order. 
    The rules of order of the city council are as follows: 
(1)  Rule 1. City council meetings shall be held in the city council chamber of the municipal building on the second Monday in each month at 7:00 p.m. and on the fourth Monday in each month at 4:00 p.m. 
(2)  Rule 2. Special meetings of the council may be called by the mayor when deemed necessary, and shall be called upon the written request of two (2) or more members of the city council. City council members shall be notified in writing of all special meetings or as otherwise permitted by law. 
(3)  Rule 3. A majority of the members elected to the city council shall constitute a quorum to transact business at city council meetings, but a less number may adjourn and compel the attendance of absent members. 
(4)  Rule 4. The mayor, or in his absence, the mayor pro tem, or in the absence of both, any member of the council who shall be designated, a quorum being present, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for any regular, adjourned or special meeting. 
(5)  Rule 5. The presiding officer shall enforce the rules enumerated herein and preserve order and decorum. The mayor or presiding officer may appoint the chief of police or another police officer as sergeant at arms to preserve order and decorum. 
(6)  Rule 6. The rules of order of city council meetings shall be as follows: 
a.  Meeting called to order; 
b.  Prayer; 
c.  Roll call; 
d.  Approval of minutes; 
e.  Formal or ceremonial presentations or recognitions; 
f.  Petitions from the public; 
g.  Consent agenda (when appropriate); 
h.  Public hearings; 
i.  Unfinished business; 
j.  New business; 
k.  Closed sessions (when appropriate). 
(7)  Rule 7. The mayor or presiding officer shall enforce Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised as far as they are applicable to meetings of the city council and where they do not conflict with the Charter, these rules or general law. The city attorney's office shall act as parliamentarian. 
(8)  Rule 8. City council members, while speaking shall respectfully address the chair, using the words "Mr. or Ms. Mayor," or in the absence of the mayor, "Mr. or Ms. Mayor Tem" or if someone else is presiding, "Mr. or Ms. Chairman." Council members shall speak only on the question on the floor; shall avoid all personal and indecorous language; and shall not interrupt another while speaking, except to rise to a point of order, the point to be briefly stated to the presiding officer. 
(9)  Rule 9. Additional rules may be adopted by the council, but no rule shall be added, altered or suspended without the consent of five-sevenths ( 5/7 ) of the entire membership or the unanimous consent of those present whenever there are less than five-sevenths ( 5/7 ) present. 
(10)  Rule 10. As provided in rule (6)e., petitions from the public, time shall be set aside at each regular city council meeting for public input, the purpose of which shall be to receive comments from the public on any subject related to the government of the city that is not the subject of a public hearing. This is not a time for debate or a time to pose questions to or receive responses from elected officials or city staff. Each speaker shall be limited to three (3) minutes; no speaker may speak more than once at any meeting; and speakers may not yield time to another speaker. At the discretion of the mayor, if the length of the public petition portion of a city council meeting infringes on other important business to be considered, it may be closed and reopened at the end of the meeting. Anyone who is unable to remain until the end of the meeting will be given the opportunity to speak at the next regular city council meeting and will be given priority based on time of signup. Anyone who does not complete their comments within the three (3) minutes allotted may complete their presentation in writing and submit it to the city clerk. In most instances, the city council will not take action on requests made or matters discussed, but may refer them to the city manager or city attorney for research and/or follow up. The city council shall be furnished a report on all matters so referred in the next information package from the city manager. 
(11)  Rule 11. All ordinances offered for adoption shall be in writing. No ordinance shall be adopted on the date on which it is introduced unless by an affirmative vote of five-sevenths ( 5/7 ) of the entire membership of the city council or the unanimous consent of those present whenever there are less than five-sevenths ( 5/7 ) present. 
(12)  Rule 12. The city manager shall develop and recommend items to be included on the agenda for city council meetings. The city clerk shall prepare, publish and distribute the agenda. After the agenda is published, items may be added to or removed from the agenda only by a majority vote of the entire membership of the city council. 
(13)  Rule 13. Agenda items requiring no debate or discussion may be included on the consent agenda. When all agenda items have been identified, the city manager and the city clerk will confer and select those items for inclusion on the consent agenda. The entire consent agenda may be approved only by unanimous vote of city council members present. Prior to approval, any item on the consent agenda may be removed to be considered individually on the regular agenda upon request by any member of the city council. 
(14)  Rule 14. Public hearings shall be held by the city council on any matter upon which a public hearing is required by law, or any matter upon which the city council is desirous of obtaining public input. The city clerk shall provide notice of all public hearings as required by law, or in the absence of legal requirements, in accordance with generally accepted notice requirements. Citizens speaking during public hearings shall adhere to the same time restrictions as set forth in rule (11). 
(15)  Rule 15. The city council may schedule meetings of the entire body sitting as a committee of the whole either on a regular basis, or when needed for informational reports or for matters requiring in depth explanation and discussion. At these meetings, action may be recommended, but any action taken shall not be final until considered and approved during a regular or special meeting of the city council. The city council, by consensus may refer matters to the committee of the whole, or to the mayor pro tem for inclusion on a future committee of the whole agenda. The mayor pro tem shall preside at committee of the whole meetings and, in collaboration with the city manager, shall make final decisions on the agenda. 
(Code 1967, § 1-12; Ord. No. O-2010-18, § 1, 3-8-10) 
Charter reference- Meetings, § 34(b); ordinances, § 484 et seq. 
Sec. 2-30. - Use of cameras and recording devices in the city council chambers. 
(a)  Restrictions. Cameras, including television and motion picture cameras, electronic sound recording devices and any other mechanical, electrical or electronic recording devices may be used in the public section of the council chamber (for the purposes of this article, public section shall mean the area behind the rail that is behind the press and staff table), but only in such manner as will cause a minimum of interference with or disturbance of the proceedings of the council. No such recording devices may be used on the floor of the council while the council is in session except by special permission from the presiding officer. 
(b)  Supplemental lighting. Supplemental lighting for television and motion picture cameras shall be used only with the exercise of extreme discretion with regard to the intensity and duration of such lighting and with a view to creating the least amount of interference with or disturbance of the proceedings of the council and the least amount of discomfort to members of the public in attendance. Whenever possible, the existing lighting installed in the council chamber shall be utilized. 
(c)  Disruptive lighting. The presiding officer shall have the authority to determine whether the intensity and/or duration of supplemental lighting is such that it disturbs the proceedings of the council and upon making such a determination require that the use of such lighting be discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 0-94-38, § 1, 7-25-94) 
Secs. 2-31-2-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS, AUTHORITIES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Planning board, § 301(b); board of adjustment, § 302; airport commission, § 310 et seq. 
Cross reference- Housing appeals board, § 11-46. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-46-2-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Promotion of the general welfare through instrumentalities or agencies, § 10(x). 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 13. 

Sec. 2-56. - Findings. 
    The city council finds and declares as facts that: 
(1)  Economic insecurity due to unemployment is a serious menace to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of not only the people directly affected, but to the people of the city as a whole. 
(2)  Involuntary unemployment and its resulting burden of indigency falls with crushing force upon the unemployed worker and ultimately upon the city in the form of increased public health costs, increased police protection costs, increased fire protection costs and increased needs for assistance to indigents in the city. 
(3)  Unemployment and the absence of new economic opportunities in this area have caused many workers and their families to migrate elsewhere to find work and establish homes, and this exodus has tended to reduce the tax base of the city and the school districts and impair their financial ability to support education and other local governmental services. 
(4)  Security against unemployment and the resulting spread of indigence and economic stagnation in this area can best be provided by the promotion, attraction, stimulation, rehabilitation and revitalization of industry and commerce in this area. 
(5)  The present and prospective health, safety, morals, right to gainful employment and general welfare of the people of the city requires the promotion and development within this area of new and expanded industrial and commercial enterprises and the same has been found by the General Assembly of North Carolina to constitute a public purpose. 
(6)  The purposes for which the city business development authority has been formed have proven effective in creating new employment, industrial and commercial opportunities in other areas of the country, and requires and deserves encouragement and support from the city, as a means of alleviating the foregoing employment and economic distress. 
(7)  The corporation, in addition to helping to rectify the economic plight of the community, can also serve the city by securing prospects for the purchase of certain land owned by the city and held by it for sale as industrial sites, as provided in Chapter 499 of the 1955 Session Laws of the General Assembly of North Carolina, and in securing additional customers for electric power manufactured and sold by the city and for natural gas sold and distributed by the city. 
(Code 1967, § 2-136) 
Sec. 2-57. - Statement of policy, purpose. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to promote the health, safety, morals, right of gainful employment, industrial and commercial opportunities and general welfare of the inhabitants thereof by the designation of the city business development authority as the instrumentality or agency of the city to exist and operate for the public purpose of alleviating unemployment with its resulting spread of indigence and economic stagnation by the promotion and development of industrial and commercial enterprises in this area. Such policy constitutes the carrying out of a public purpose as found by the General Assembly of North Carolina in enacting G.S. Chapter 158. 
(Code 1967, § 2-137) 
Sec. 2-58. - Status as city agency. 
    The city business development authority, a nonprofit corporation organized pursuant to G.S. Chapter 55A, is designated the instrumentality and agency of the city to carry out the provisions set forth in section 2-57. 
(Code 1967, § 2-138) 
Sec. 2-59. - Additional function as city agent. 
    The city business development authority is also designated the instrumentality and agency of the city to: 
(1)  Secure prospective purchasers for that certain land owned by the city and held for sale as industrial sites as provided in Chapter 499 of the 1955 Session Laws of the General Assembly of North Carolina; 
(2)  Secure new customers for the electric power manufactured and sold by the city and also for the natural gas distributed and sold by it. 
(Code 1967, § 2-139) 
Sec. 2-60. - Jurisdiction of city council. 
    So long as the business development authority is fulfilling its purposes as an instrumentality and agency of the city, the city council shall: 
(1)  Name the original and succeeding board of directors and remove the same as may be necessary; 
(2)  Receive reports from the board of directors at least annually and more often if necessary; 
(3)  Approve amendments to the articles of incorporation and bylaws of the corporation where the same will further the corporation's purposes; 
(4)  Receive such surplus funds as the corporation may from time to time have over and above its obligations and operating expenses, plus a reasonable reserve for further activities; 
(5)  Approve the dissolution of the corporation by the board of directors at such times as its corporate purposes are fulfilled or in lieu of action by the board of directors, order the board of directors to do the same; 
(6)  Take title to the property of the corporation upon its dissolution whether upon fulfillment of its corporate purposes or upon expiration of its corporate life. 
(Code 1967, § 2-140) 
Sec. 2-61. - Nature of authority. 
    In connection with the provisions of this division, the city council: 
(1)  Recognizes that the corporation is a separate entity from itself and exists as a nonprofit corporation by virtue of the actions of the incorporators taken pursuant to G.S. Chapter 55A. 
(2)  In designating the corporation its instrumentality and agency for the purposes specified, it is not attempting to nor shall its actions be construed to be a delegation of the powers and authorities of the city, the corporation merely being the means of carrying into execution the powers and authorities of the city in these respects, subject always to the ultimate control of the city. 
(3)  Expressly declares that none of the indebtednesses or other obligations or liabilities of the corporation shall be the indebtednesses, obligations or liabilities of the city, unless the same are expressly assumed by it, and that none of the acts of the corporation shall be the acts of the city, the corporation not possessing the power to bind the city or otherwise cause it to become liable for any of its activities. 
(4)  Hereby provides as a condition to its assuming the responsibilities heretofore referred to, that if it is ever determined at law that the property of the corporation within the city is exempt from municipal ad valorem taxation, the corporation shall annually pay to the city a sum in lieu of taxes equal to the taxes which would have been assessed against such property but for the exemption. 
(Code 1967, § 2-141) 
Secs. 2-62-2-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HOUSING AUTHORITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Housing, Ch. 11; fair housing requirements, § 12-26 et seq. 
State Law reference- Housing authorities and projects, G.S. § 157-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-76. - Creation. 
    The city housing authority is hereby created pursuant to authority contained in G.S. Chapter 157. 
(Code 1967, § 2-181) 
State Law reference- Notice, hearing and creation of authority, G.S. § 157-4; powers of authority, G.S. § 157-9. 
Sec. 2-77. - Membership. 
    The membership of the housing authority shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the mayor. In addition to the five (5) regular members, the mayor may appoint a resident of a housing authority facility to serve in an advisory capacity. 
(Code 1967, § 2-182) 
State Law reference- Appointment, qualifications and tenure, G.S. § 157-5. 
Sec. 2-78. - Term of office. 
    Members of the housing authority shall serve five-year terms and terms shall be staggered so that no more than two (2) expire in a given year. 
(Code 1967, § 2-183) 
State Law reference- Terms, G.S. § 157-5. 
Secs. 2-79-2-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 0-98-69, § 1, adopted Sept. 14, 1998, amended Div. 4, in its entirety to read as herein set out in §§ 2-96-2-100. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 4 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference- Human relations, Ch. 12; fair housing requirements, § 12-26 et seq.; director of the human relations commission to determine merits and reasonableness of complaints and grievances under the fair housing regulations, § 12-29. 

Sec. 2-96. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a human relations commission for the city to promote understanding, respect and harmony among all people. The commission shall consist of thirteen (13) members who shall be residents of the city and shall serve without compensation. The members shall be appointed as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-69, § 1, 9-14-98) 
Sec. 2-97. - Membership. 
(a)  The city council will make appointments to the commission from nominations presented to them as follows: 
(1)  Three (3) members by the mayor; 
(2)  Seven (7) members by the city council; (one (1) from each of the seven (7) wards) 
(3)  One (1) member by the Rocky Mount Chapter of the NAACP; 
(4)  One (1) member by the Rocky Mount Area Chamber of Commerce; 
(5)  One (1) member by the human relations commission. 
    In making it's appointments, the city council shall consider the qualifications of each nominee and endeavor to ensure the commission's composition by race, gender and national origin is generally reflective of the population of the city. 
    One-half (1/2) of the initial appointments following the adoption of this division shall be for two-year terms and one-half (1/2) shall be for four-year terms. Thereafter all appointments shall be for four-year terms. 
(b)  Any resident of the city is eligible to serve as a volunteer worker, subject to approval by the commission. Volunteer workers may be unlimited in number and will be used in projects and activities at the discretion of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-69, § 1, 9-14-98) 
Sec. 2-98. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the human relations commission to: 
(1)  Study and investigate problems in the area of human relations; 
(2)  Promote equality of opportunity for all citizens; 
(3)  Develop, improve and promote understanding, respect and goodwill among citizens; 
(4)  Provide channels of communications among all citizens; 
(5)  Encourage the employment of qualified people without regard to race, sex, creed, disability or national origin; 
(6)  Establish programs that will provide youth and adults with a better understanding of human relations; 
(7)  Work closely with staff members and make an annual report of its activities and recommendations to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-69, § 1, 9-14-98) 
Sec. 2-99. - Officers; duties. 
(a)  Chairperson. Annually, the members of the human relations commission shall select from among themselves a chairperson, who shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  Preside at the monthly meetings of the commission; 
(2)  Supervise and coordinate, in cooperation with the director, the various projects, programs and activities of the commission; 
(3)  Appoint task forces for projects assumed by the commission; 
(4)  Be responsible in all other respects for the conduct of the affairs of the commission. 
(b)  Executive director. The executive director shall be an employee of the city, appointed by the city manager, and shall be subject to all duties and regulations thereof. The duties of the executive director shall be to: 
(1)  Originate and plan in cooperation with the commission all programs and activities of the commission; 
(2)  Be responsible for the employment, assignment and discharge of all salaried employees; 
(3)  In compliance with city financial and budgetary procedures and policies, administer departmental and commission funds; 
(4)  Keep open lines of communications with the commission; 
(5)  Seek advice and help from the commission; 
(6)  Investigate any problem on behalf of and within the jurisdiction and stated duties of the commission; 
(7)  Perform in general the administration of the commission and such other duties as it and the city manager may assign; 
(8)  Carry out and/or assign staff to carry out investigations and attempts at conciliation of citizen complaints in areas which shall include, but not be limited to, discrimination and mistreatment in employment, housing, community services, public accommodations, education and consumer affairs. 
(9)  Such other duties as may be assigned from time to time by the city council. 
(c)  Vice-chairperson. Annually, the members of the commission shall select from among themselves a vice-chairperson, who shall have the responsibility of serving in the absence of the chairperson. The vice-chairperson will be eligible to serve on commission task forces. 
(d)  Secretary. The secretary shall be a staff member appointed by the executive director. The responsibility of the secretary shall be to serve the commission in clerical duties as it and the executive director shall decide. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-69, § 1, 9-14-98) 
Sec. 2-100. - Organizational procedures. 
    The following organizational procedures shall apply to the human relations commission: 
(1)  A monthly meeting shall be held at a time and date determined by the commission to consider its duties, discuss any problem situations and plan programs on how to alleviate problem situations. 
(2)  The chairperson, when necessary, and with the approval of the commission, shall appoint task forces to carry out the intentions of the commission. Such task forces will exist until their assignments have been completed and the commission dissolves them. Membership on the task forces may be made up of commission members and/or volunteer members. In all cases, task forces shall be fully responsible to the commission. 
(3)  Any commission member who misses three (3) consecutive meetings without approval by the commission shall be reported to the city council who shall name a new member to fill the unexpired term. 
(4)  One-half (1/2) of the members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-69, § 1, 9-14-98) 
Secs. 2-101-2-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - INSPECTION SERVICES ADVISORY COMMITTEE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; building construction standards, § 5-106 et seq.; insulation and energy utilization standards, § 5-131 et seq.; fire prevention code, § 8-26 et seq. 

Sec. 2-116. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created an inspection services advisory committee for the city which shall consist of twelve (12) members, who shall be residents of the city or its planning jurisdiction, shall serve without compensation and shall be appointed as provided in this division. 
(Code 1967, § 22-44) 
Sec. 2-117. - Membership. 
    Appointments to the inspection services advisory committee shall be made for terms of three (3) years. Responsibility for appointments is as follows: 
(1)  The mayor of the city shall appoint the following members: 
a.  One (1) member from a lending institution; 
b.  One (1) practicing architect; 
c.  The supervisor of inspection services for the city who will serve as secretary to the board; 
d.  One (1) representative from the building trade; 
e.  One (1) practicing engineer; 
f.  One (1) land developer; 
g.  One (1) heavy construction contractor; 
h.  The director of community development for the city, or his designee. 
(2)  The Rocky Mount Electrical Contractors' Association, the Rocky Mount Plumbing and Heating Association and the Home Builders Association of Eastern Carolina, Incorporated, shall recommend to the mayor for appointment to the committee the following members: 
a.  One (1) representative from the plumbing trade; 
b.  One (1) representative from the heating trade; 
c.  One (1) representative from the building trade; 
d.  One (1) representative from the electrical trade. 
All appointments shall be for three-year staggered terms. 
(Code 1967, § 22-45) 
Sec. 2-118. - Functions. 
    The inspection services advisory committee shall meet as often as necessary and shall review the North Carolina Building Code, recommend changes and amendments to the North Carolina Building Code Council to be included in the North Carolina Building Code, recommend construction specifications and inspection standards to inspection services of the city and review other matters related to the enforcement of various state, federal and municipal codes and local ordinances by the inspection services division or other departments of the city. Implementation of such recommended specifications and standards must be consistent with federal, state and municipal codes. 
(Code 1967, § 22-46) 
Sec. 2-119. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  The inspection services advisory committee shall designate a chairman and adopt rules and regulations for the execution of its functions and designate places and procedure for the conduct of its meetings. 
(b)  The supervisor of inspection services for the city shall call all meetings necessary for the committee to carry out the functions set forth in section 2-118. 
(Code 1967, § 22-47) 
Secs. 2-120-2-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - MAYOR'S COMMISSION ON PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES 

Sec. 2-131. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a mayor's commission on persons with disabilities. 
(Code 1967, § 2-166; Ord. No. 0-88-77, § 1(2-166), 9-12-88) 
Sec. 2-132. - Membership. 
(a)  The mayor's commission on persons with disabilities shall be composed of not more than fifteen (15) members serving without pay. They shall be appointed by the mayor and city council, and vacancies occurring on the committee shall be filled in the same manner for the unexpired term. The term of office for members shall be two (2) years ending June 30 in the second year or until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(b)  A member's seat will be declared vacant when that member has been absent without cause for three (3) consecutive regular meetings or a total of four (4) regular meetings during the year. In such cases, the chairman will request the mayor and city council to fill the vacancy. 
(Code 1967, § 2-167; Ord. No. 0-88-77, § 1(2-167), 9-12-88) 
Sec. 2-133. - Organization. 
    Members of the mayor's commission on persons with disabilities shall meet and select a chairman and such other officers as may be necessary. The committee shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as may be determined by it. It shall also have the power to adopt bylaws and to establish such subcommittees as it may deem necessary. Membership on the subcommittees may be extended to include noncommission appointees. 
(Code 1967, § 2-168; Ord. No. 0-88-77, § 1(2-168), 9-12-88) 
Sec. 2-134. - Purposes. 
    The purposes of the mayor's commission on persons with disabilities are to serve as a formal and continuing means by which the community may be made aware of the needs and abilities of persons with disabilities to encourage the involvement of persons with disabilities in the daily activities of the community by promoting their gainful employment, removing architectural barriers and by acting as an educational, public relations and advisory agency to both individual citizens with disabilities and the community at large to the end that the skills of all our citizens be used to the fullest extent. 
(Code 1967, § 2-169; Ord. No. 0-88-77, § 1(2-169), 9-12-88) 
Secs. 2-135-2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; subdivisions, App. A; zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Urban redevelopment law, G.S. § 160A-500 et seq. 

Sec. 2-151. - Findings. 
    The city council finds as facts that: 
(1)  Blighted areas, as defined in G.S. § 160A-503(2) exist in the city; and 
(2)  The redevelopment of such areas is necessary in the interest of the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 2-151) 
Sec. 2-152. - Creation. 
    A separate and distinct body corporate and politic, to be known as the redevelopment commission of the city, is hereby created under authority contained in G.S. § 160A-504 and other laws of the state applicable thereto to function within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 2-152) 
Sec. 2-153. - Purpose. 
    The redevelopment commission shall exist and operate for the public purposes of acquiring and replanning blighted areas within the corporate limits of the city and of holding or disposing of them in such manner that they shall become available for economically and socially sound redevelopment. The commission may undertake nonresidential redevelopment in accord with sound and approved plans and may undertake the rehabilitation, conservation and reconditioning of areas where, in the absence of such action, there is a clear and present danger that the same will become blighted. In furtherance of the foregoing purposes, the commission shall prepare redevelopment plans and shall have the powers and be subject to the limitations contained in G.S. § 160A-512. 
(Code 1967, § 2-153) 
Sec. 2-154. - Membership. 
    The redevelopment commission shall be composed of nine (9) members who shall be appointed by the mayor and city council. The term of office shall be five (5) years and shall be staggered so that three (3) terms shall expire each year. A member shall hold office until his successor has been appointed and qualified. Vacancies for the unexpired terms shall be promptly filled by the mayor and city council. A member shall receive no compensation for service, but shall be entitled within the budget appropriation to his necessary expenses, including travel expenses, incurred in the discharge of his duties. 
(Code 1967, § 2-154) 
Secs. 2-155-2-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR. COMMISSION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 0-99-25, § 1, adopted March 22 1999, deleted Division 8 in its entirety. Formerly, said division pertained to the utilities review board. Further, said ordinance provided for a new division 8 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 2-166. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a Martin Luther King, Jr. Commission for the city to arrange for the annual celebration of the Martin Luther King holiday. 
(Ord. No. 0-99-25, § 1, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 2-167. - Membership. 
(a)  The Martin Luther King, Jr. Commission shall be composed of not more than twelve (12) members who shall serve without compensation. Members shall be residents of the city at the time of appointment and throughout their terms of service. 
(b)  The city council will make appointments to the commission after soliciting volunteers and nominations from interested citizens and organizations. It is the intent of the city council to appoint persons of diverse racial, ethnic, religious and educational backgrounds. 
(c)  The term of office shall be three (3) years ending on June 30 or until their successors are appointed and qualified. Terms shall be staggered. One-third ( 1/3 ) of the initial appointments shall be for one (1) year, one-third ( 1/3 ) shall be for two (2) years and one third ( 1/3 ) shall be for three (3) years; thereafter terms shall be for three (3) years. 
(d)  The mayor and city council shall be informed in the event a commission member has three (3) consecutive absences. The city council may be asked to name a new member to fill the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 0-99-25, § 1, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 2-168. - Organization. 
(a)  Members of the commission shall meet and select a chairperson and such other officers as may be necessary. The commission shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as may be determined by it. It shall also have the power to adopt bylaws and to establish such subcommittees, as it may deem necessary. Membership on the subcommittees may be extended to include noncommission appointees who shall hold the status of adjunct members, but shall not have the right to vote on commission matters. 
(b)  One-half (1/2) of the members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum. 
(c)  The director of the department of human relations shall be an ex-officio member of and shall serve as secretary to the commission. The duties of the secretary shall be to prepare agendas for meetings, maintain written minutes from each meeting, and assist the commission in planning and implementing programs and activities for the commission. The secretary shall not have a vote but shall participate fully in all matters before the commission. 
(d)  The human relations commission shall appoint two (2) of its members to serve as ex-officio members of the commission. These appointees may serve no more than three (3) consecutive years in this capacity and shall not have power to vote on matters before the commission. 
(Ord. No. 0-99-25, § 1, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 2-169. - Purpose. 
    The Martin Luther King, Jr. commission is appointed for the purpose of organizing programs and activities that honor the legacy of the late Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. and for promoting unity among our diverse populations within the Rocky Mount community. The commission shall prepare plans for celebrating the legacy of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. for the coming year and for implementing the mayor's annual prayer breakfast. The commission shall present these plans to the human relations commission for approval. Annually, the commission shall report its accomplishments to the human relations commission which in turn, shall include said accomplishments in its annual report to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 0-99-25, § 1, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 2-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - UTILITY SERVICE REVIEW BOARD 

Sec. 2-171. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a Utility Service Review Board for the City of Rocky Mount which shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be residents of the City of Rocky Mount. All members shall be retail customers (account holders) in good standing (as defined in Section 9 of the Customer Service Policy) of the Rocky Mount Public Utility System for the receipt of at least one (1) utility service. Members shall serve without compensation and shall be appointed as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-20, 3-27-06) 
Sec. 2-172. - Membership; qualifications; term of office. 
    Appointments to the board shall be made by the city council, with each councilmember having the power to appoint one (1) board member, who shall have the same residency requirements as the city councilmember appointing the board member with respect to qualifications for office as provided in the City Charter. 
    Members so appointed shall serve four-year terms beginning upon appointment, except that those members appointed by councilmembers representing Wards 1, 3, and 5 shall initially serve three-year terms and thereafter be appointed for four (4) years. The purpose of this procedure is to set staggered terms for the members of the board. Initial terms shall be effective upon appointment. Thereafter the beginning and ending of terms shall coincide with the city's fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-20, 3-27-06) 
Sec. 2-173. - Organization; meetings and quorum. 
(a)  The members shall elect one (1) of the board members to serve as chairman. 
(b)  The board shall elect one (1) of its members to serve as vice-chairman to serve in the absence of the chairman. 
(c)  The board shall elect one (1) of its members to serve as secretary. 
(d)  If the office of chairman shall become vacant for any reason (resignation, death, etc.) the vice chairman shall automatically succeed to the office of chairman without election by the board. In such event the board shall elect another of its members to serve as vice chairman. The secretary shall preside in the absence of the chairman and the vice chairman, but shall not succeed to either office in the event of a vacancy unless elected by the board. 
(e)  Officers shall serve one-year terms and may succeed themselves. 
(f)  The board shall meet during the months of October, November, December, January, February and March of each year and at such other times as the chairman shall decide. In the event there is no business to be presented at a scheduled meeting, the chairman may elect to cancel the meeting. All meetings shall be properly scheduled and noticed according to law and shall be open to the public. 
(g)  The meetings shall be held at the city hall/administrative offices of the city. 
(h)  The director of finance or his designee shall attend all meetings of the board for the purpose of furnishing information, but shall not be a member of the board. 
(i)  A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 0-06-20, 3-27-06; Ord. No. O-08-24, § 1, 3-24-08) 
Sec. 2-174. - Duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the board to work with city staff to review and update customer service policies, procedures, and practices based on best practices and new business practices and models from other cities, utilities and electricities of North Carolina, and to make recommendations to the city manager and city council for amending same. 
(b)  The board shall work with city staff on general outreach, information and education to the community on consumer related utility matters. 
(c)  The board shall hear appeals or concerns from customers who may contend the city staff failed to follow established customer service policies and procedures in matters related to their personal utility accounts. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the board to review any requested adjustments in the monthly charge for any retail customers of the city public utility system. Prior to being eligible for review, however, it must be determined by the director of finance that the monthly charge meets the following criteria: 
(1)  The monthly consumption for the particular utility (electric, gas, water or sewer) must exceed the average consumption for the same seasonal period in the prior year by fifty (50) percent and the consumption for the month in question must exceed the consumption for the same month in the prior year by fifty (50) percent. Seasonal periods are defined as the period of usage as follows: December-March (winter season); April-May (spring season); June-September (summer season); October-November (fall season). 
(2)  If the customer does not have twelve (12) months of prior history upon which to calculate the average in accordance with subsection (1) above, then the calculation will be based on the current and available average for that customer (at same premise) up to twelve (12) months excluding the month in question. 
(3)  The customer's meter shall have been tested as provided under the city's administrative policy and found to be correct. 
(e)  In fulfilling its assigned duties in paragraph (c) above, the board shall upon hearing all relevant evidence make specific findings of fact for each such appeal. The board shall have the authority to make adjustments in staff's application of established customer service policies and procedures as it deems equitable and appropriate but, only as supported by the findings of fact, and may not vary, suspend, modify, or omit the intent and content of such policies as established by the city council. An affirmative vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the board members present and voting shall be required to overturn or modify the staff's decision or action being appealed. The decision of the board shall be final. 
(f)  In fulfilling its assigned duty in section (d) above, the board shall upon hearing all relevant evidence make specific findings of fact for each such appeal. The board shall have the authority to make such adjustment in the monthly charge as it deems equitable and appropriate, but only as supported by the findings of fact. An affirmative vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the board members present and voting shall be required to make any adjustment in a customer's monthly charge. The decision of the board shall be final. 
(g)  A written appeal shall have been submitted (on forms provided by staff) to the business office manager within sixty (60) days of the original billing date of the charge or date of the staff's decision in question and being appealed. 
(h)  A written release shall have been signed by the customer (account holder) authorizing the city to provide their billing and customer information to the board pursuant to the appeal, and in recognition that such information may become public information. 
(i)  Minutes of the meeting of the board shall record the action and findings of fact of the board on each appeal. Copies of the minutes shall be furnished to the city manager, and the action of the board, so recorded, shall constitute authority for the city manager to make the approved adjustment. 
(Ord. No. O-06-20, 3-27-06; Ord. No. O-08-24, § 2, 3-24-08) 
Secs. 2-175-2-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Power to enact ordinances on declaring state of emergency, G.S. § 14-288.12. 

Sec. 2-186. - Declaration of emergency; imposition of curfew. 
(a)  A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times of great public crisis, disaster, rioting, civil disturbance, catastrophe or for any other reason, municipal public safety authorities are unable to maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives, safety, health, welfare or property. 
(b)  In the event of a state of emergency threatening or endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within the city or threatening damage to or destruction of property, the mayor of the city is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all persons the existence of such a state of emergency, and in order to more effectively to protect the lives, safety and property of people within the city, to define and impose a curfew applicable to all persons within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 2-3) 
Sec. 2-187. - Area and time limitations of curfew; exempt persons. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit the application of a state of emergency curfew to any area specifically designated and described within the jurisdiction of the city and to specific hours of the day or night; and to exempt from the curfew police officers, firefighters, doctors, nurses, emergency medical services and such other classes of persons as may be essential to the preservation of public order and immediately necessary to serve the safety, health and welfare needs of the people within the city. 
(Code 1967, § 2-4) 
Sec. 2-188. - Prohibited acts during curfew. 
    During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency when a curfew has been defined and imposed, it shall be unlawful for anyone subject to curfew to: 
(1)  Be or travel upon any public street, alley or roadway or upon public property, unless such travel is necessary to obtain medical assistance; 
(2)  Possess off one's own premises; or buy, sell, give away or otherwise transfer or dispose of any explosives, firearms, ammunition or dangerous weapon of any kind; 
(3)  Sell beer, wine or intoxicating beverages of any kind; or to possess or consume the same off one's own premises; 
(4)  Sell gasoline or any other similar petroleum products, or any other combustible or flammable substances, except as expressly authorized by the provisions of the curfew imposed. 
(Code 1967, § 2-7) 
Sec. 2-189. - End of curfew. 
    The mayor shall proclaim the end of a state of emergency and curfew as soon as circumstances warrant or when directed to do so by the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-5) 
Sec. 2-190. - Council meeting upon proclamation of emergency. 
    The city council shall be called into session within twenty-four (24) hours after a state of emergency has been proclaimed by the mayor. 
(Code 1967, § 2-6) 
Secs. 2-191-2-194. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER CONSERVATION[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-04-26, § 1, adopted Feb. 23, 2004, amended art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Ord. No. 0-00-10, § 1, adopted Feb. 14, 2000; as amended. 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 21. 

Sec. 2-195. - Water shortage condition. 
    Whenever it is predicted that the water level in the Tar River Reservoir will decline to the extent that continued availability of water for human consumption, sanitation, health and fire protection and commercial usage is at risk after considering stream flows, demand, long-term precipitation forecasts, the Tar River Operations Model forecasts, and availability of water from other sources, it may become necessary to declare a water shortage and implement conservation requirements under the standards set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. O-04-26, § 1, 2-23-04) 
Sec. 2-196. - Declaration and notice. 
    The city manager is authorized and empowered, after communication to the mayor and city council, to declare a water shortage condition and to give notice to the public through the media and such other means as are reasonably calculated to make the public aware of the condition. 
(Ord. No. O-04-26, § 1, 2-23-04) 
Sec. 2-197. - Water shortage advisory notice. 
    Upon the declaration of a water shortage condition, the city manager shall issue a water shortage advisory notice to the public. The water shortage advisory notice shall request voluntary restriction of water usage. The city manager shall initiate an extensive publicity effort to encourage reduced consumption and usage of treated water. Examples of such voluntary restrictions shall include, without limitation, the following: 
(1)  Washing dishes by hand, or fully loading dishwashers; 
(2)  Repairing plumbing leaks; 
(3)  Limiting the frequency of car washing; 
(4)  Watering plants with leftover household water; 
(5)  Delaying the seeding or sodding of new lawns; 
(6)  Washing clothes only with fully loaded washers; 
(7)  Installing flow restriction devices on showers and toilets; 
(8)  Prohibiting children from playing in the sprinklers; 
(9)  Putting industrial/commercial voluntary conservation programs into effect which: 
a.  Restrict water use for dust control; 
b.  Limit the washing of commercial vehicles; 
c.  Reduce usage of automatic exterior sprinklers; 
d.  Limit the wash down of exterior impervious services; 
(10)  All non-residential customers, excluding customers who purchase water at a wholesale rate and excluding Nash General Hospital and private medical offices and clinics for public health reasons, who use ten thousand (10,000) gallons of water or more per day shall submit plans to the director of water resources demonstrating the ability to reduce water consumption by ten (10) percent and thirty (30) percent per day. The list of customers who use ten thousand (10,000) gallons or more of water per day shall be based on the average usage during the corresponding billing period of the most recent twelve (12) month period ending June 30, in which no water use restriction pursuant to this ordinance was in effect. If no meter readings are recorded or otherwise available for a customer's billing period, the finance department will establish an average based on other users similar to the customers with no recorded readings. 
In addition, the city manager shall activate the policy on the city's conservation measures as set forth in the administrative policy manual. 
(Ord. No. O-04-26, § 1, 2-23-04) 
Sec. 2-198. - Stage I mandatory water conservation condition. 
    A Stage I mandatory water conservation condition shall be declared by the city manager at any time that the city's stream flow and reservoir simulation model known as the "Tar River Reservoir Operations Model" indicates the likelihood of a reduction in the elevation of the water level at the Tar River Reservoir prescribed for Stage I mandatory water conservation in the drought management implementation plan included in the city's administrative policy manual as policy IX.18. 
(Ord. No. O-04-26, § 1, 2-23-04; Ord. No. O-2009-4, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 2-199. - Declaration and notice. 
    Upon the declaration of a Stage I mandatory conservation condition, the city manager shall cause notice to be given to the public through the media and such other means as are reasonably calculated to make the public aware of the Stage I mandatory water conservation condition. 
(Ord. No. O-04-26, § 1, 2-23-04) 
Sec. 2-200. - Stage I mandatory water use restrictions. 
    Upon the declaration of a Stage I mandatory water conservation condition, it shall be unlawful to use water supplied by the city from the public water system for the following purposes: 
(1)  Watering lawns, grasses, shrubbery, trees, flowers, and vegetable gardens except when: 
a.  Such watering is done on either a Wednesday and Saturday or Thursday and Sunday schedule as determined by geographic location within the city between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. and such watering is done either by a handheld hose or container or a drip irrigation system. The city manager, at his discretion, may authorize twice a week watering with automatic irrigation systems. 
b.  Persons regularly engaged in the sale of plants shall be permitted to use water to maintain such plants; 
c.  The city manager shall have the authority to equitably adjust the foregoing restrictions by establishing zones or districts in which watering can be done on specified days and, further, depending on the water level in the reservoir, may authorize the operation of irrigation systems and other water uses restricted or prohibited by this article, on specified days in specified zones or districts as he determines is consistent with water conservation and the then current level of the reservoir. 
(2)  Filling of newly constructed or drained pools or wading pools, ornamental fountains, ponds, or other structures designed to hold water; 
(3)  Washing outside areas such as streets, sidewalks, patios, service station aprons, parking lots, exteriors of office buildings, homes, or apartments, or using water for similar purposes provided, however, that firms having a license from the City of Rocky Mount to conduct a pressure cleaning business in the city may wash residential, commercial, and office structures and other ancillary facilities as necessary to maintain public health and sanitation standards; 
(4)  Using water for dust control or compaction; 
(5)  Washing automobiles, trucks, trailers, vans, boats, airplanes, or any other type of mobile equipment; provided, however, persons regularly engaged in the business of washing motor vehicles or operating commercial car wash facilities shall be permitted to use water for such purpose and provided further, a business regularly engaged in the sale and/or leasing of vehicles may wash vehicles at the site of the business when they are received prior to placement on display for sale or lease, and when they are sold or leased to a new owner or lessor; 
(6)  Using water from public or private fire hydrants for any purpose except fire suppression or other public emergency or other water resources department needs; 
(7)  Serving water in restaurants, cafeterias, or other eating establishments except upon request of patrons. 
(Ord. No. O-04-26, § 1, 2-23-04; Ord. No. O-2009-4, § 3, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 2-201. - Stage II mandatory water conservation condition. 
    A Stage II mandatory water conservation condition shall be declared by the city manager at any time that the city's stream flow and reservoir simulation model known as the "Tar River Reservoir Operations Model" indicates the likelihood of a reduction in the water level at the Tar River Reservoir prescribed for Stage II Mandatory Water Conservation in the drought management implementation plan included in the city's administrative policy manual as policy IX.18. 
(Ord. No. O-04-26, § 1, 2-23-04; Ord. No. O-2009-4, § 2, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 2-202. - Declaration and notice. 
    Upon the declaration of a Stage II mandatory water conservation condition, the city manager shall cause notice to be given to the public through the media and such other means as are reasonably calculated to make the public aware of the Stage II mandatory water conservation condition. 
(Ord. No. O-04-26, § 1, 2-23-04) 
Sec. 2-203. - Stage II mandatory water use restrictions. 
    Upon the declaration of a Stage II mandatory water conservation condition, it shall be unlawful to use water supplied by the city from the public water system for the following purposes: 
(1)  Using water in any of the ways restricted by the Stage I mandatory water use condition; 
(2)  Watering lawns, grasses, shrubbery, trees, flowers, and vegetable gardens except when: 
a.  Such watering is done on either a Saturday or Sunday between the hours of; 
b.  6:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. depending on geographic location within the city; 
c.  Such watering is done only by handheld hose or container, or drip irrigation system. Provided, however, that persons regularly engaged in the sale of plants shall be permitted to use water to maintain such plants; 
d.  The city manager shall have the authority to equitably adjust the foregoing restrictions by establishing zones or districts in which watering can be done on specified days and, further, depending on the water level in the reservoir, may authorize the operation of irrigation systems and other water users restricted or prohibited by this article, on specified days in specified zones or districts as he determines is consistent with water conservation and the then current level of the reservoir. 
(3)  Filling or refilling any swimming or wading pool; 
(4)  All non-residential customers who submitted water use reduction plans or were required to submit water use reduction plans shall implement the ten (10) percent per day reduction plan as approved by the director of water resources. If the managed reduction in water usage cannot be obtained without threatening health or safety, or if there has been a significant change in the customer's circumstances, the customer may apply to the director of water resources for a variance to the water use restriction requirement. Customers may appeal the administrative decision of the director of water resources to the city council; 
(5)  Commercial car wash facilities shall be permitted to use water for washing motor vehicles provided they can certify to the director of water resources that their car wash facility recycles a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the water. 
(Ord. No. O-04-26, § 1, 2-23-04; Ord. No. O-2009-4, § 4, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 2-204. - Stage III mandatory water conservation condition. 
    A Stage III mandatory water conservation condition shall be declared by the city manager at any time the condition of the Tar River Reservoir and supplementary water resources indicate a prolonged or worsening situation despite the implementation of Stage II mandatory water use restrictions, or at any time following issuance of severe, extreme, or exceptional drought designation for Nash County by the state drought management advisory council, or at any time the supply of available water resources has been compromised in a critical manner, so as to constitute a probable danger to the community from an insufficient supply of water to maintain the health, safety, and welfare of the public if conditions persist. 
(Ord. No. O-2007-122, § 1a., 11-26-07) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2007-122, § 1a., adopted Nov. 26, 2007, amended § 2-204 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 2-204 pertained to violation-a misdemeanor, and derived from Ord. No. O-04-26, § 1, adopted February 23, 2004. 
Sec. 2-205. - Declaration and notice. 
    Upon the declaration of a Stage III mandatory water conservation condition, the city manager shall cause notice to be given to the public through the media and such other means as are reasonably calculated to make the public aware of the Stage III mandatory water conservation condition. 
(Ord. No. O-2007-122, § 1c., 11-26-07) 
Editor's note- See note at § 2-215. 
Sec. 2-206. - Stage III mandatory water use restrictions. 
    Upon the declaration of a Stage III mandatory water conservation condition, it shall be unlawful to use water supplied by the city from the public water system for the following purposes: 
(1)  Using water in any of the ways restricted by the Stage II mandatory water use condition; 
(2)  Watering lawns, grasses, shrubbery, trees, flowers, vegetable gardens, or any other outside surfaces by any means, provided, however, that persons regularly engaged in the sale of plants shall be permitted to use water only to maintain those plants to the minimum critical level necessary; 
(3)  Operating, filling, or refilling any fountain or swimming or wading pool; 
(4)  Testing or flushing of any water or sewer lines, unless necessary to ensure public health and safety; 
(5)  All non-residential customers who use ten thousand (10,000) gallons or more of water per day who submitted water use reduction plans or were required to submit water use reduction plans under stage I shall implement up to thirty (30) percent (as determined by the city manager) per day reduction of water consumed according to plans approved by the director of water resources. If the managed reduction in water usage cannot be obtained without threatening health or safety, or if there has been a significant change in the customer's circumstances, the customer may apply to the director of water resources for a variance to the water use restriction requirement. Customers may appeal the administrative decision of the director of water resources to the city council; 
(6)  All non-residential customers, excluding customers who purchase water at a wholesale rate and excluding Nash General Hospital and private medical offices and clinics for public health reasons, who use between five thousand (5,000) and ten thousand (10,000) gallons of water per day shall submit plans to the director of water resources demonstrating the ability to reduce water consumption by ten (10) percent and thirty (30) percent per day. The list of customers for these groups shall be based on the average usage during the corresponding billing period of the most recent 12-month period ending June 30, in which no water use restriction pursuant to this section was in effect. If no meter readings are recorded or otherwise available for a customer's billing period, the finance department will establish an average based on other users similar to the customers with no recorded readings. Upon approval of plans, and as directed by the city manager, these customers shall reduce water consumption by ten (10) percent; 
(7)  All non-resident customers who use ten thousand (10,000) gallons of water or more per day shall submit plans to the director of water resources demonstrating the ability to reduce water consumption by fifty (50) percent per day. The list of customers for these groups shall be based on the average usage during the corresponding billing period of the most recent 12-month period ending June 30, in which no water use restriction pursuant to this section was in effect. If no meter readings are recorded or otherwise available for a customer's billing period, the finance department will establish an average based on other users similar to the customers with no recorded readings; 
(8)  Customers operating water-cooled chillers for air conditioning and other purposes shall be seriously encouraged to restrict use to during operating hours only, or as necessary to ensure public health and safety; 
(9)  Restaurants and other eating establishments and facilities, including schools and hospitals, shall be encouraged to use disposable utensils, dishes, and serving ware; 
(10)  All customers shall be advised to restrict their water usage to the minimum amounts necessary and implement temporary measures as necessary to conserve above and beyond existing measures. 
(Ord. No. O-2007-122, § 1c., 11-26-07; Ord. No. O-2009-4, § 4, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 2-207. - Stage IV mandatory emergency water conservation condition. 
    A stage IV mandatory emergency water conservation condition shall be declared at any time the condition of the Tar River Reservoir and supplementary water resources have deteriorated to a state of extremis despite the implementation of stage III mandatory water use restrictions, or at any time the supply of available water resources has been compromised in a critical manner, so as to constitute an imminent danger to the community from an insufficient supply of water to maintain the health, safety, and welfare of the public. A declaration of a stage IV mandatory emergency water conservation condition shall be deemed as meeting the conditions for a state of emergency, and the mayor shall declare as such when in his or her judgment conditions warrant. 
(Ord. No. O-2007-122, § 1c., 11-26-07) 
Sec. 2-208. - Declaration and notice. 
    Upon the declaration of a stage IV mandatory emergency water conservation condition, the city manager shall cause notice to be given to the public through the media and such other means as are reasonably calculated to make the public aware of the stage IV mandatory emergency water conservation condition. 
(Ord. No. O-2007-122, § 1c., 11-26-07) 
Sec. 2-209. - Stage IV mandatory emergency water use restrictions. 
    Upon the declaration of a stage IV mandatory water conservation condition, it shall be unlawful to use water supplied by the city from the public water system for the following purposes: 
(1)  Using water in any of the ways restricted by the stage III mandatory water use condition; 
(2)  Using water for any outside purpose, except as necessary to ensure public health and safety; 
(3)  Customers operating water-cooled chillers for air conditioning and other purposes shall be required to restrict use to during operating hours only, or as necessary to ensure public health and safety; 
(4)  Restaurants and other eating establishments and facilities, including schools and hospitals, shall be required to use disposable utensils, dishes, and serving ware; 
(5)  All customers shall be advised to restrict their water usage to the minimum amounts necessary to handle the critical functions of food preparation, drinking, and hygiene, and shall implement temporary measures as necessary to conserve above and beyond existing measures; 
(6)  All non-residential customers who submitted water use reduction plans or were required to submit water use reduction plans shall implement reductions up to the following amounts (as determined by the city manager), depending on their average daily usage: 
a.  For those customers who consume between five thousand (5,000) and ten thousand (10,000) gallons per day, reductions shall be up to thirty (30) percent; 
b.  For those customers who consume ten thousand (10,000) or more gallons per day, reductions shall be up to fifty (50) percent; and 
c.  If the managed reduction in water usage cannot be obtained without threatening health or safety, or if there has been a significant change in the customer's circumstances, the customer may apply to the director of water resources for a variance to the water use restriction requirement. Customers may appeal the administrative decision of the director of water resources to the city council; 
(7)  The city manager shall have the authority to utilize all necessary and available resources, including those of the city, counties, state, and federal governments, to locate and distribute water for household use at prearranged locations within affected areas of water shortage. 
(Ord. No. O-2007-122, § 1c., 11-26-07; Ord. No. O-2009-4, § 4, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 2-210. - Water conservation by medical care providers. 
    Non-residential customers who use five thousand (5,000) gallons of water or more per day and who are exempt from preparing water reduction plans following declaration of a water shortage condition because they provide medical care or public health services, including but not limited to Nash General Hospital and private medical offices or clinics, shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon the declaration of a stage III mandatory water conservation condition, they shall provide a plan to the director of water resources demonstrating their efficient use of water, existing efforts to reduce water consumption, and plans for further reduction that would result in at least an additional ten (10) percent reduction in consumption, or reasons that such reduction is not possible in order to ensure public health and safety; and 
(2)  Upon declaration of a stage IV mandatory emergency water conservation condition, they shall show that all reasonable measures have been taken to reduce water consumption, taking into account public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. O-2007-122, § 1c., 11-26-07) 
Sec. 2-211. - Appeal of decision of director of water resources. 
    Any customer may appeal the administration decision of the director of water resources to the city council by filing written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) business days from the date of the decision. The city council shall hear the appeal at its next meeting. 
(Ord. No. O-2007-122, § 1c., 11-26-07) 
Sec. 2-212. - Violations, civil penalties. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the following civil penalties for violations under stages I and II, and double said amounts under stages III and IV: 
(1)  Residential violations. 
a.  First violation-Warning notice; 
b.  Second violation-$100.00 civil penalty; 
c.  Third violation-$250.00 civil penalty; 
d.  Fourth violation-Termination of service until such time as the violator establishes to the reasonable satisfaction of the city manager that such customer has taken appropriate steps to prevent any further violations; and 
e.  Fifth violation-Termination of service until the end of the water shortage condition. 
(2)  Non-residential violations. 
a.  First violation-Warning notice; 
b.  Second violation-$250.00 civil penalty; 
c.  Third violation-$500.00 civil penalty; 
d.  Fourth violation-Termination of service until such time as the violator establishes to the reasonable satisfaction of the city manager that such customer has taken appropriate steps to prevent any further violations of this article; and 
e.  Fifth violation-Termination of service until the end of the water shortage condition. 
(3)  High volume water users required to operate under a ten (10) percent or more per day reduction plan-Violations. 
a.  First violation-Warning notice; 
b.  Second violation-$1,000.00 civil penalty; and 
c.  Third and subsequent violations-$5,000.00 civil penalty. 
(Ord. No. O-2007-122, § 1c., 11-26-07) 
Sec. 2-213. - Authority to issue notices of violation and assess civil penalties. 
    Notice of violation may be issued and civil penalties authorized by this article may be assessed by a city police officer; by any officer, employee, or agent of the department of water resources; or by any other officer, employee, agent, or other person who is authorized by the city manager to enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2007-122, § 1c., 11-26-07) 
Sec. 2-214. - Appeals of civil penalty assessments. 
(a)  Any person assessed a civil penalty may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within thirty (30) days from the date of assessment. Failure to file notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the civil penalty. 
(b)  Appeals shall be heard by the city manager or his designee through a quasijudicial process according to rules and procedures established by the city manager that govern the appeal and quasijudicial hearing process. Such rules may include a requirement that, for specified violations, a bond equal to the amount of the civil penalty be posted at the time a notice of appeal is filed. 
(c)  The decision on a civil penalty appeal is subject to further review in the superior court of the county in which the violation occurred by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. Any petition for writ of certiorari shall be filed with the clerk of superior court within thirty (30) days after the date that the written decision is issued. 
(Ord. No. O-2007-122, § 1c., 11-26-07) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2007-122, § 1, adopted November 26, 2007, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections (1)-(3). To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (a)-(c). 
Sec. 2-215. - Restrictions applicable to Tar River Reservoir. 
    It shall be unlawful to withdraw water from the Tar River Reservoir through pipes, hoses, conduits, or any other means, without a permit from the city. 
(Ord. No. O-04-26, § 1, 2-23-04; Ord. No. O-2007-122, § 1b, 11-26-07; Ord. No. O-2008-2, § 1A., 1-14-08) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2007-122, § 1b., adopted November 26, 2007, renumbered the former § 2-205 as § 2-215. The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Chapter 3 - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-08-118, § 1, adopted September 22, 2008, amended the Code by repealing former Ch. 3, §§ 3-1-3-14, and adding a new Ch. 3. Former Ch. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. O-08-32, § 1, adopted April 28, 2008. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; housing, Ch. 11; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 13. 
State Law reference- Alarm systems, G.S. 74D-1 et seq. 

Sec. 3-1. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to encourage alarm users to properly use and maintain alarm systems in order to improve the reliability of alarm systems and reduce or eliminate false alarms and to provide a means for the city to recover a portion of the cost incurred to respond to false alarms. 
(b)  This chapter governs alarm systems intended to summon law enforcement response, and requires registration, establishes fees, provides penalties for false alarms and violations, establishes a system of administration, and sets conditions for suspension of police response, and revocation of registration. 
(Ord. No. O-08-118, § 1, 9-22-08; Ord. No. O-2015-86, § 1, 8-24-15) 
Sec. 3-2. - Definitions. 
    In this chapter the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm administrator means a person or persons designated by the chief of police to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and administer the provisions of this chapter. 
    Alarm installation company means a person licensed by the state alarm systems licensing board and in the business of selling, providing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, or installing an alarm system at an alarm site. 
    Alarm dispatch request means a notification to the city that an alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a particular alarm site. 
    Alarm registration (or permits) means authorization granted by the alarm administrator to an alarm user to operate an alarm system. 
    Alarm site means a single fixed premises or location served by an alarm system or systems. Each unit, if served by a separate alarm system in a multi-unit building or complex, shall be considered a separate alarm site. 
    Alarm system means a device or series of devices, including, but not limited to, hardwired systems and systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, which emit or transmit a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition and intended to summon law enforcement response. 
    Alarm system means and includes local alarm systems. Alarm system does not include an alarm installed in a vehicle or on someone's person unless the vehicle or the personal alarm is permanently located at a site. 
    Alarm user means any person, who (which) has contracted for monitoring, repair, installation, or maintenance service from an alarm installation company or monitoring company for an alarm system, or who (which) owns or operates an alarm system which is not monitored, maintained, or repaired under contract. 
    Alarm user awareness class means a class conducted for the purpose of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms. 
    Automatic voice dialer means any electrical, electronic, mechanical, or other device capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice message, when activated, over a telephone line, radio, or other communication system, to a law enforcement, public safety, or emergency services agency requesting dispatch. 
    Cancellation means the process where response is terminated prior to arrival when a monitoring company (designated by the alarm user) for the alarm site notifies the city that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring law enforcement agency response after an alarm dispatch request. 
    Conversion means the transaction or process by which one alarm installation company or monitoring company begins the servicing and/or monitoring of a previously unmonitored alarm system or an alarm system previously serviced and/or monitored by another alarm company. 
    Duress alarm means a silent alarm system signal generated by the entry of a designated code into an arming station in order to signal that the alarm user is being forced to turn off the system and requires law enforcement response. 
    False alarm means an alarm dispatch request to the city, when the responding law enforcement officer finds no evidence of a criminal offense or attempted criminal offense after having completed a timely investigation of the alarm site. 
    Holdup alarm means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress. 
    Law enforcement authority means the chief of police or his designee. 
    Local alarm system means any alarm system, which is not monitored, that annunciates an alarm only at the alarm site. 
    Monitoring means the process by which a monitoring company receives signals from an alarm system and relays an alarm dispatch request to the city for the purpose of summoning law enforcement to the alarm site. 
    Monitoring company means a person in the business of providing monitoring services. 
    Panic alarm means an audible alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring law enforcement response. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, association, organization, or similar entity. 
    Responder means an individual capable of reaching the alarm site within thirty (30) minutes and having access to the alarm site, the code to the alarm system and the authority to approve repairs to the alarm system. 
    Verify means an attempt by the monitoring company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. 
    Zones mean division of devices into which an alarm system is divided to indicate the general location from which an alarm system signal is transmitted. 
(Ord. No. O-08-118, § 1, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 3-3. - Registration required; application; fee; transferability; false statements. 
(a)  No alarm user shall operate, or cause to be operated, an alarm system at its alarm site without a valid alarm registration. A separate alarm registration is required for each alarm site. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a completed alarm registration application form and the alarm registration fee, the alarm administrator shall register the applicant unless the applicant has: 
(1)  Failed to pay a penalty assessed under section 3-7; or 
(2)  Had an alarm registration for the alarm site suspended or revoked, and the violation causing the suspension or revocation has not been corrected. 
(c)  Each alarm registration application must include the following information: 
(1)  The name, complete address (including apartment/suite number), and telephone numbers of the person who will be the registration holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed under this chapter; 
(2)  The classification of the alarm site as either residential (includes apartment, condo, mobile home, etc.) or commercial; 
(3)  For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the classification of the alarm system (i.e. burglary, holdup, duress, panic alarms or other) and for each classification whether such alarm is audible or silent; 
(4)  Mailing address, if different from the address of the alarm site; 
(5)  Any dangerous or special conditions present at the alarm site; 
(6)  Names and telephone numbers of at least two (2) individuals who are able and have agreed to: 
a.  Receive notification of an alarm system activation at any time; 
b.  Respond to the alarm site within thirty (30) minutes at any time; and 
c.  Upon request can grant access to the alarm site and deactivate the alarm system if necessary. 
(7)  Type of business conducted at a commercial alarm site; 
(8)  Signed certification from the alarm user stating the following: 
a.  The date of installation, conversion or changeover of the alarm system, whichever is applicable; 
b.  The name, address, and telephone number of the alarm installation company or companies performing the alarm system installation, conversion or changeover and of the alarm installation company responsible for providing repair service to the alarm system; 
c.  The name, address and telephone number of the monitoring company if different from the alarm installation company; 
d.  That the alarm user has obtained a set of written operating instructions for the alarm system, including written guidelines on how to avoid false alarms; and 
e.  That the alarm user has received training in proper use of the alarm system, including instructions on how to avoid false alarms. 
(d)  Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm registration shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a registration. 
(e)  An alarm registration cannot be transferred to another person or alarm site. An alarm user shall inform the alarm administrator of any change that alters any of the information listed on the alarm registration application within five (5) business days of such change. 
(f)  All civil penalties owed by an applicant under this chapter must be paid before an alarm registration may be issued or renewed. 
(Ord. No. O-08-118, § 1, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 3-4. - Alarm registration duration and renewal. 
    An alarm registration shall expire three (3) years from the date of issuance, and must be renewed by submitting an updated application to the alarm administrator. The alarm administrator shall notify each alarm user of the need to renew thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the registration. It is the responsibility of the alarm user to submit an application prior to the registration expiration date. Failure to renew will be classified as use of a non-registered alarm system. 
(Ord. No. O-08-118, § 1, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 3-5. - Duties of the alarm user. 
(a)  An alarm user shall: 
(1)  Maintain the alarm site and the alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarms. 
(2)  Make every reasonable effort to have a responder to the alarm system's location within thirty (30) minutes when requested by the law enforcement agency in order to: 
a.  Deactivate an alarm system; 
b.  Provide access to the alarm site, and/or 
c.  Provide alternative security for the alarm site. 
(3)  Not activate an alarm system for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report. 
(b)  An alarm user shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the exterior of an alarm site will sound for no longer than ten (10) minutes after being activated. 
(c)  An alarm user shall have an alarm installation company inspect the alarm system after four (4) false alarms in a twelve-month period and shall provide a written statement to the city from the alarm installation company stating that the inspection has been made. The alarm administrator may waive a required inspection if it determines that a false alarm(s) could not have been related to a defect or malfunction in the alarm system. After eight (8) false alarms within a twelve-month period, the alarm user must have an alarm installation company modify the alarm system to be more false alarm resistant or provide additional user training as appropriate. The alarm user shall provide a written statement to the city from the alarm installation company that the alarm system has been modified to be more alarm resistant or that additional user training has been provided to the alarm user. 
(d)  An alarm user shall not use automatic voice dialers. 
(e)  An alarm user shall maintain at each alarm site, a set of written operating instructions for each alarm system. 
(Ord. No. O-08-118, § 1, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 3-6. - Duties and authority of the alarm administrator. 
(a)  The alarm administrator shall: 
(1)  Designate a manner, form and telephone numbers for the communication of alarm dispatch requests; and 
(2)  Establish a procedure to accept cancellation of alarm dispatch requests. 
(b)  The alarm administrator shall establish a procedure to record such information on alarm dispatch requests necessary to permit the alarm administrator to maintain records, including, but not limited to, the information listed below: 
(1)  Identification of the registration number for the alarm site; 
(2)  Identification of the alarm site; 
(3)  Date and time alarm dispatch request was received, including the name of the monitoring company and the monitoring operator name or number; 
(4)  Date and time of law enforcement officer arrival at the alarm site; 
(5)  Zone and zone description, if available; 
(6)  Weather conditions; 
(7)  Name of alarm user's representative at alarm site, if any; 
(8)  Identification of the responsible monitoring company; 
(9)  Whether law enforcement officer was unable to locate the address of the alarm site; and 
(10)  Cause of alarm signal, if known. 
(c)  The alarm administrator shall establish a procedure for the notification to the alarm user of a false alarm. The notice shall include the following information: 
(1)  The date and time of law enforcement response to the false alarm; 
(2)  The identification number of the responding law enforcement officer; and 
(3)  A statement urging the alarm user to ensure that the alarm system is properly operated, inspected, and serviced in order to avoid false alarms and resulting penalties. 
(d)  The alarm administrator may require a conference with an alarm user to review the circumstances of each false alarm. 
(e)  The alarm administrator may create and implement an alarm user awareness class. The alarm administrator may request the assistance of alarm associations, alarm companies, and law enforcement agencies in developing and implementing the class. The class shall inform alarm users of the problems created by false alarms and teach alarm users how to avoid generating false alarms. 
(f)  The alarm administrator may require an alarm user to remove a holdup alarm that is a single action, non-recessed button, if a false holdup alarm has occurred. 
(g)  The alarm administrator will make a copy of this chapter and/or a summary sheet of this chapter available to the alarm user. 
(Ord. No. O-08-118, § 1, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 3-7. - Penalties. 
(a)  Civil penalties for false alarms shall be assessed as provided in this section. 
(b)  An alarm user shall be liable for civil penalties, depending on the number of false alarms within the calendar year, based upon the following schedule: 
(1)  False alarm civil penalties: 
False alarm Penalty  
1 ..... $  0.00 
2 ..... 0.00 
3 ..... 0.00 
4 ..... 50.00 
5 ..... 50.00 
6 ..... 100.00 
7 ..... 100.00 
8 ..... 250.00 
9 ..... 250.00 
10 or more ..... 500.00 
(c)  In addition, any person operating a non-registered alarm system will be liable for a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each false alarm in addition to any other penalties. The penalty for a non-registered system shall be waived if the alarm user submits an application for alarm registration within ten (10) days after of notification of such violation. 
(d)  An alarm user shall have the option of attending an alarm user awareness class in lieu of paying one (1) of the prescribed penalties. 
(e)  If cancellation occurs prior to law enforcement arriving at the scene no false alarm shall be deemed to have occurred and no civil penalties shall be assessed. 
(f)  If the officer responding to the false alarm determines that an on-site employee of the alarm installation company directly caused the false alarm, no false alarm shall be deemed to have occurred and no civil penalties shall be assessed. 
(g)  Notice of the right of appeal under this chapter will be included with any penalties. 
(Ord. No. O-08-118, § 1, 9-22-08; Ord. No. O-2009-60, § 1, 6-22-09) 
Sec. 3-8. - Notification. 
    The alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user in writing after each false alarm. The notification shall include: the amount of the penalty, if any, for the false alarm, notice that the alarm user can attend alarm user awareness class to waive a penalty, the fact that response will be suspended after the tenth false alarm, excluding duress, holdup and panic alarms, and a description of the appeals procedure available to the alarm user. The penalty may be waived only once in any five-year period by attending an alarm user awareness class. 
    The alarm administrator will notify the alarm user and the alarm installation company or monitoring company in writing after alarm response has been suspended, except to duress, holdup and panic alarms. This notice of suspension will also include the amount of the penalty for each false alarm and a description of the appeals procedure available to the alarm user. 
(Ord. No. O-08-118, § 1, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 3-9. - Suspension of response. 
(a)  The alarm administrator may suspend law enforcement response to an alarm site by revoking the alarm registration if it is determined that: 
(1)  The alarm user has ten (10) or more false alarms in a twelve-month period; 
(2)  There is a statement of a material fact known to be false in the alarm user's application for a registration; 
(3)  The alarm user has failed to make payment of a penalty assessed under section 3-7 or fee due under section 3-3 within thirty (30) days of the date the penalty is assessed or the fee is due; or 
(4)  The alarm user has failed to submit a written certification from an alarm installation company, that complies with the requirements of this chapter, stating that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) and/or additional training has been conducted by the alarm installation company. 
(b)  Unless there is separate indication that there is a crime in progress, the law enforcement authority will refuse law enforcement response to an alarm dispatch request at an alarm site for which the alarm registration has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. O-08-118, § 1, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 3-10. - Appeals. 
(a)  If the alarm administrator assesses a civil penalty or denies the issuance, renewal or reinstatement of an alarm registration, the alarm administrator shall send written notice of the action and a statement of the right to an appeal to the affected applicant or alarm user. 
(b)  The alarm user may appeal any of the foregoing decisions of the alarm administrator to the law enforcement authority as follows: 
(1)  The applicant or alarm user may appeal by filing a written request for a review and by paying an appeal fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and setting forth the reasons for the appeal within twenty (20) business days after the date of notification of the decision from the alarm administrator. Appeal fees will be returned to the appealing alarm user if the decision of alarm administrator is reversed or modified. 
(2)  The law enforcement authority shall conduct an informal hearing as soon as reasonably possible and in any event within thirty (30) days after receipt of the appeal, and consider the evidence presented by any interested person(s). The law enforcement authority shall make its decision on the basis of the preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing. The law enforcement authority must render a decision within ten (10) days after the date of the hearing. The law enforcement authority may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the alarm administrator. 
(3)  Filing of a request for appeal shall stay the action by the alarm administrator revoking an alarm registration or requiring payment of a civil penalty, until the law enforcement authority has rendered its decision. If an appeal is not made within the twenty (20) business day period, the action of the alarm administrator is final. 
(4)  Alarm administrator or law enforcement authority may adjust the count of false alarms based on: 
a.  Evidence that a false alarm was caused by an act of God; 
b.  Evidence that a false alarm was caused by action of the telephone company; 
c.  Evidence that a false alarm was caused by a power outage lasting longer than four (4) hours; 
d.  Evidence that the alarm dispatch request was not a false alarm; 
e.  Evidence that the law enforcement officer response was not completed in a timely fashion; and/or 
(5)  In determining the number of false alarms, multiple alarms occurring in any twenty-four-hour period shall be counted as one (1) false alarm in order to allow the alarm user time to take corrective action, unless the false alarms are directly caused by the alarm user. 
(Ord. No. O-08-118, § 1, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 3-11. - Reinstatement. 
(a)  A person whose alarm registration has been revoked may have the alarm registration reinstated by the alarm administrator or the law enforcement authority if such person: 
(1)  Submits a new application and pays a fifty-dollar ($50.00) reinstatement fee; 
(2)  Pays, or otherwise resolves, all outstanding citations and penalties; and 
(3)  Submits a certification from an alarm installation company, stating that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the alarm installation company; 
(b)  In addition, the alarm administrator may require from the alarm user one (1) or more of the following as a condition to reinstatement: 
(1)  Proof from the alarm user that an employee of the alarm installation company or monitoring company caused the false alarm; 
(2)  A certificate showing that the alarm user has successfully completed the alarm user awareness class as provided under subsection 3-6(e); 
(3)  A written statement from the servicing or installing alarm company that the system has been inspected and is in good working order. 
(4)  A written statement from the monitoring company that it will not make an alarm dispatch request unless the need for law enforcement is confirmed by a person at the alarm site. 
(Ord. No. O-08-118, § 1, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 3-12. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city may enforce the provisions of this chapter by applying to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction, abatement order or any other appropriate equitable remedy. 
(b)  Alarm users shall be subject to civil penalties for false alarms and for operating a non-registered alarm system as provided in section 3-7. 
(c)  It is unlawful to use an automatic voice dialer and any person owning such device shall be subject to a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each time that the device contacts the city. 
(Ord. No. O-08-118, § 1, 9-22-08) 
Sec. 3-13. - Governmental immunity. 
    Alarm registration is not intended to, nor shall it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of any response by the city. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond and a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained not waived. By applying for an alarm registration, the alarm user acknowledges that law enforcement response may be influenced by factors such as: the availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels, prior response history, technological conditions, and of other factors or conditions beyond the control of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-08-118, § 1, 9-22-08) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Mar. 24, 2014, amended Ch. 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 4, §§ 4-1-4-68, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 0-02-85, § 1, adopted Sept. 23, 2002; Ord. No. 0-03-25, §§ 1-3, adopted Feb. 24, 2003; Ord. No. O-2009-7, § 1, adopted Jan. 26, 2009; Ord. No. O-2011-85, §§ 1A-C, adopted Sept. 12, 2011; and Ord. No. O-2011-103, § 1, adopted Nov. 14. 2011. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; housing, Ch. 11; parks and recreation, Ch. 15; solid waste, Ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, Ch. 19; traffic and vehicles, Ch. 20; zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, G.S. § 14-360 et seq.; protection of animals, G.S. § 19A-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Purpose. 
    This animal control chapter is enacted to regulate, restrict or prohibit if necessary, animals; to protect the public from unvaccinated, diseased, stray, roaming, dangerous, wild or exotic animals; to make unlawful acts of animals that interfere with the enjoyments of property or the peace and safety of the community; to protect animals from abuse or conditions harmful to their well-being; to operate an animal shelter; and to carry out any lawful duties authorized by state statutes and applicable ordinances. This chapter also regulates the keeping and/or maintenance of animals upon any premises within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined and shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
    Abandon. To intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or negligently leave an animal without providing for or making provisions for its proper care. 
    Adequate food. The provision at suitable intervals, not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours, of a quantity of wholesome food stuff suitable for the species and age, sufficient to maintain a reasonable level of nutrition in each animal. Such foodstuff shall be served in a receptacle, dish or container that is physically clean and in which agents injurious to health have been removed or destroyed to a practical minimum. 
    Adequate shelter. Shelter, which will keep a non-aquatic animal dry, out of the direct path of winds and out of the direct sun, at a temperature level that is healthy for the animal. For dogs, cats and other small animals, the shelter shall be a wind proof and moisture proof structure of suitable size to accommodate the animal and allow the retention of body heat. It shall include four (4) walls, a roof and a solid floor raised off the ground with an opening entrance large enough to allow access to the animal, but placed in such a way as to keep the animal out of the direct path of winds. Kennel type shelters that consist of a series of three (3) walls, a solid raised floor, and a roof with a fenced front are acceptable as long as the depth is suitable to prevent wind driven rain from wetting an area suitable for the animal contained inside to have a dry location in which to lie down, and whose opening is blocked from direct winds by a building, impervious material, tarp, or similar device, or another set of kennels facing the open side of each other. Metal barrels do not normally provide adequate shelter for a dog, cat or other small animal. They shall be allowed only if they are raised off the ground by a stand or similar attachment that is attached permanently to the barrel for the purpose of keeping the barrel from rolling over. Any barrel used in this manner must have any sharp edges or protrusions removed to prevent injury to any animal using same and must have any trace or residue of any chemical from use of the container removed. The use of a barrel as a shelter is prohibited if the barrel has rust or oxidation occurring to the level that the rust effects the integrity of the structure, causes a buildup of loose rust in the structure, or has caused holes in the structure. The structure shall provide with a sufficient quantity of suitable bedding material consisting of hay, straw, cedar shavings, cloth or the equivalent. For all animals, the containment area shall be free of accumulated waste and debris so that the animal shall be free to walk or lie down without contact with any such waste or debris, and a suitable method of drainage shall be provided to prevent rapidly excess water or moisture. Hoofed and cloven-hoofed animals shall be allowed to be sheltered on natural floors. Aquatic or semi-aquatic shall have adequate amount of clean water in which to move. 
    Adequate water. Reasonable access to a supply of clean, fresh water provided in a clean receptacle of debris and contaminants. 
    Aggression-training facility. Any person, group of persons, firm, organization, association, partnership, syndicate or corporation that schools, trains or conditions canines to bite, attack or exhibit aggressive behavior towards humans or other domestic animals for any purpose, including, but not limited to, the security of business property, personal security or dog fighting. The facility may be operated as a licensed business or as a nonprofit hobby or interest. 
    Animal. Every vertebrate nonhuman species of animal, wild or domestic, male or female, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, livestock and other mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians and fish. 
    Animal (running) at large or stray animal. Any animal off the premises of his owner and not under sufficient physical restraint such as a leash, cage, bridle, or similarly effective device to allow the control of an animal; any animal which does not wear an appropriate rabies vaccination tag. 
    Animal control officer. Persons properly appointed by the city to enforce all sections of this chapter and applicable state laws and who are responsible for the discharging of such other duties and functions as may be prescribed by the Rocky Mount City Council as set forward by this or any other applicable ordinance or state law. 
    Animal control shelter. Any facility designated by the city for the purpose of sheltering any animal lawfully impounded by the section. 
    Animal under restraint. Any animal confined within a vehicle, unable to bite persons outside said vehicle; confined within the real property limits of its owner or secured by leash or lead or strict voice control of a competent person. 
    Anti-climber. A device consisting of angled metal braces and barbed wire, which wire is stretched between each angled metal brace, all of which is attached to the top of a fence. The wire shall be at least three (3) strands, separated evenly, the furthest being no less than eighteen (18) inches from the top of the fence. It shall extend inwards at an angle of not less than forty-five (45) degrees, no more than ninety (90) degrees, measured from perpendicular. 
    At large. Outside of a fence or other enclosure which restrains the animal to a particular premises, whether on public or private property, and not under the control, by leash or lead, of the owner or keeper. Animals tethered to a stationary object within reach of a street, sidewalk, alley, trail or other public access are deemed to be "at large." 
    Authorized representative. Any person, group or association, or employee of such person, group or association designated by the chief of police to perform any duty under this chapter. 
    Cat. All felines, domestic or non-domestic, of either sex. 
    Cattery. A commercial establishment wherein any person, for profit, buys, sells, boards, breeds or grooms cats. 
    Chief of police. The chief of police of the City of Rocky Mount or his or her designee. 
    City. The City of Rocky Mount, North Carolina. 
    Code. City of Rocky Mount Code. 
    Community appeals board means the board established pursuant to subsection 11-18(b) of the City Code and to which appeals from decisions or orders made pursuant to this chapter, as well as chapter 10, health, sanitation and nuisances, and chapter 11, housing code, may be taken. 
    Competent person. An individual who has the present ability to physically restrain an animal or to whose voice control the animal is trained to respond and in fact does respond. 
    County rabies ordinance. The Edgecombe or Nash County Ordinance for the Control of Rabies and other disease that are capable of being spread from animals to humans, or state statute enforced by either county. 
    Cruel treatment. Every act, omission, or neglect whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering, or death is caused or permitted; such acts or omissions shall include, but not be limited to: beating, kicking, hanging, submerging under water, suffocating, poisoning, setting on fire, and depriving of food, water, and medical treatment, or otherwise subjecting the animal to conditions detrimental to its health or general welfare. Such terms, however, shall not be construed to include the lawful taking of animals under the jurisdiction and regulation of the North Carolina Wildlife Resource Commission, lawful activities sponsored by agencies conducting biomedical research or training, or lawful activities for sport. 
    Dangerous animal. Any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other animals by virtue of attack and severity as to cause property damage or physical injury or death. Any animal whose behavior constitutes a reasonable risk of injuring a human or animal or damaging personal or real property, or which is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of fighting or trained for fighting. Such behavior includes, but is not limited to, an animal's biting, wounding, or attacking or attempting to attack a human or another animal. This definition shall not apply to any animal that has been subject to provocation as defined herein, upon the animal owner's premises. "Dangerous animal" includes "dangerous dogs" as defined in G.S. 67-4.1. 
    De-barked. A medical procedure where veterinarians surgically alter the vocal cords of a dog to prevent the animal from making any sound. 
    Department. The Police Department of the City of Rocky Mount. 
    Dog. All canines, domestic or non-domestic of either sex. 
    Domesticated. Those species of animals that are indigenous to Edgecombe County, Nash County and the City of Rocky Mount and are accustomed to live in or about the habitation of men, including but not limited to cats, cows, dogs, fowl, horses, and domesticated wild animals. This does not include hogs, pigs, any other swine, or any member or the ursidae or felidae families or the carnivora order if the animal weighs more than thirty-five (35) pounds. 
    Estrus. A period of sexual activity in the female cat or dog known as "heat," wherein male cats or male dogs are attracted for the purpose of mating. 
    Exposed to rabies. Any animal or human bitten by or exposed to an animal which is unvaccinated against rabies or whose vaccination status is unknown and has had the opportunity to be exposed to rabies. 
    G.S. The General Statutes of the State of North Carolina. 
    Harboring an animal. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered seven (7) days or more, unless the animal is being boarded for a fee. 
    Health director. The director of either Edgecombe County or Nash County Health Department. 
    Holding facility. Any pet shop, kennel, cattery, or combination thereof. 
    Impounded. Any animal which is received into custody by any employee of the animal control unit or the police department. 
    Inoculation or inoculation against rabies. The vaccination of a dog or cat with antirabic vaccine approved by the United States Bureau of Animal Industry, the North Carolina Department of Agriculture and the North Carolina State Board of Health at such time or times as shall be required by the General Statutes of North Carolina, the North Carolina Board of Health and/or the local health director, as defined in Section 106-364(2) of the General Statutes of North Carolina or as amended thereafter. 
    Inspection services division. The unit within the department of development services charged with the enforcement of all building codes and zoning ordinances. 
    Leash or lead. A thong, cord, rope, chain or similar device which holds an animal in restraint. 
    Livestock. Any large domesticated animals, i.e., horses, which term includes all equine; cows, which term includes all bovines; goats, which term includes all caprines; sheep, which term includes all ovines; swine, which term include all species of the family Suidae; any other domestic, hoofed, or cloven-hoofed animals; and to include all domestic fowl. 
    Kennel. A commercial establishment wherein any person, for profit, buys, sells, boards, breeds, grooms, lets for hire, or trains for a fee, dogs. 
    Neighborhood. An area within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of the property wherein the animal is kept or maintained. 
    Owner or keeper. Any person, group of persons, firm, organization, association, society, club, lodge, partnership, syndicate, trustee or corporation owning, keeping, having in charge of sheltering, feeding, harboring or taking care of any animal however temporarily; provided, however, that a person having temporary custody or possession of an animal for the sole purpose of turning over such animal to a member of animal control or other peace officer shall not be deemed the owner of the animal. 
    Owner's real property. Any real property owned or leased by the owner of an animal, but does not include any public right-of-way or a common area of a condominium, apartment complex, or townhouse development. 
    Pasture. An auxiliary fenced area with sufficient grass for grazing. 
    Pet. A domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility. Pets include, but are not limited to, birds, cats, dogs, fish, hamsters, mice, rats, reptiles, domesticated wild animals and other animals associated with the human environment. 
    Pet shop. A commercial establishment, which offers for sale two (2) or more species of live animals with the intent that they be kept as pets. 
    Premises. A definite portion of real estate, including land with its appurtenances, a building or part of a building. 
    Provocation. Any action designed, intended, or which can reasonably be expected to have the effect of goading, inflaming, or instigating an aggressive response on the part of an animal. Reasonable efforts of self-defense against a dangerous animal and authorized or otherwise lawful entry onto the property of another shall not constitute provocation. 
    Public nuisance animal. Any animal or group of animals which: 
(1)  Is repeatedly found at large; 
(2)  Damages the property of anyone other than its owner; 
(3)  Is dangerous; 
(4)  Causes fouling of the air by odors; 
(5)  Causes unsanitary conditions of enclosures or surroundings; 
(6)  By virtue of number or type is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare; 
(7)  Barks, whines, howls, crows, or makes any other noise in an excessive, disturbing, continuous or untimely fashion; 
(8)  Is diseased and dangerous to public health; 
(9)  Habitually or repeatedly chases, snaps at, attack or barks at pedestrians, bicycles or vehicles; 
(10)  Runs at large while in heat; or 
(11)  Has been determined to be a "dangerous animal or dog" pursuant to section 4-18, dangerous animals, section 4-36, aggression-trained dogs, or section 4-37, guard dogs of this chapter. 
    Restraint. 
(1)  Secured by a leash or lead under the physical control of a competent person; 
(2)  Tethered to stationary object not within reach of a street, sidewalk, alley, trail or other public access; or 
(3)  Within a fence or other enclosure which limits the animal to a particular premises. 
    Rodentproof. The state or condition not conducive of entry, feeding or harboring of rodents. 
    Run at large or running at large. To roam, run or self-hunt off the property of the owner or custodian while not under the owner or custodian's immediate control. 
    Sanitary. The state or condition of good order and cleanliness which precludes the probability of disease transmission. 
    Shall and may defined. "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. 
    Spayed female. A female cat or dog which has been rendered sterile by surgical means (ovariohysterectomy). 
    Strict voice control. Demonstrable control or governance of the behavior of any animal as if such animal were controlled by a leash. 
    Three-day holding period. The 72-hour holding period for animal seized or turned into the animal control shelter. The 72-hour period begins at 5:00 a.m. on the day immediately following the date of the seizure or delivery of the animal to the animal shelter and ends at 5:00 a.m. on the third day thereafter, not including Saturdays, Sundays, and city holidays. 
    Trainer. Any individual who holds him/herself available to the general public for the purpose of training attack and security dogs. This does not include individuals who are in the business of obedience training only. 
    Trespassing. To be upon the property of another without consent or permission. 
    Unit. The animal control unit within the police department of the City of Rocky Mount. 
    Wild or exotic animal. Any living animal which is not usually and customarily kept as a pet or a domesticated animal. A wild or exotic animal is one which would ordinarily be confined to a zoo, or one which would ordinarily be found in the wilderness of this or any other country or one which is a species of animal not indigenous to the United States or North America. It is also one which otherwise causes a person to be fearful of significant destruction of property or bodily harm and includes, but is not limited to, any animal for which a federal or state permit or license is required, and such animals as lions, tigers, wild cats, wolves, bears, apes, monkeys or raccoons, skunks, squirrels, ocelots, bobcats, wolves, hybrid wolves, and other such animals or one which causes zoonotic diseases or other warm-blooded animal which can normally be found in the wild state. Examples also include dangerous reptiles, such as alligators, caimans, poisonous reptiles, and poisonous arachnids, including scorpions, which are those reptiles and arachnids that have the capability of injecting humans or other animals with venom which may cause death or physical injury. Such animals are further defined as being those mammals or those non-venomous reptiles weighing over twenty-five (25) pounds at maturity which are known at law as ferae naturae (wild by nature). Wild or exotic animals specifically do not include animals of species customarily used in North Carolina as ordinary household pets, animal of species customarily used in North Carolina as domestic farm animals, fish confined in an aquarium, birds, or insects. A hybrid of any animal as defined in this section, regardless of genetic percentage, shall be deemed exotic. 
    Wildlife conservation officer of North Carolina. Any employee of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources commissioned as a special peace officer pursuant to Article 1A of Chapter 113 of the North Carolina General Statutes. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14; Ord. No. O-2018-79, § 1, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 4-3. - Bird sanctuary. 
    The area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. It shall be unlawful for any person to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot, kill, maim, or injure any bird therein or to destroy, rob or tamper with the eggs or nests and breeding places of any birds or wild fowl. The provisions of this section shall not protect pigeons, crows, starlings, or English sparrows or any birds classified as a public health nuisance by the North Carolina State Wildlife Resources Commission or by the general statutes of North Carolina. If any birds so classified as a public health nuisance are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality so as to constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of the city, and no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, such birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the city manager under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-4. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-5. - Administration and duties. 
(a)  Animal control as a unit of the Rocky Mount Police Department shall be charged with the responsibility of: 
(1)  Enforcing and carrying out the provisions of this chapter and any other ordinance assigning animal control duties and of all relevant state laws for the care, control and custody of all animals as described in this chapter. 
(2)  Making canvasses, including homes and any businesses utilizing guard or security dogs, for the purpose of ascertaining that all dogs, cats and equine animals are properly licensed, if required, and/or animals requiring permits as described in section 4-51. Keeping of animals are duly administered and maintained; ascertaining that all dogs are properly registered with the appropriate county of residence for tax purposes; that all dogs and cats are currently vaccinated against rabies; organizing and carrying out any such canvas, have sole and exclusive authority, control and responsibility for such actions; and that provisions of this chapter are being followed. 
(3)  Cooperating with the appropriate county health director and county health and animal control officers and assisting in the enforcement of the laws of the state with regard to the control of animals and especially with regard to the vaccination of dogs and cats against rabies and the confinement of dangerous dogs, investigating all reported animal bites or other human physical contact of suspected rabid animal, enforcement of quarantine of any animal involved, and submission of bite reports and reports of human contacts to the appropriate county health director. 
(4)  Supervising, maintaining and operating the City of Rocky Mount animal shelter and unit employees. 
(5)  Protecting animals from neglect and abuse; enforcing within the city all of the state laws and city ordinances for the care, control and custody of animals covered in this chapter. 
(6)  Investigating all complaints with regard to animals covered by this chapter. 
(b)  Uniform. Every employee of the section, while performing these respective duties, shall wear a uniform to be determined by the chief of police. 
(c)  Weapons. The employees of the unit shall not carry on their person any firearms of any kind unless specifically authorized by the chief of police. However, employees of the section may store at the animal shelter, or carry in section vehicles, tranquilizer guns, or any other weapons approved for use by the chief of police. Such weapons may be used when necessary to enforce sections of this chapter or other applicable laws for the control of wild, feral, diseased or dangerous animals or for public safety when the chief of police deems the action necessary. While acting with weapons in their official capacity, employees of the section shall be exempt from any City Code provision otherwise requiring permits or city council approval. 
(d)  Except as may be otherwise provided by statute or local law or ordinance, no officer, agent or employee of the municipality charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter or other applicable law shall be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of such duties. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-6. - Inspection, right of entry, interference or concealment. 
(a)  Inspections. Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or other applicable law, or whenever an employee of the unit has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any violation of this chapter or other applicable law, the employees of the unit are empowered to enter and inspect such property at any reasonable time and perform any duty imposed upon them by this chapter or other applicable law, but only if the consent of the occupant or owner of the property is freely given or an administrative search warrant or criminal search warrant is obtained as follows: 
(1)  If such property is occupied, the employee of the unit shall first present credentials to the occupant and request entry, explaining the reasons therefore; and 
(2)  If such property is unoccupied, the employee of the unit shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having control of the property, present proper credentials and request entry, explaining the reasons therefore; and 
(3)  If such entry is refused or cannot be obtained because the owner or other person having control or charge of the property cannot be found after due diligence, an employee of the unit may obtain an appropriate warrant to conduct a search, or inspection of the property or seizure on the property. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an employee of the unit shall have the authority to enter upon any land to enforce the provision of this chapter, including the seizure of dogs running at large in violation of section 4-25, "Run or running at-large/Restraint of animals", or other applicable law if a violation of such law is being committed in the presence of the employee; and such entry upon private property shall not be deemed to be a trespass. 
(b)  Interference. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder, molest, resist or obstruct employees of the unit while they are carrying out any duty created under this chapter or other applicable law. 
(c)  Concealment of animal(s). It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal, for the purpose of evading tax or license requirements, permit requirements, rabies inoculation requirements of this chapter, or any other applicable law, any unlisted, unlicensed, uninoculated or unpermitted animal from any employee of the unit. 
(d)  Concealment of license, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to show proof of taxation, license, permit or a rabies inoculation to any employee of the unit upon request. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Secs. 4-7-4-12. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 4-13. - Abandoned animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, possessing or harboring an animal to abandon that animal. 
(b)  If the unit finds that an animal has been abandoned, the animal may be impounded. If the animal has been abandoned in a house or within a fenced area, the unit must make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or manager of the property. If the property owner or manager is not the animal owner, then the unit shall secure permission to remove the animal. If the property owner is also the animal owner, and this individual cannot be located, the unit shall secure an appropriate warrant to seize the animal. 
(c)  An animal seized pursuant to this section shall be impounded for the three-day holding period. If the owner contacts the unit to reclaim the animal, an explanation for the animal's abandonment and proof of ownership must be provided to the reasonable satisfaction of the chief of police before the animal is released to the owner. If the animal is unclaimed at the end of the three-day holding period, the chief of police may dispose of the animal as provided by section 4-67, "Disposition of unredeemed animals." 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-14. - Abuse of or cruelty to animals. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful to: 
(1)  Fail to provide adequate food and/or adequate drinking water for any animal. 
(2)  Fail to provide adequate shelter for an animal wherein the animal can be protected from extremes of weather (heat, cold, rain, etc.); or 
(3)  Overwork, overload, or overdrive any animal causing physical pain, suffering or death; or 
(4)  Beat, torture, injure, torment, poison or mutilate an animal causing physical pain, suffering or death; or 
(5)  Fail to provide adequate medical attention for any sick, diseases or injured animal; or 
(6)  Keep any animal under unsanitary or inhumane conditions which are detrimental to the animal's health and general welfare or fail to maintain a condition of good order and cleanliness which reduces the probability of transmission of disease; or 
(7)  Tease, tantalize, provoke, molest, bait or in any way bother or harass any animal which causes the animal to bark excessively or attempt to escape from its enclosure or property, or act in an aggressive manner; or 
(8)  Set a rabbit, hare, raccoon or other such animal loose for the purpose of chasing, hunting or having a race thereafter; or 
(9)  Promote, stage, hold, manage, conduct, carry on or attend any game, exhibition, contest, fight or combat between one (1) or more animals or between animals and humans; or 
(10)  Convey any type of animal in a motor vehicle or in a wagon or trailer pulled by a motor vehicle or in a truck or the back of a truck in such a way as to cause pain, suffering, discomfort or death to the animal; or 
(11)  Place or confine an animal or allow an animal to be placed or confined in a motor vehicle under such conditions or for such a period of time as to endanger the health or well-being of such animal due to temperature, lack of food or water, or such other conditions as may reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability or death. 
a.  Any animal control officer is authorized to exercise all powers granted by G.S. 14-363.3 to protect the health or well-being of the animal. 
b.  The officer removing the animal shall then impound it and leave in a prominent location on the motor vehicle a written notice or tag of the animal's impoundment, a brief description of the animal, and where and when the animal may be reclaimed. The officer may also issue a citation for violation of this section. 
c.  So long as an animal is within sight of an employee of the animal control unit or a police officer, section 4-14 shall not be interpreted to require that any warrant be obtained before removing the animal. 
(12)  Fail to provide sufficient shade, when sunlight is likely to cause overheating and discomfort; or 
(13)  Keep animals outdoors without access to shelter to allow them to remain dry and comfortable during inclement weather; or 
(14)  Fail to provide a suitable method to rapidly eliminate excess water. 
(15)  Tie or otherwise physically fasten an animal to any object on a public right-of-way or near to a public right-of-way so that the animal may go upon the public right-of-way and leave the animal unattended. 
(b)  Injuring or meddling with police dogs or law enforcement animals. No person shall tease, harass, interfere or meddle with any dog or horse used by any law enforcement agency while the animal is being used by such agency or any member thereof in the performance of any of the functions or duties of such law enforcement agency or of such members. 
(c)  Convictions. If a person has been convicted twice of a violation of this section or N.C.G.S. §§ 14-360, 14-361, 14-361.1, 14-362, 14-363, or as they are amended, and any two (2) such convictions have both occurred with the last five (5) years preceding the request for an animal permit, then the animal permit shall be refused. In that situation, the person shall be eligible for applying for an animal permit five (5) years after the date of the last violation or conviction. 
(d)  Transporting exception. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the humane transportation of horses, cattle, sheep, poultry or other livestock in trailers or other vehicles designed, constructed, and adequate for size and number of animals transported. 
(e)  Euthanizing exception. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the unit or veterinarians from euthanizing dangerous, unwanted, injured or diseased animals in a humane manner; nor to prohibit slaughterhouses or medical facilities from the proper, humane and lawful carrying out of their activities or duties. 
(f)  Pet shops. Animal control officers shall have the authority to conduct inspections of pet stores, to the extent not preempted by state law, in order to determine if there is any abuse of animals. Pet shops shall also be subject to the Nash or Edgecombe County Ordinance for the Control of Rabies and Other Zoonoses as administered and enforced by the county health departments or by the State of North Carolina. Abuse of animals shall include any act described in this section or any other act which is detrimental to the well-being of the animal. It shall be unlawful for any pet store employee or pet store owner to violate this section. 
(g)  [Relative to this section.] In this section, every such offender shall for each offense be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor. In this section and in every law which may be enacted relating to animals, the words "torture,", "torment," or "cruelty" shall be held to include every act, omission or neglect whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death is caused or permitted. Such terms shall not be construed to prohibit the lawful taking of animals under the jurisdiction and regulation of the North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-15. - Animal bite. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an animal to bite a human being, who does not ordinarily reside on the premises, unless the animal has been subject to provocation, or unless the victim has been trespassing, as defined in section 4-2 "Definitions." 
(b)  Any person having knowledge, or having had reported to him or her, that an animal other than a rodent, bird or reptile has bitten a human being so as to cause an abrasion of the skin shall immediately report the occurrence to the animal control unit and shall provide further information requested by the any animal control officer. It shall be unlawful for any person having knowledge to fail to inform the unit where an animal is located if the owner has given the animal away, or caused in any way the animal to be taken from the owner's premises. For the purposes of this section, rodents, birds, and reptiles are not included under the definition of animals since they are not considered to be transmitters of the rabies virus. Bites inflicted by these animals need not to be reported to animal control. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for an animal which has bitten, attacked or threatened a human or animal to remain at large. Animal control officers shall have the authority to enter upon private property, including entry into a dwelling unit or other similar building, when the animal control officer has observed an animal which has committed the biting, attacking or threatening in violation of this section; and such entry upon private property shall not be deemed a trespass. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere, to threaten or otherwise prevent an animal control officer from carrying out or performing their lawful duties, as described above, under this section. 
(f)  Any violation of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty. This penalty shall be doubled for a second offense and if the animal inflicting the bite is the same a dangerous animal investigation shall be initiated by the animal control supervisor. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-16. - Animals or fowl banned from sale. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership or corporation to sell or offer for sale, or permit to be sold or offered for sale, barter or give away, baby chickens, baby ducklings or other fowl or baby rabbits less than six (6) weeks of age as pets, toys, premiums or novelties; provided, this section shall not apply to breeders, hatcheries or stores engaged in the business of selling for purposes of commercial breeding and raising, nor shall it prohibit nature museums or raptor centers from placing such animals and fowl in foster homes registered with the department for the same. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to color, dye, stain or otherwise change the natural color of baby chick, all other fowl, rabbits or any animal. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-17. - Animal fights. 
    No person shall cause, instigate or encourage any animal to fight or to enter into combat in any manner. No person shall train or keep any animal for the purpose of fighting. No person shall maintain any place where animals are permitted or encouraged to fight for exhibition, wager or sport. No person shall surgically alter the vocal cords of any animal, known as debarking, for the purposes of masking the noise of any illegal dog fighting activity. It shall be unlawful for any person to own an animal that has had its vocal cords removed for the purposes of any animal fighting activity. 
    Any fees associated with the boarding, feeding, cleaning, and medical care of animals that are subject to the seizure of animals for animal fighting and animal cruelty cases and are required to be held for court purposes, will be assessed to animal owner pending the outcome of the court case. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-18. - Dangerous animals. 
(a)  Probable cause notice. The chief of police shall designate an animal control supervisor who shall have the authority to determine whether there is probable cause to believe an animal is a dangerous animal and if the supervisor makes that determination he or she shall issue a notice of probable cause declaring that there is probable cause to believe that the animal is a dangerous animal. The probable cause notice shall state the specific reasons there is probable cause to believe the animal is a dangerous animal. The department shall serve the owner by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, as soon as reasonably possible with a copy of the probable cause determination if the whereabouts of owner is known. The owner's appeal rights shall be provided in all notices of probable cause. If the owner is unknown, the department shall make reasonable efforts to determine who the owner is and attempt to serve the owner. The supervisor shall notify the chief of police of all communication about the probable cause notice and keep a written report of the date and contents of all communications. 
(b)  Unlawful to fail to surrender animal. The owner shall turn the animal over to the animal control unit immediately upon receiving a probable cause notice. The police department shall have the authority to seize immediately any animal for whom there is probable cause to believe that the animal is a dangerous animal. It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of a premises to fail to give an animal to the animal control unit immediately upon presentment of a probable cause notice. The chief of police or his designated supervisor shall have the authority to authorize keeping the animal on the owner's premises or elsewhere if it is determined that such confinement will be adequate to protect the public and the well-being of the animal. The department shall have the authority to seize an animal upon delivery of the probable cause notice if the supervisor determines that it would be dangerous to the public health and safety for the animal to remain at large. 
(c)  Unlawful to keep an animal subject to a notice of probable cause for declaring an animal dangerous. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any animal cited and identified in a notice of probable cause declaring the animal dangerous as defined in section 4-2, Definitions, of this chapter, unless authorized to keep the animal is granted as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Request for hearing. The owner of an animal subject to a probable cause notice shall have the right to a hearing to determine whether the animal is a dangerous animal as defined in this chapter. The owner of the animal must request a hearing by submitting a written request during normal working hours to the chief of police within ten (10) calendar days after service of the probable cause notice, or after a reasonable effort has been made to serve the notice. 
(e)  Failure to request a hearing. If the owner fails to properly file a timely request for a hearing, the chief of police shall determine whether the animal is dangerous. The chief of police shall make finding of fact to support his or her determination, and that determination shall be conclusive. The chief of police may dispose of the animal as provided by subsection (k) below. 
(f)  Hearing and decision. If a hearing is requested, the chief of police shall within ten (10) days of receipt of an appeal arrange a location and time for a hearing. The designated supervisor shall present whatever relevant evidence the supervisor has that the animal should be declared dangerous. The owner shall be entitled to present whatever evidence the owner wishes and to have legal representation. All testimony before the chief of police shall be sworn testimony. The chief of police's decision shall be supported by specific findings of fact and specific conclusions based upon the finding of fact. The findings of fact must be supported by competent and material evidence in the record. The chief of police shall render his decision and notify the owner of the animal or responsible party in question of the decision in writing within ten (10) days by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the owner's last known address as determined in the exercise of reasonable diligence. 
(g)  Appeals. The owner/responsible party shall have the right to appeal the determination of the chief of police to the community appeals board within ten (10) days following receipt of notice. The determination of the chief of police shall be final in the absence of an appeal. 
(h)  [Post-appeals hearing.] The community appeals board shall schedule a hearing no earlier than five (5) days and no later than thirty (30) days following receipt of the owner's notice of appeal. The owner shall be advised in writing of the date, time, and place of the hearing at least three (3) business days prior to the hearing. 
(i)  Appeals board decision. The appeals board shall hear sworn testimony and review such relevant evidence as the chief of police and the owner or his/her authorized representative wish to present concerning the question of whether the animal in question is a dangerous animal. The failure of the owner to appear shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the determination of the chief of police. The appeals board shall render its decision in a timely manner and state in writing either (1) that the animal is a potentially dangerous animal as determined by the chief of police, or (2) that the animal is not a potentially dangerous animal. 
(j)  Appeal to superior court. The decision of the community appeals board, involving dangerous animals only, shall be subject to review by the superior court by proceeding in the nature of certiorari. Any petition for writ of certiorari for review by the superior court shall be filed with the clerk of superior court within ten (10) days after delivery of or reasonable efforts to deliver the decision to the owner or the owner's representative. In the event of the filing of a petition for writ of certiorari in superior court, the animal shall be confined at the animal shelter or at a location acceptable to the chief of police; and at the time of the filing of petition for writ of certiorari, a cash bond must be provided to the city for all costs incurred thus far by the city's retention of the animal and for an approximate time for the course of the appeal. The petitioner who has filed a petition for writ of certiorari shall bear the cost of the transcript prepared for the court. The city shall reimburse the petitioner for the cost of the petitioner's transcript and the court's transcript if the court reverses the decision and determines that the animal is not dangerous. No charge shall be made for boarding, impoundment or associated fees in the case of a ruling declaring an animal not dangerous. The appeal shall be heard de novo before a superior court judge sitting without a jury. 
(k)  Disposition of the animal. The chief of police shall have the discretion to dispose of an animal which has been determined to be a dangerous animal in one (1) of three (3) ways: 
(1)  By humane destruction of the animal; or 
(2)  By giving the animal to an individual or an organization subject to the protective and inspection conditions required by the chief of police for the well-being of the animal, for the protection of the public and for the purpose of preserving and taking care of the animal; or 
(3)  By removing the animal from the City of Rocky Mount city limits and confining it within a "secure fence" enclosure as defined in subsection 4-38(c). Such enclosure shall be made available for inspection and approval by the chief of police or his or her designee before such disposition is granted. 
a.  Any animal ordered removed from the City of Rocky Mount city limits shall be subject to immediate seizure or disposition if found within the city, temporarily or otherwise, unless prior permission has been granted in writing by the chief of police. 
If the unit determines that a dog has bitten a human being, without provocation, then the unit shall have the authority to require the owner to procure liability insurance in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) at the owner's expense, with reasonable policy provisions including prior notice of cancellation, and/or to have the dog tattooed, and/or implanted with a microchip that contains identifiable data, and/or to display a sign on the premises warning of the dog on the premises. The unit shall have the authority to require the owner to show signed written statements about maintaining the liability insurance, the designated enclosure for the dogs, the duty to notify the animal control unit if the dog escapes, and to require the owner to give the unit the authority to seize and impound the dog if the owner fails to comply with the foregoing provisions. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-19. - Dead animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or place the carcass of any animal which he owns upon any street, alley or lot or to allow the animal to remain unburied on his property. This shall not be construed to prohibit the placing of a carcass of a small animal on the right-of-way or within three (3) feet thereof for pickup by the environmental services unit or in a manner approved by the superintendent of the environmental services of the city or for pickup on state roads by the N.C. Department of Transportation. 
(b)  The owner of any small animal (less than one hundred (100) pounds) which dies shall, within twenty-four (24) hours after he has learned of its death, bury it at least three (3) feet beneath the surface of the ground and not closer than three hundred (300) feet to any flowing stream or public body of water, or otherwise have it removed as described in subsection 4-19(a). 
(c)  The owner of any large animal (greater than one hundred (100) pounds) which dies shall, within twenty-four (24) after he has learned of its death, bury it at least four (4) feet beneath the surface of the ground and not closer than three hundred (300) feet to any flowing stream or public body of water, or otherwise have it removed from his property. 
(d)  The superintendent of environmental services and/or his representative, upon request of any person or otherwise, may pick up and dispose of any animal carcass within the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-20. - Designated special events, animals prohibited. 
(a)  Applicability. This section shall apply to city sponsored festivals or events attended by more than one hundred (100) persons. 
(b)  Unlawful to have animal at festival. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having possession, charge, custody, or control of any animal, whether or not under restraint, to allow the animal to enter the boundaries of any festival or event to which this section applies. The boundaries and the interior of any festival or event to which this section applies, shall consist of any area that is part of the festival and shall include any public street, sidewalk or other publicly owned area. 
(c)  Failure to remove animal. It shall be unlawful for any person having an animal, regardless of how restrained, within the boundaries of any festival or event specified to fail to obey the command of a law enforcement officer to remove such animal from the festival or event. 
(d)  Exception. This section shall not apply to those animals that are part of a city authorized exhibit or animal focused event. Animal control unit officers shall have the authority to specify the conditions under which such animals are kept for the protection of the public and for the well-being of the animals. This section shall not apply to any service animal, i.e., any animal trained to act as an aid or companion to a person with a disability. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-21. - Exhibiting animals. 
(a)  Unlawful display. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit, keep, or display pets, animals, birds, or fowl of any kind in any manner without shading said animals from the sun, and providing adequate food, water, and ventilation for their use and comfort. 
(b)  Flea markets-Sell [sale] prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit, keep, display, or sell pets, animals, birds, or fowl at any flea market. However, this shall not prohibit the sale of personally owned animals upon the property of the seller. 
(c)  Same-Authority to remove an animal. If an animal control officer finds that an animal is without appropriate provisions as stated in (a), then the animal control officer is authorized to direct the person in charge of the premises or having control of the animal(s) or the person having control of the animal(s) at the flea market that such provisions be immediately provided or that the animal control officer has the authority to remove the animal from the premises or from the flea market if necessary, for the well-being of the animal. It shall be unlawful for a person to fail to comply with such order to provide the appropriate provisions after being instructed to. 
(d)  Safety and proper care of animal. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit or to display pets, animals, birds, or fowl in any manner which endangers the animal's safety or which causes the animal to act in a manner unnatural for the particular species, after being instructed by an animal control officer about what needs to be done for the safety of the animal or what constitutes actions for an animal unnatural for the particular species. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-22. - Nuisance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess or maintain an animal in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance or nuisance to neighbors. By way of example and not of limitation, the following acts or actions of any owner, harborer or possessor of an animal are hereby declared to be a public nuisance in addition to elaboration upon "public nuisance animal" as defined in section 4-2: 
(1)  Having an animal that disturbs the rights of, threatens the safety of or damages the property of a member of the general public or interferes with the ordinary use and enjoyment of their property; or 
(2)  Allowing or permitting an animal to damage the property of anyone other than its owner, including, but not limited to, turning over garbage containers or damaging gardens, flowers, or vegetables; or 
(3)  Having a dangerous animal as defined in section 4-2, "Definitions"; or 
(4)  Allowing or permitting an animal to defecate upon any street, sidewalk, park or other privately owned area without immediately removing the feces deposited on same; or 
(5)  Allowing or permitting an animal to defecate on any private property without immediately removing the feces deposited on same, unless the owner of the property has given permission allowing such use of property; or 
(6)  Maintaining animals in an environment of unsanitary conditions or lack of cleanliness which results in offensive odor, or a failure to maintain a condition of good order and cleanliness which reduces the probability of transmission of disease. The presence of a large quantity of fecal matter or the presence of rats in an area where animals are maintained shall be prima facie evidence that such area is unsanitary; or 
(7)  Maintaining property that is offensive, annoying or dangerous because of the number, type, variety, density or location of the animals on the property; or 
(8)  Allowing or permitting an animal to bark, whine, howl, crow or cackle or make any other noise in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion so as to interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of neighboring premises; or 
(9)  Maintaining an animal that is diseased and dangerous to the public health; or 
(10)  Maintaining an animal that habitually or repeatedly chases, snaps at, attacks or barks at pedestrians, joggers, dogs walked on a leash by owners, bicycles or vehicles; or 
(11)  Allowing to run at large and/or failing to confine a female cat or dog while in estrus (heat) in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner that she cannot come into contact with another cat or dog, or creates a nuisance by attracting other animals; provided this section shall not be construed to prohibit the intentional breeding of animals within an enclosed, concealed areas on the premises of the owner of an animal which is being bred. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-23. - Resolution of public nuisance animals. 
(a)  Public nuisances prohibited. Public nuisance animals as defined in section 4-2, "Definitions," and/or section 4-22, "Nuisance," are hereby declared to be public health nuisances. It shall be unlawful to own, keep or harbor a public nuisance animal within the city. 
(b)  Exceptions. It shall not be unlawful to own or keep a dog of dangerous tendencies for the protection of persons or property if such a dog is securely confined in a manner not to expose it to the general public. It shall not be unlawful to own or keep a dangerous dog if such dog is controlled or restrained as provided in section 4-38, "Preventive measures/confinement requirements." The exception for dogs of dangerous tendencies and dogs deemed dangerous does not include dogs which are otherwise public nuisance animals. 
(c)  Complaint and notice. Upon the filing of a written and signed complaint by any resident of the city or any animal control officer to the animal control unit of the police department alleging that a public nuisance as defined in section 4-2, "Definitions," and/or section 4-22, "Nuisance," of this chapter is being maintained, the chief of police shall cause the owner of the animal or animals in question to be notified in writing that a complaint has been filed and shall cause the situation complained of to be investigated and a report and findings thereon to be submitted in writing by the investigating officer. If the complaint is filed by an animal control officer, that officer shall be excused from conducting the investigation. The notice shall inform the owner or keeper of the animal or animals that he may present evidence refuting the existence of the alleged public nuisance to the chief of police within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice. 
(d)  Order of abatement. If the written findings of the investigation reveal that the owner or keeper of the animal or animals in question is maintaining a public nuisance as defined in section 4-2, "Definitions" and/or section 4-22, "Nuisance," the chief of police shall issue an order of abatement directed to the owner or keeper of the animal or animals, ordering abatement of the public nuisance within a specified period of time which shall not be less than ten (10) days from the receipt of the order, and shall advise such person that if the nuisance is not abated within the time specified in the notice of abatement that the city will take all action necessary to abate the nuisance, including impoundment and/or destruction of the public nuisance animal. The order of abatement may contain preventive measures specifically designed to abate the nuisance. The order shall further inform the owner or keeper of his right to appeal. 
(e)  Failure to abate. Upon the failure or refusal of the owner or keeper of a public nuisance animal to abate the nuisance within the time specified by the order of abatement, the chief of police is authorized to take all action necessary to abate the nuisance, including impounding of the animal or animals according to the provisions of article III, "Impoundment and Reclamation" of this chapter, or removing and humanely destroying the animal or animals. 
(f)  Appeal. All appeals from an order of abatement or other remedies as set forth under this specific section shall be requested as prescribed in section 4-74. 
(g)  Service of complaints and orders. Complaints, notices, and orders issued under this section shall be served upon the owner or keeper of the animal or animals in question either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the whereabouts of such person is unknown and cannot be determined in the exercise of reasonable diligence, service shall be made by publishing the complaint, notice or order, together with a general description of the animal or animals, once in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. When service is made by publication a notice of the action shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises where the nuisance is maintained. In the case of service by publication and posting, the date of receipt of service shall be the date of posting or publication, whichever is latest. 
(h)  Lien. If the city abates the nuisance the expense of the action shall be paid by the owner or occupant of the property where the nuisance arose, and if not paid, shall be a lien upon such real estate and shall be collected as unpaid taxes. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-24. - Reckless riding or driving of animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to run, drive or ride any animal in a reckless, disorderly or careless manner through any street, alley or highway or public property within the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or cause to be driven through any street or highway any loose or unhaltered horses, mule, cow or other livestock; nor shall the keeper of any such animal knowingly permit any loose horse, mule or cow to be driven from his property onto the streets, alleys, highways or public property within the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-25. - Run or running at large/restraint of animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper, possessor or any person in charge or having custody of any domesticated animal to allow such animal to be at large within the corporate limits of the city or on any city property. Any animal found running at large may be impounded by animal control officers until the owner has been ascertained and given opportunity to take possession of such animal. Any costs associated with the impoundment and maintenance of such animal shall be assessed to the owners thereof and shall be in addition to any other penalties imposed for violations of this section. 
(1)  Physical run at large/restrain of animal. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having possession, charge, custody or control of any animal to keep such on his own premises or off the premises, unless such animal is under sufficient physical restraint, such as a leash, lead, cage, bridle or similar effective device, or is adequately contained by a fence on the premises or other secure enclosure which restrains and controls the animal. 
(2)  "Invisible fence" substituted for a physical fence. If the secure enclosure is an effective, working invisible fence, then there must be a visible, permanent prominently displayed sign on the premises stating that there is an invisible fence. 
(3)  Adult with animal on premises. If a responsible adult is physically present with the animal on the land where the owner of the animal resides, and the animal is under the person's direct control and is obedient to that person's commands, then this section shall not apply during the duration of the time the animal is in the company and the control of that adult and the animal is on the premises. An adult is defined as a person eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(4)  Public parks. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having possession, charge, custody, or control of any dog or other animal to take such animal into or allow the animal to enter any public park without being at all times under the restraint of a lead or leash. 
a.  Exemptions. This section shall not apply to dogs which are being allowed to free rein in any city park area designated as a "dog park" or approved dog recreation area in which off lead/leash activity is allowed. 
(5)  Park areas. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having possession, charge, custody, or control of a dog or other animal to take such animal into picnic areas, pond areas and children's play areas of any public park. This shall not apply to guide dogs or hearing-aid dogs in the company of blind or deaf persons. 
(6)  Vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having possession of a dog in a vehicle to allow such animal the ability to have contact with persons by leaving the windows open in a manner that the dog can protrude its head from the opening and have contact with an unwilling person. It shall likewise be unlawful to allow an animal in any open area of any vehicle unless such animal is under sufficient physical restraint, such as a leash, lead, cage, bridle or similar effective device. If a responsible adult is physically present with the animal in the vehicle where the animal is present, and the animal is under the person's direct control and is obedient to that person's commands, then this section shall not apply during the duration of the time the animal is in the company and the control of that adult and the animal is in or upon the vehicle. An adult is defined as a person eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-26. - Stray animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without the actual consent of the owner, to harbor, feed, keep in possession by confinement or otherwise have any animal which does not belong to him, unless he has, within twenty-four (24) hours of the time the animal came into his possession, notified the unit. Upon receiving such notice, the unit may take the animal and deal with it as provided in section 4-61, "Authorization for capture and impoundment." 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to surrender such an animal to an employee of the unit upon demand. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-27. - Uncared-for animals. 
(a)  Whenever the unit finds that any animal is or will be without proper care because of injury, illness, incarceration or other excusable absence of the person responsible for the care of such animal, the unit may impound such animal until reclaimed by its owner. The owner must pay the applicable fees in section 4-66, "Impoundment and redemption fees" in the same manner as any other owner would reclaim an impounded animal prior to release of such animal by the unit. 
(b)  Any animal which has been impounded under subsection (a) and is not reclaimed within the three-day holding period may be disposed of by the unit pursuant to section 4-67, "Disposition of unredeemed animals." 
(c)  If the owner of the animal notifies the chief of police that he or she will be unable to reclaim the animal during the three-day holding period, the chief of police may grant additional time to the owner if good cause is shown. The owner shall be charged double the redemption fee stated in section 4-66, "Impoundment and redemption fees," if the animal is claimed after the three-day holding period. If the chief of police concludes that the owner or an agent has not shown good cause for the delay in reclaiming the animal, he or she shall inform the owner or agent that the request is denied and proceed to dispose of the animal in accordance with section 4-67, "Disposition of unredeemed animals." 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Secs. 4-28-4-30. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-31. - Holding facilities shall seek care for sick, diseased or injured animals. 
    Any animal in a holding facility as defined in section 4-2, Definitions, which shows signs of illness or contagious disease shall be isolated in such manner as to prevent the spread of such illness or disease to other animals. All sick, diseased or injured animals in such facilities shall be provided appropriate veterinary care; and areas where said animals have been shall be decontaminated. All holding facilities shall, in addition to complying with all applicable provisions of this chapter, provide for healthy and comfortable temperatures, in accordance with the age and species of animals, in areas outside building where animals are kept. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Secs. 4-32-4-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CATS AND DOGS 

Sec. 4-36. - Aggression-trained dogs. 
(a)  Registration of aggression-trained dogs. The chief of police shall have the authority to determine whether any individual or business entity is engaged in the aggression-training of dogs. If the chief of police makes such a determination, the individual or business entity must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The individual or business entity has a duty to provide registration information as required by the police department as it pertains to aggression-training of any kind of dog. 
(2)  The individual or business entity has the duty to maintain a current registration of all dogs thus trained, including the current location or address of the dog; and that information shall be provided to the police department upon the training of any such dog. 
(3)  The police department shall have the authority to inspect the premises engaged in aggression-training and to observe training methods and the safety of facilities during the operating hours of such facilities. 
(4)  The aggression-trained dogs must be maintained by adequate confinement. The police department and inspection services shall have the authority to require all aggression-trained dogs to be confined in a strong fence at least six (6) feet high and, at the discretion of the police department, topped by an anti-climb enclosure. 
(5)  The owner, keeper or business entity shall meet and comply with all requirements of sections 4-50 through 4-54 regarding the keeping and permitting of animals. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any aggression-trained facility to cause, allow, use, or train animals that have undergone the medical surgical procedure of "debarking." Such animals are a public safety issue for law enforcement personnel and the general public at large. 
(b)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any individual or business entity to fail to comply with any of the requirements stated in this section. It shall be unlawful for an individual or business entity to fail to inform the police department of any animal in the city that has been subject to some training or conditioning at an aggression-training facility and fail to carry out the duty to provide registration information as required by the police department. 
(c)  Imposition of preventative measures. If the police department determines that a dog has been trained for fighting or aggressive attack, the department shall have the authority to impose the same requirements stated in section 4-38, "Preventive measures/confinement requirements." 
(d)  Appeal. If the chief of police determines that an individual or business entity is engaged in aggressive training of dogs, or a dog has been trained for fighting or aggressive attack, and the owner wishes to appeal that or the preventative measures imposed, then the appeal shall be the same as that stated in section 4-74, "Right of appeal." 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-37. - Guard dogs. 
(a)  Definition and purpose. Guard dogs are guard, security or watch dogs on a premises specifically used for the purpose of protecting the premises from any intruder and for attacking a person coming in the vicinity of the security dog. Guard dogs are expected to attack human beings and are especially dangerous if they succeed in getting off the premises, thereby endangering any member of the public. The purpose of this section is to provide regulatory requirements that will enable the unit to have knowledge about any security dogs in the city. It also applies to such security dogs brought into the city from outside the city limits. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, business or entity to cause, allow, use, or train animals that have undergone the medical surgical procedure of "debarking." Such animals are a public safety issue for law enforcement personnel and the general public at large. 
(b)  Regulations. The owner of a guard dog shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Identification. It shall be unlawful for a guard dog in the city not to have an identification microchip implanted on the animal in accordance with current veterinary practices. Any identification microchip for compliance with this section of this City Code must be readable by a microchip reader. 
(2)  Guard dog license. A identification microchip and microchip alert tag complying with subsection (1), above are necessary to obtain a security dog license. The microchip alert tag shall be securely fastened to the dog's choke chain, collar or harness, and it shall be unlawful for the owner of a guard dog to allow such dog to be within the city without such tag. If a private veterinary service is used to implant the microchip the appropriate microchip identifiers shall be provided as well as the animal for confirmation at the time of application for a security dog license. The animal control supervisor shall be responsible for maintaining a computer database with current and pertinent information regarding, ownership, the type of guard dog and its location as well as microchip identification information. 
(3)  Fees. 
a.  The annual guard dog license fee shall be set in the City of Rocky Mount Administration Policy, Scheduling of Fees, No. X.6.1. 
b.  The license fee shall be due on January 1 of each year. 
(4)  Signs. The owner of any guard dogs or the owner of the premises employing the dogs must have posted on the premises a sign that identifies the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the guard dogs. 
(c)  Escaping dog. If a guard dog escapes and bites someone who is not a trespasser, the chief of police shall have the authority to prohibit that dog from serving as a guard dog with the city. It shall be unlawful to use such a dog as a guard dog after the chief of police has ordered that the dog not be used as a guard dog within the city. 
(d)  Enforcement. In addition to using any and all enforcement remedies stated in section 4-71, "Enforcement," the animal control unit shall also have the additional authority in respect to guard dogs: 
(1)  If any guard dog is seized running at large, then the dog shall not be returned to the owner until the owner has registered that dog and any other guard dogs used or to be used in the city in accordance with subsection (b) above, secured identification tags, if necessary, and complied with all the requirements of the section. 
(2)  If a guard dog is found on the premises without complying with subsection (b), then the unit shall have the authority to issue a notice of prohibition letter that will prohibit the use of that dog as guard dog within the city, unless there is compliance with subsection (b) within forty-eight (48) hours. 
a.  Such notice of prohibition shall, at the same time, be given to the owner of the premises upon which guard dog is utilized. The owner of the premises shall be informed that the continued use of such a guard dog on the premises is an unlawful act on the part of the owner in violation of this section. 
b.  If such a dog remains on the premises after forty-eight (48) hours, it shall be an unlawful act on the part of the owner of the dog and on part of the owner of the premises; and a citation shall be issued to either or both of those individuals. 
(e)  The unit shall have the authority to seize guard dogs if there has not been compliance with the provisions of this subsection or for the safety of the public, all in accordance with code section 4-38, "Preventative measures/confinement requirements. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-38. - Preventive measures/confinement requirements. 
(a)  Circumstances requiring special preventive measures/confinement requirements. The chief of police, which term shall include his authorized designee, shall have the authority to require any person having possession, charge, custody or control of a dog to comply with specific preventive measures/confinement requirements, as described in subsection (b), after taking into consideration the following three (3) circumstances: 
(1)  Nature of the particular dog. The behavior, size, temperament, breed, and capacity for inflicting serious injury, the number of dogs or other such similar factor which would be relevant to a determination of whether or not additional preventive measures/confinement requirements need to be imposed for a particular situation; and 
(2)  Adequacy of confinement. The adequacy of the existing enclosure or confinement, if any; and 
(3)  Immediate surrounding area. The likelihood that the conditions pertaining to the particular dog and the dog's confinement are detrimental to the safety or welfare of citizens or the peace and tranquility of citizens in the immediate surrounding areas. 
(b)  [Special preventative measures.] In consideration whether to order a special preventive measure, the chief of police is authorized to consider additional factors as aggravating circumstances that might warrant the ordering of special preventative measures: 
(1)  Child under the age of seven (7). There is a child under the age of seven (7) who lives in close proximity, or children walk by or are otherwise in close proximity, to the property occupied by the dog; or 
(2)  Bite. The dog has bitten or attempted to bite a human being or domestic animal without provocation or without a trespass, and the person bitten or attempted to be bitten does not reside on the premises; or 
(3)  Dog trained for fighting or aggressive attack. The dog is kept primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting or the dog has been trained for aggressive attacks; or 
(4)  Attitude of attack incident. A dog, without provocation of a trespass, has approached a person in an apparent attitude of attack; or 
(5)  Reputation of dog. The individual dog has a known propensity, reputation, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury, or to otherwise endanger or threaten to endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals. 
(c)  Preventive measures/confinement requirements. If the chief of police determines that the circumstances require special preventive measures/confinement requirements, then he shall have the authority to require appropriate, specific preventive measures/confinement requirements which may include, but are not limited to, the following, all of which are subject to being specifically approved for adequacy by the chief of police: 
(1)  Necessary repairs to any fence or enclosure; or 
(2)  Measures to ensure that a gate will remain closed; or 
(3)  A "fence" or "secure dog fence" as described below; or 
(4)  Any other similar device that would provide greater assurance for the confinement of the dog. 
a.  A fence shall be a minimum of four (4) feet high and constitute a secure enclosure sufficient to contain the dog at all times. The minimum size of the enclosure shall be at least one hundred (100) square feet. If the dog is over fifteen (15) inches at the shoulder or is deemed capable of climbing a standard four-foot fence, then the chief of police may require a six-foot fence with anti-climbing device attached. 
b.  A secure dog fence means a fence, as immediately described above, that is enclosed on all six (6) sides, including the top. The bottom shall be concrete, unless the sides of the fence are buried at least eighteen (18) inches into hard-packed soil. 
(5)  Any reference to "fence" or "secure dog fence" shall be defined as stated immediately above. 
(6)  The chief of police shall also have the authority to require the owner to tattoo or have implanted an identification microchip placed on the dog at the owner's expense if that is necessary for identification, investigating, or enforcement purposes. 
(7)  The chief of police shall have the authority to designate the enclosure for the dog, to notify the animal control unit if the dog escapes, and to require the owner to give the chief of police the authority to seize and impound the dog if the owner fails to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Written order. If the chief of police determines that specific preventive measures are required by the owner of a dog, he shall state in writing the reason that preventive measures/confinement requirements are required, identify the specific preventive measures/confinement requirements that must be implemented, and state the designated time period within which the owner must comply with the written order. The chief of police shall cause the order to be served on the owner by any method authorized by the North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure. The chief of police shall have the authority to exercise discretion for extensions of time if the same is reasonable in view of good-faith progress of the owner in implementing the preventive measures/confinement requirements. 
(e)  Failure to comply with written order. It shall be unlawful for an owner to fail to comply with a written order within the designated time for compliance. A civil citation may be issued. The chief of police shall have the authority to issue additional citations for each twenty-four-hour period with the continuing failure to comply with a written order. 
(f)  Right of appeal. Appeals from a notice of specific preventive measures/confinement requirements, or other remedies as set forth under this specific section shall be requested as prescribed in section 4-74. 
(g)  Seizure and disposition of animal. The chief of police is authorized to seize an animal as provided for in code section 4-67, "Disposition of unredeemed animals," when the owner has not complied with the written order. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-39. - Rabies inoculation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to provide current inoculation against rabies (hydrophobia) for any cat, ferret, or dog and all other animals recommended for inoculation by the American Veterinary Medical Association, four (4) months of age or older. A rabies inoculation shall be deemed current for a cat or dog if two (2) inoculations have been given one (1) year apart and booster doses of rabies vaccine administered every three (3) years thereafter. 
(b)  Any animal other than a cat or dog, as indicated above, for which rabies inoculations are recommended shall be required to have such animal inoculated against rabies in accordance with and at the intervals suggested by the current Compendium of Animal Rabies Control published yearly by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, Inc. 
(c)  Every person moving into the city from a location outside the city shall comply with this section within thirty (30) days after having moved to the city. 
(d)  Proof of inoculation. 
(1)  Any person inoculating an animal against rabies shall issue to the owner of the animal inoculated a numbered metal tag, stamped with the number and the year for which it was issued, and indicating that the animal has been inoculated against rabies. 
a.  Dogs. The metal inoculation tag shall be securely fastened to the dog's collar, choke chain, or harness and it shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog to allow such dog to be within the city without wearing the inoculation tag. 
b.  Cats and ferrets. The owner or responsible person for any cat or ferret shall maintain the tag issued in subsection 4-39(d)(1) of this article or a receipt for such proof of rabies inoculation for any cat or ferret that they keep. Such proof shall include inoculation services. This proof shall be displayed for examination to any animal control person or officer on request. 
(2)  No person shall use any tag issued pursuant to the terms of this section for any animal other than the animal for which the tag was issued. 
(3)  Dogs not wearing such tags, and for which the owner cannot promptly display a valid rabies tag, shall be impounded and shall be subject to a fees and charges as provided by City of Rocky Mount Administration Policy, Scheduling of Fees, No. X 6.1 by citation pursuant to Code section 4-71, "Enforcement." 
(4)  If the unit has lawfully acquired custody or control of an animal and the unit has reason to believe that the animal does not have the lawfully required inoculation against rabies and it is necessary for the unit to transport the animal to a veterinarian, then the unit shall have the authority to inoculate the animal against rabies. The owner of an animal shall not have the right to reclaim an animal so inoculated until the owner has reimbursed the city for the costs of the rabies vaccination. 
(e)  Penalty. Failure to obtain or maintain rabies inoculation for animals or provide, when requested by an animal control officer, proof of inoculation of animals shall result in a citation for fees and charges specified in the Schedule of Fees X 6.1.The citation shall state on its face that the unit has the authority to seize the animal if the citation is not paid within ten (10) days of the issuance of the citation, and if the owner has not obtained proof of rabies inoculation. 
(f)  Seizure of the animal. If the owner fails to pay the amount set in article IV, subsection 4-39(e), Penalty, for the citation, and fails to provide proof of current rabies inoculation within ten (10) days of the issuance of the citation, the unit shall have the authority to summarily seize the animal. The unit shall hold the animal for a minimum of three (3) days. The owner shall have the option to reclaim the animal by paying the citation fee, a delinquency charge, the impoundment fees, rabies fees and any other lawfully authorized costs. If the owner wishes to request a review of the seizure of the animal, then the owner shall request a review with the chief of police in writing within three (3) days of the animal's impoundment and, at the same time, shall pay an amount in cash covering the citation, the delinquency charge, impoundment fees, rabies fees and any other costs, which amount of money shall be returned to the owner if there is an administrative or judicial decision ultimately in favor of the owner. 
(g)  No person charged with violating subsection (a) of this section shall be convicted if the person produces in court a rabies vaccination certificate which was valid at the time of the alleged violation. 
(h)  If there is no hearing requested within three (3) days of the seizure of the animal, and the animal is not reclaimed, then the ownership rights of the animal shall be terminated and upon the expiration of the three (3) days, the unit shall have the authority to dispose of the animal by adoption or by the humane destruction of the animal. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-40. - Procedure upon suspicion of rabies; confinement required. 
(a)  If any animal is suspected of having rabies or if any animal has bitten a human being, it shall be confined for a period of not less than ten (10) days from the date of the bite. The animal may be confined on the owner's premises, if deemed appropriate in the discretion of the animal control unit. The owner shall execute a waiver of any and all liability of the city, its agents or employees for any injury to person or property arising out of or by reason of such confinement. 
(b)  In the event the owner refuses to or is unable to confine the animal, the animal shall be confined at the animal shelter or a duly qualified and licensed veterinarian. Such confinement shall be at the expense of the owner of the animal. During the ten-day observation period, no rabies vaccine shall be administered to the animal. 
(c)  The animal shall be subject to the observation by the animal control supervisor or person designated by him at all times during the confinement period. All animals confined for suspicion of rabies shall be securely penned and separated from other animals at all times. 
(d)  If rabies does not develop within the aforesaid period of confinement, then the animal shall be released to his owner. But if symptoms develop justifying microscopic examination, then the animal shall be destroyed in a humane manner by the animal control officer or licensed veterinarian. 
(e)  The owner of any animal that has been reported as having inflicted a bite on any person shall, on demand of the animal control officer, produce said animal for examination and confinement, as prescribed in this section. If the owner of any such animal refuses to produce the animal, the owner shall be subject to immediate arrest if there is probable cause to believe the animal has inflicted a bite upon a person, and the owner is keeping or harboring the animal and willfully refuses to produce the animal upon such demand. Such person shall be taken before a magistrate of the court, who may order the immediate production of the animal. Each day of refusal to produce the animal shall constitute a separate and individual violation of this chapter. 
    When the local health director reasonably suspects that an animal required to be vaccinated under this part has been exposed to the saliva or nervous tissue of a proven rabid animal or animal reasonably suspected of having rabies that is not available for laboratory diagnosis, the animal shall be considered to have been exposed to rabies. An animal exposed to rabies shall be destroyed immediately by a veterinarian, an animal control officer, or a peace officer unless the animal has been vaccinated against rabies in accordance with this part and the rules of the state commission for public health more than twenty-eight (28) days prior to being exposed, and it given a booster dose of rabies vaccine within five (5) days of the exposure. As an alternative to destruction, the animal may be quarantined at a facility approved by the local health director for a period up to six (6) months, and under reasonable conditions imposed by the local health director. In such case the owner of the animal shall be responsible for all costs incurred with the quarantine. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-41. - Reporting of rabies cases and bites required. 
(a)  Every person having knowledge thereof shall report to the animal control unit any suspected or positively diagnosed occurrence of rabies and any biting by any suspected or confirmed rabid animal. 
(b)  Every physician and other medical practitioner who treats a person or persons residing within the city limits for bites inflicted by animals shall report such treatment to the animal control officer, giving the names and addresses of such persons. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-42. - Killing rabid or suspect animals authorized. 
    No person shall kill any suspected or confirmed rabid animal except upon the prior written consent of the animal control unit, or in defense of a human being or other animal, or to prevent the escape of such suspected or confirmed rabid animal. This section shall not apply to state or county health officials. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-43. - Body removal; approval required. 
    No person shall remove the dead body of any suspected or confirmed rabid animal from where the animal was killed or found without the prior written approval of the animal control unit. This section shall not apply to state or county health officials. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-44. - Destruction of rabid animals. 
    If rabies has been suspected in any animal, such animal shall be summarily destroyed and its brain tested for positive verification of rabies, or the animal or its body may be disposed of according to law, regulation or order of the North Carolina Department of Environmental Health and Natural Resources. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-45. - Muzzling of animals. 
    Whenever it becomes necessary to safeguard the public from the danger of hydrophobia, the mayor, if he deems necessary, shall issue a proclamation ordering every person owning or keeping a cat, dog, or ferret to confine it securely on his premises unless such animal shall have a muzzle of sufficient strength to prevent its biting any person. Any unmuzzled cat, dog, or ferret running at large during the time of the proclamation shall be seized and impounded, unless noticeably infected with rabies. All animals so noticeably infected with rabies and displaying vicious propensities shall be destroyed by the animal control supervisor or any police officer without notice to the owner. Animals impounded during such proclamation shall, if claimed within three (3) days be released to the owner, unless infected with rabies, upon payment of impounding charges provided for in section 4-66, "Impoundment and redemption fees." If unclaimed after that period, such animals may be summarily destroyed. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-46. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-47. - Confinement of females dogs in heat. 
    Every female dog, while in estrus (heat), shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such manner that she will not be in contact with another dog, nor create a nuisance by attracting other animals; provided, this section shall not be construed to prohibit the intentional breeding of animals within an enclosed area on the premises of the owner of an animal being bred. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
ARTICLE IV. - LICENSING 

Sec. 4-48. - Licenses; fee for dogs. 
(a)  Registration. All dog owners shall register their dogs over the age of four (4) months with the respective county tax department annually during the tax listing period, and provide such pertinent information as may be requested such as the size, age, breed, color, sex, legal residence of the dog, and name and address of the owner. 
(b)  Penalty. Failure to dutifully register dogs with the county tax department or provide, when requested by an animal control officer, proof of registration of dogs shall result in the issuance of a citation. The citation shall state on its face that the unit has the authority to seize the dog if the fees is not paid within ten (10) days of the issuance of the citation, and if the owner has not obtained proof of registration with the county tax office. 
(c)  Seizure of the dog. If the owner fails to pay the amount set in article IV, subsection 4-48(b), Penalty, for the citation, and fails to provide proof of current tax registration within ten (10) days of the issuance of the citation, the unit shall have the authority to summarily seize the dog. The unit shall hold the dog for a minimum of three (3) days. The owner shall have the option to reclaim the dog by paying the citation fee, a delinquency charge, the impoundment fees, rabies fees and any other lawfully authorized costs. If the owner wishes to request a review of the seizure of the dog, then the owner shall request a review with the chief of police in writing within three (3) days of the dog's impoundment and, at the same time, shall pay an amount in cash covering the citation, the delinquency charge, impoundment fees, rabies fees and any other costs, which amount of money shall be returned to the owner if there is an administrative or judicial decision ultimately in favor of the owner. 
(d)  [Owership rights to be terminated. If there is no hearing requested within three (3) days of the seizure of the dog, and the dog is not reclaimed, then the ownership rights to the animal shall be terminated and upon the expiration of the three (3) days, the unit shall have the authority to dispose of the dog by adoption or by the humane destruction of the dog. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-49. - Pet shops license; required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a pet shop in the city without possessing a valid pet shop license. An application for a pet shop license shall be on a form provided by the city and shall state the name and address of the pet shop, its owner and operator. License fees shall be established by the city council for business privilege licenses. Licenses shall be available for inspection by the animal control unit. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-50. - Kennel license; required; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a kennel in the city without possessing a valid kennel license. An application for a kennel license shall be on a form provided by the city and shall state the name and address of the kennel, its owner and operator. License fees shall be established by the city council for business privilege licenses. Licenses shall be available for inspection by the animal control unit. 
(b)  Veterinary hospitals or clinics, research facilities where bona fide medical or related research (dental, veterinary, pharmaceutical or biological) is being conducted, properly zoned humane shelters, and other animal establishments operated by state or local governments or which are licensed by federal law are excluded from the kennel licensing requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
ARTICLE V. - KEEPING OF ANIMALS IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-51. - Keeping of animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, have, permit anyone to keep or maintain within the corporate city limits any hoofed or cloven-hoofed animals or other livestock as defined in section 4-2. "Definitions", or any chickens, turkeys, ducks, guineas, geese, pigeons, ostrich, emu or any other domestic fowl, or similar animal, without first receiving from the animal control unit a permit to do so unless such animal is located in an area that is zoned for the keeping of such animal, or to continue to have any of the same stated above after a permit has been denied. 
(b)  Cats and dogs. It shall be unlawful to own, keep, or maintain, or cause or permit anyone to keep or maintain within the corporate limits of the city more than two (2) cats or two (2) dogs, or one (1) cat and one (1) dog without first receiving from the animal control unit a permit to do so, or to continue to have any of the same stated above after a permit has been denied. 
(c)  Bees and venomous insects. It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain bees or other insects of the apoidea family including, but not limited to wasp, hornets, or yellow jackets. 
(1)  Exceptions. The keeping of bees shall be allowed in areas zoned agricultural for the purpose of pollination of crops and the making of honey; provided that all "beehives", or houses, have visible signs at least fifty (50) feet from any approach warning of the presence of the bee hives. This exception shall not apply to aggressive bees commonly known as "African bees" or any strain or hybrid thereof. 
(d)  Applications for permit shall meet all the provisions of section 4-54, "Permits for keeping of animals," and in addition shall meet the following eight (8) requirements: 
(1)  Noise from the animal(s) must not interfere with an abutting occupant's use and peaceful enjoyment of the property. 
(2)  All pens, housing or enclosures shall be kept clean, sanitary and free from the accumulation of animal excrement and objectionable odors. It shall be cleaned daily, and all droppings and body excretion shall be placed in a fly-proof container and double-bagged in plastic bags for disposal. 
(3)  Every keeper of animals shall ensure that feed be stored and kept in a rat-proof and fly-tight building, box or receptacle. 
(4)  All permit applicants shall meet all the provisions of section 4-39, "Rabies inoculation." Evidence that the animal(s) do not pose any health problem or disease exposure for abutting occupants shall be required. Flea and tick control shall be provided by the applicant and/or permit holder as needed to prevent the egress onto abutting property. Failure to provide flea and tick control as directed by the animal control supervisor shall be cause for permit denial, revocation or nonrenewal. The animal control supervisor may request the assistance of the superintendent of environmental services to determine and document that a flea or tick infestation exists or has been eliminated. 
(5)  All animal runs or other animal-related structures or combination thereof shall not be permitted unless the structures are screened from view of an abutting occupant's property in a residentially zoned district. All buildings or structures shall meet the requirements of the building code of the inspections unit. 
(6)  All permit applicants shall provide evidence that all provisions of section 4-48, "License, fees," have been complied with. 
(7)  All permits for hoofed or cloven-hoofed animals or other livestock as defined in section 4-2. "Definitions", or any chickens, turkeys, ducks, guineas, geese, pigeons, ostrich, emu or any other domestic fowl shall require that abutting occupants or property owners shall be notified of the pending application, by a form containing language approved by the animal control unit, by the permittee. This form shall notify the adjoining property owner's, or tenant's, of their right to express objection of the issuance of a permit to the permittee by the animal control unit. Proof of notification shall accompany the permit application and shall consist of a certified receipt from the U. S. Post Office showing delivery or attempted delivery of the notification form, or a signature and date, of any person personally receiving such notification form. 
(8)  All permit applicants for livestock, hoofed, or cloven-hoofed animals, as defined in section 4-2 definitions, or fowl that crow, honk, quack, or cock, shall include documentation from the city verifying that the property to house or serve as a stable for the animals to be permitted is zoned agricultural. No such livestock, hoofed, or cloven-hoofed animal or fowl that crows, honks, quacks or cocks shall be permitted in an area not zoned agricultural. 
(e)  Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Animal and fowl slaughterhouses licensed by appropriate county or state authorities; 
(2)  Animals and fowl in veterinary hospitals under the direct personal supervision of a licensed veterinarian; 
(3)  Baby fowl and animals transported into or kept within the city for selling purposes by licensed retail stores; 
(4)  Animals or fowl kept at hospital or scientific institutions for scientific purposes or other appropriately certified and recognized academic institutions, museums, raptor center, etc; 
(5)  Animals at licensed sale barns not kept for a period longer than forty-eight (48) hours; 
(6)  Animals and fowl kept at any city park, city lake, a public zoo, or animal shelter under city supervision or other governmental authority; 
(7)  Baby animals during the nursing period until weaned. 
(8)  Any agricultural operation within N.C.G.S. § 106-700, "Nuisance Liability of Agricultural Operation," and zoned for agricultural use only. 
(9)  Any humane organization or animal rescue operation so recognized by the unit that files a permit requesting to harbor animals at specific addresses for not more than thirty (30) days for the sole purpose of rendering aid or seeking adoption for animals may harbor a number of animals, as set by the unit on an approved permit. There will be no charge for a permit if applied for under this exception. 
(f)  The animal control supervisor is authorized to issue additional requirements, stipulations or conditions to insure that the animals(s) do not interfere with the peaceful use and enjoyment of the occupants of abutting property. These conditions shall be stated in writing to the applicant. 
(g)  Appeals. All appeals for applications under this section shall be conducted as specified in section 4-74 of this section. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any permit holder as provided for in this section to violate any provision of this chapter. All permit holders shall be subject to any provision in this chapter and it shall be the responsibility of said permit holders to comply with any directives from the animal control supervisor regarding these provisions. Failure for a permit holder to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall subject the permit holder to any citation and/or criminal prosecution as deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-52. - Provisions for enclosures and appurtenances. 
    An owner or possessor of any animals or fowl requiring a permit as described in this chapter shall comply with following applicable provisions before a permit is issued: 
(a)  Fowl and other specifically identified animals: Chickens, turkeys, ducks, guineas, geese, pheasants, quail, ostrich, emu, or other domestic fowl: 
(1)  Such animals must be confined in a coop, fowl house not less than eighteen (18) inches in height. The fowl must be kept within the coop or fowl house at all times. Ostrich and emu shall be allowed to openly leave the fowl house into a fenced-in area, that encompasses the area required in subsection 4-52(a)(7), that is adequate to prevent their escape and/or injury. A fowl house for ostrich or emu must not be less than ninety-six (96) inches in height. 
(2)  The coop or fowl house must be used for fowl only and must be well ventilated. 
(3)  The coop or fowl house shall have a minimum or four (4) square feet of floor area for each fowl. Two (2) square feet shall be allowed for each quail. Twenty (20) square feet shall be allowed for each emu or ostrich. 
(4)  The run must be well drained so there is no accumulation of moisture. 
(5)  The coop or fowl house shall be kept clean, sanitary and free from the accumulation of animal excrement and objectionable odors. It shall be cleaned daily, and all droppings and body excretion shall be placed in a fly-proof container and double-bagged in plastic bags for disposal. 
(6)  The coop or fowl house shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any property line. All structures or combination thereof shall not be permitted unless the structures are screened from view of an abutting occupant's property in a residentially zoned district. All construction shall meet all building code requirements of the inspections unit. 
(7)  No more than twenty (20) such fowl shall be kept or maintained per acre. The number of fowl shall be proportionate to the acreage. Example: One-half (1/2) acre lot will equal ten (10) (such animals). 
(b)  Pigeons. Pigeon coops shall meet the conditions as stated in subsection 4-52(a) and shall be allowed to fly to and from the premises. Sanitary conditions must be maintained at all times. 
(c)  Hoofed or cloven-hoofed animals. Hoofed or cloven-hoofed animals, equines and other livestock: 
(1)  Such animals must be provided with adequate shelter to protect them from the elements. All shelters, stables or structures used for housing cows, horses and other large livestock shall comply with the zoning ordinances and shall be constructed and maintained in conformity with the requirements of the inspections unit of the city. 
(2)  The shelters for cows, horse and other large livestock shall be kept at a minimum or seventy-five (75) feet from any property line. The shelter for goats, sheep and other small livestock shall be kept at a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any property line. 
(3)  The shelter shall be kept clean, sanitary and free from accumulations of animal excrement and objectionable odors. Shelters shall be cleaned daily to prevent accumulation, runoff or leachate of such wastes. In addition: 
a.  Manure in which flies breed or are likely to breed is hereby declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to public health. The natural presence of fly larvae in manure shall be evidence that flies are breeding there. 
b.  All manure shall be removed from all stables and premises at least once a week, and at all times stables and premises shall be kept in such condition as not to become a nuisance by the breeding of flies or a menace to public health, and the escape of any disagreeable odor therefore shall be prevented so far as possible. 
c.  The word "stable" as used in this section, shall be taken to mean any building or part of any building in the city used or intended to be used for housing one (1) or more cows, horses, or other large livestock. The word "premises" shall be taken to mean the land used in connection with any stable. 
(4)  Cows, horses and other large livestock shall have a minimum pasture area of two (2) acres for each animal. Each goat, sheep or other small livestock shall have a minimum pasture area of one-fourth (1/4) acre. All pasture and animal storage areas shall be enclosed with fences or walls of a minimum of four (4) feet six (6) inches in height. The design of these enclosures shall be shown on drawings submitted with the permit application. 
(5)  Cows, horses and other large livestock, goats, sheep or other small livestock are prohibited in any area of the city except those areas zoned for agricultural purposes by the zoning ordinance. 
(6)  The owners of all permitted livestock shall meet all requirements of county health departments or the North Carolina Department of Agriculture regarding the health, maintenance and keeping of livestock. 
(d)  Keeping of swine prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any hogs, pigs, or any member of the Suidae family within the corporate limits of the city on any residential or business zoned property. Exception of this section will only include property that is zoned for agricultural purposes by the zoning ordinance with the following requirements: 
(1)  All pens, fenced pastures, or housing for swine shall be located at a minimum distance of five hundred (500) feet from any abutting property line. 
(2)  The pens or housing shall be of sufficient size and construction to properly house or contain the number of animals being maintained. 
(3)  Written notification shall be provided to residents and owners of any dwelling within five hundred (500) feet of the nearest fence line surrounding any pen or pasture that keeps swine. 
(4)  The animal control supervisor shall approve all maintenance, care and security of the animals. 
(5)  The owner of such animals shall meet all standards established by county health departments or the North Carolina Department of Agriculture regarding the health, maintenance or keeping of swine. 
(6)  Exceptions for Vietnamese potbellied pigs being kept as pets. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person from applying for a permit under section 4-54, "Permits for keeping animals" of this article to keep, as a pet, a Vietnamese potbellied pig. All applications for permit shall meet all the provisions of subsection 4-51(f)(1)-(7) and section 4-54, "Permits for keeping of animals." The number of Vietnamese potbellied pigs that may be kept shall be determined by the animal control supervisor but shall not exceed two (2) under this exception. 
(e)  Wild or exotic. The unit shall inspect the premises where any wild animals, "Wild or exotic animals," are kept to determine if the animal may be kept or maintained without presenting a concern about the health, safety, noise, odor or enjoyment of any persons or property. The unit shall require that any wild animal be caged or secured or make any additional rules regulating the keeping of wild or exotic animals. The section only applies to wild or exotic animals as regulated in subsection 4-52(b), "Wild or exotic animals; exceptions." 
(f)  Annexation. Newly annexed have ninety (90) days from the effective date of annexation to bring their property into compliance and to have obtained necessary permits or permission required by this section. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-53. - Wild or exotic animals. 
(a)  Unlawful act. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep, maintain, possess or have under their control within the city, a venomous reptile or any other wild or exotic animal. The prohibition of venomous reptiles and wild and exotic animals is primarily based upon the concern to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Rocky Mount. 
(b)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to lawfully operated zoological gardens, scientific research laboratories, circuses, veterinarians harboring such animals for purposes of providing professional medical treatment or wildlife rehabilitators with proper licenses or permits, provided that the animals are maintained in quarters so constructed and maintained to prevent escape. 
(c)  Compliance with state and federal regulations and safe confinement. Any permitted or exempt animals as described in subsections (a) through (d) above must meet the regulations promulgated by the North Carolina Wildlife Commission, the North Carolina Department of Agriculture, the minimum standards under the United States Animal Welfare Act and all applicable rules promulgated by the United States Department of Agriculture. 
(d)  Wild animals on public rights-of-way. Animals described in this section shall not be allowed on any public street, sidewalk, or other public way, except in a fully enclosed cage or adequate structural restraint. The use of a leash, with or without muzzle, shall not be considered adequate restraint. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-54. - Permits for keeping animals. 
(a)  Permit application. Any person wishing to keep or maintain any animal or animals which may not be lawfully kept or maintained without a permit shall complete an application on a form supplied by the animal control unit and submit the same along with a nonrefundable application fee, in an amount set in the City of Rocky Mount Administration Policy, Scheduling of Fees, No. X.6.1, to the animal control supervisor within the police department. The applicant shall provide an address for the service of any notices under this section and it shall be the duty of the applicant to advise the city of any change in this address. The application shall list all such animals and/or fowl to be kept on the premises. 
(b)  Issuance of permit. Before a permit is issued, an employee of the animal control unit shall ensure the animal to be permitted will meet the requirements of Article V, section 4-51, "Keeping of animals." The unit will also inspect the premises to determine if the keeping of the animals or fowl on the premises will meet the criteria of section 4-52, "Provisions for enclosures and appurtenances." The unit will additionally inspect the premises before issuing the permit to see if the animal would endanger or is likely to endanger the health, safety, peace, quiet, comfort, enjoyment of or otherwise become a public nuisance as defined in section 4-2, "Definitions," and/or section 4-22, "Nuisance," to nearby residents or occupants or places of business. In addition, the inspection shall determine that the keeping of such animal or animals and the pens, stalls, stables, yards, shelters, cages, areas, places and premises where they are held or kept will not be detrimental to the public health by creating or causing conditions or situations conducive to the breeding or attracting of flies, mosquitoes or other injurious or obnoxious insects or vermin, to the breeding, attracting, feeding or harboring of rats, or to the giving rise to offensive odors and smells, the ponding of water, the accumulation of manure, garbage, refuse or other noxious material, or any such condition that may endanger the public health or constitutes a public health nuisance. The animal control supervisor may request the assistance of the community code enforcement supervisor in establishing a public health nuisance and the abatement thereof. 
(1)  Any permit issued under this section shall be valid for a specified period of time not to exceed twelve (12) months from the date of issue and may be renewed for a period of twelve (12) months upon payment of an amount set in the City of Rocky Mount Administration Policy, Scheduling of Fees, No. X.6.1, unless the animal control supervisor determines that the permit should not be renewed for failure to meet one (1) of the requirements specified in subsection 4-51(f). 
(c)  Denial, revocation or nonrenewal. The animal control supervisor shall deny the issuance of or, revoke or refuse to renew an existing permit to any applicant or permit holder who, with regard to his application for, or permitted animal or animals, has violated or permitted the violation of any condition of his application or permit, has created or permitted the creation of a public nuisance as defined in section 4-2, "Definitions," or has violated or permitted the violation of any other section of this chapter, regardless of whether the violation is corrected or such public nuisance abated. 
(d)  Notice of denial, revocation or nonrenewal. 
(1)  Upon the determination that an application is subject to denial or a permit is subject to revocation or nonrenewal as provided in subsection 4-54(c), "Denial, revocation or nonrenewal," the animal control supervisor shall notify the applicant or permit holder that his application has been denied or his permit has been revoked or will not be renewed and shall advise him that he may appeal under section 4-74, "Right of appeal," of this chapter within ten (10) days from the service of the notice. The notice shall further advise the applicant the reason for denial or the permit holder the reason for the revocation or nonrenewal. 
(2)  The unit may revoke any permit when the permit has been mistakenly issued without compliance with the provisions of this section; or when the applicant has submitted false information; or for a violation of any provisions of this chapter; or, when, in the opinion of the animal control supervisor, the health, safety or welfare of any person or property is menaced by the keeping of such animals; or when the animal becomes a nuisance. 
(e)  Right of appeal. All appeals from a denial of issuance of a permit or other remedies as set forth under this specific section may be requested as prescribed in section 4-74. 
(f)  Service of notices. All notices made or given under this section shall be served upon the owner or keeper of the animal in question either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address shown on the permit application. If service is by certified mail, return receipt requested, service shall be complete on the date that the notice was deposited with the United States Postal Service. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Secs. 4-55-4-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - IMPOUNDMENT AND RECLAMATION 

Sec. 4-61. - Authorization for capture and impoundment. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the animal control officers or police officers to capture, take or seize and impound within the city animal shelter or other appropriate location any animal in the following categories in violation of any provision of this chapter or in violation of any state law relating to animals: 
(1)  Any animal domesticated or non-domesticated, other than dogs, may be impounded when found at large, or determined to be dangerous, creating a disturbance, maltreated or when constituting a public nuisance. 
(2)  Any dog found at large shall be impounded. In addition, a dog may be impounded if found to constitute a public nuisance or if found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter requiring inoculation, registration, permitting, licensing and tagging. 
(3)  Wild or exotic animals kept in violation of section 4-52, "Wild or exotic animals." 
(4)  Animals which were being transported by a person involved in a vehicular accident when such person becomes unable to care for or maintain control over the animal as a result of the accident and there is no responsible person to take possession of the animal. 
(5)  Animals which appear to have been left uncared for as a result of the death, injury, arrest, detention or other incapacitation of the owner or keeper. 
(6)  The animal control supervisor shall be responsible upon receipt of such animal to make a complete registry, entering breed, color and sex of such animal. 
(b)  Such officers may utilize a tranquilizer dart if necessary in order to capture an animal which appears to be dangerous or destroy such animal if necessary to avoid physical harm to human beings. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-62. - Notice of impoundment. 
    The animal control unit shall make a prompt and reasonable effort to notify the owner of the impoundment of an animal with an identification tag or by means of other identification, providing directions for redemption procedures. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-63. - Minimum time for impoundment of unclaimed animals. 
    If the owner is unknown or cannot be located, notice of such impoundment shall be posted for three (3) days, or until disposition of the animal takes place, on a bulletin board at the animal shelter. The notice shall state the time and place of the taking of such animal, together with the time and date of the posting of notice. Exception to this section will be euthanasia of an animal when deemed necessary or appropriate by a veterinarian advising animal control personnel. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-64. - Summary destruction of animals for humane reasons. 
    When, in the judgment of the animal control supervisor, it is determined that any impounded animal should be destroyed for humane reasons, or to protect the public from imminent danger to persons or property, such animal may be destroyed without regard to any time limitations otherwise established herein. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-65. - Redemption procedures. 
(a)  The owner or keeper of any animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to redeem any such animal within the three-day holding period, upon the payment of all fees and charges incurred against the animal, upon furnishing proof of ownership, upon compliance with appropriate county registration, applicable permits and/or licensing provisions, and upon compliance with inoculation requirements within two (2) weekdays of redemption. No impounded animal shall be released until all fees incurred are paid. 
(b)  Failure to reclaim an animal as set forth in this chapter shall not relieve the person owning or having charge, care, custody or control of the subject animal of the responsibility for all fees and costs incurred for the impoundment, maintenance and/or disposition thereof. 
(c)  Any animal impounded which appears to be suffering from rabies or if affected with rabies shall not be redeemed or adopted but shall be kept for ten (10) days under observation securely penned and separated from other animals. Thereafter, if the animal control officer or practicing veterinarian determines that the animal is affected with such disease, such animal shall be destroyed in a humane manner. Otherwise, it shall be subject to redemption or adoption as herein above provided. Any animal which is suffering any infectious, contagious or dangerous disease shall not be adopted but may be redeemed by the owner to provide proper treatment for such animal. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-66. - Impoundment and redemption fees. 
(a)  A charge shall be made for the redemption of any animal impounded pursuant to the provisions of this article; and an additional amount shall be charged for the feeding and sheltering of such animal for each day it is in confinement. If an impounded animal is not redeemed by its owner within the time period prescribed in section 4-63, "Minimum time for impoundment of unclaimed animals," the animal may be adopted. The city council shall set fees for impoundment, redemption, feeding and adoption in the City of Rocky Mount Administration Policy, Scheduling of Fees, No. X.6.1. and may adjust them as needed. 
(b)  Redemption fees for impounded animals which have been previously impounded and that are not subject to escalating civil penalties shall be as follows: 
(1)  Once previously impounded: city council impoundment fees plus a ten dollar ($10.00) penalty. 
(2)  Impounded twice within six-month period: city council impoundment fees plus a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) penalty. 
(3)  Impounded three (3) times within a six-month period: city council impoundment fees plus a fifty dollar ($50.00) penalty. A third violation shall automatically cause the animal control supervisor to initiate a nuisance investigation. 
(4)  Impounded more than three (3) time within a six-month period: city council impoundment fees plus one hundred dollar ($100.00) penalty and the owner shall remove the animal from with the city limits indefinitely. 
(5)  No fees shall be charged or collected for or on account of any animal which has been unlawfully taken up or impounded, and any such animal shall be immediately delivered upon demand of the owner or person entitled to the custody thereof after a proper determination has been made. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-67. - Disposition of unredeemed animals. 
(a)  If an impounded animal is not redeemed by the owner within the period prescribed in section 4-63, it shall be deemed abandoned and may be destroyed in a humane manner or shall become the property of the animal control unit and offered for adoption to any responsible adult who complies with the provisions of this chapter. Such animal may be adopted by the first such person who pays the adoption fee and rabies fee as set in the City of Rocky Mount Administration Policy, Scheduling of Fees, No. X.6.1. 
(b)  The animal control unit shall require that all dogs and cats released from the animal shelter be spayed or neutered and microchipped. A written agreement from the adopter shall be executed prior to release of the animal guaranteeing that such animal will be sterilized and microchipped within a certain period of time after the date of release. It shall be unlawful for the adopter to violate the terms of such written agreement. All costs incurred for the sterilization and microchipping of the animal shall be the responsibility of the adopting person. 
(c)  No animal which has been impounded as a stray or is unclaimed by its owner shall be allowed to be adopted from the animal shelter during a period of emergency rabies quarantine except by special authorization of the chief of police and the county health director. 
(d)  No employee of the unit shall directly or indirectly adopt any animal impounded by the unit without written permission of the chief of police and the written understanding that the employee must maintain the animal for a period of at least one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-68. - Impoundment records. 
    A record of each animal impounded shall be kept showing the date of receipt of the animal, the date and manner of its disposition and, if redeemed or adopted, the name of the person by whom redeemed, reclaimed or adopted, the address of such person and the amounts of fees received or collected because of the impounding, reclaiming or adoption thereof, together with the number of the license tag and the date of the license exhibited or issued upon redemption or adoption of any such animal. It shall be unlawful for any person redeeming, reclaiming or adoption an animal from the unit to give false or fictitious names and addresses for the unit records. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-69. - Citation of owner or keeper in lieu of impoundment. 
    The police department shall have the authority to issue citations to any owner or keeper of any animal that could be impounded for any violation of any section of this article as provided for in section 4-71, "Enforcement," and section 4-72, "Notice of violation, citation of owner or keeper in lieu of impoundment." 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FEES, PENALTIES, AND APPEALS 

Sec. 4-71. - Enforcement. 
    The vigorous and effective enforcement of the provisions of this chapter require the following to accomplish the objectives and goals of the unit: 
(a)  Proper registration of dogs for tax purposes and a current rabies inoculation tag is vital for public health, for the ability of the unit to carry out its functions, for the protection of the owner and for the protection of the animal and, therefore, must be complied with. The owner of an animal, particularly a cat or dog, has a very serious obligation of ownership and a duty to citizens of Rocky Mount to comply with registering and rabies inoculation requirements. 
(1)  The presence of a dog when off-premises in violation of section 4-25, "Run or running at large/restrain of animals," often creates substantial anxieties and concerns for people for safety and free movement; and, therefore, the owner has an obligation to the citizens of Rocky Mount for the effective confinement of one's cat or dog. 
(2)  The possibility of a dog bite is a serious concern for citizens, neighborhoods and areas in Rocky Mount; and, therefore, owners have an obligation to prevent the creation of that apprehension and concern. 
(3)  A dog owner has particular responsibility for being conscious of and sensitive to any possible dangers for children under the age of seven (7) years who, at that age, are unable to fully appreciate the possible danger present by a dog and a dog's reaction to a child under the age of seven (7). 
(4)  The chief of police and/or his agents must have ample authority to impose preventive measures/confinement requirements, as provided for in section 4-38; must have the authority to seize animals, as provided for in section 4-61; and, if necessary, terminate ownership rights. 
(5)  Escalating fee and other sanctions are measures that have been adopted to protect the citizens of Rocky Mount and to declare that the ownership of dogs and other permitted or unpermitted animals entails publicly related responsibilities. 
(b)  When there is a violation of this chapter, the animal control unit, at its discretion, may take one (1) or more of the following courses of action: 
(1)  Civil penalties: 
a.  Any violation of chapter 4, Animals, unless otherwise stated in the chapter shall be subject to civil penalties as provided in subsection (b)(1). 
b.  Violations of section 4-25, "Run or running at large/restrain of animals:" The issuance of a citation for violation of Code section 4-25, "Run or running at large/restrain of animals," is directed toward and against the owner or keeper of an animal. The purpose of the issuance of a citation pursuant to Code section 4-25, "Run or running at large/restrain of animals," is to affect the conduct of the owner or keeper of an animal by seeking to have an owner responsibly maintain a sufficient restraint and the confinement of the animal. 
c.  Therefore, an owner or keeper of an animal shall be subject to escalating penalties for each violation of Code section 4-25 by the owner, whether the animal is the same animal, a different animal or various animals belonging to the owner. Each violation of Code section 4-25 shall subject the owner or keeper to an increased citation penalty as set in subsection 4-71(b)(1). 
d.  Violations of section 4-51, "Keeping of animals", 4-52, "Provisions for enclosures and appurtenances", 4-53, "Wild and exotic animals", or 4-54, "Permits for keeping animals" An owner or keeper of an animal shall be subject to escalating penalties as set in subsection 4-71(b)(1) of this article, and for each violation of Code section 4-51, 4-52, 4-53 or 4-54 by the owner, whether the animal is the same animal, a different animal or various animals belonging to the owner. Each violation of Code section 4-51, 4-52, 4-53, or 4-54 shall subject the owner or keeper to an increased citation penalty as set in subsection 4-71(b)(1), the fencing or construction of a secure dog fence shall not apply to violations addressed in subsection 4-71(b)(2) unless the animal is a dog. 
e.  Owner's or keeper's civil penalty; 
Escalating penalties: 
1st violation: Thirty-five dollars ($35.00). 
2nd violation: Seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
3rd violation: One hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00), and a fence and animal must be spayed or neutered before returning to its home or place of residence. 
4th violation: Two hundred dollars ($200.00), and a secure dog fence must be installed. 
5th violation: Five hundred dollars ($500.00), and the seizure of the animal(s), or expulsion from the corporate city limits of Rocky Mount. 
f.  Each twenty-four-hour period for violations of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
g.  Option to spay or neuter in lieu of penalty: Any person whose animal is seized for a violation of the following sections may have their pet spay or neutered within thirty (30) days of the claiming of their animal from the animal control unit; 
Section 4-25, "Run or running at large/restrain of animals" 
Section 4-15, "Animal bite" 
Section 4-47, "Confinement of females dogs in heat" 
Section 4-38, "Preventive measures/confinement requirements" 
(2)  Criminal misdemeanor: Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter may be charged with a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which the violation is committed, continued or permitted by such person(s), and shall be punishable as such. 
(3)  Injunction: The city may apply to the appropriate court for an injunction and order of abatement which would require that a violator correct any unlawful condition relating to this chapter existing on his or her property. 
(4)  Exception: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent law enforcement authority of any kind from enforcing any or all provisions of this chapter or from exercising their authority as law enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-72. - Notice of violation, citing of owner or keeper in lieu of impoundment. 
(a)  Authorized. In lieu of impoundment, the animal control officers are hereby empowered to issue civil citations to any person if there is reason to believe that the person has violated any provision of this chapter. 
(b)  Delivery, contents. These citations may be delivered in person to the violator; or if the violator cannot be readily found, the citation shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person so charged at his last known address. The citation shall direct the violator to pay a specified penalty, under section 4-71, for a noted violation within seventy-two (72) hours of receipt of such citation either in person or by certified mail delivery. This citation shall include instructions for the payment of any penalty. 
(c)  Civil penalty. Any person, owner or keeper of any cat, dog or any animal to whom a citation is issued shall pay to the animal control supervisor of the city a civil penalty in the amount subject to the fee schedule in subsection 4-71(b)(1), enforcement. 
(d)  Delinquency charge, warning notice upon failure to respond. If the violator does not pay the designated civil penalty in response to the citation on or before the seventy-two (72) hours specified in the citation, he shall have a delinquency charge added per day to the amount shown on the citation until paid; and a notice shall be mailed informing him of the violation and warning him that if he does not appear within ten (10) days from the date of the mailing of the notice, a complaint against him will be filed. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-73. - Negligence per se. 
    There is hereby imposed a public duty upon any person(s) having possession of an animal to prevent that animal from attacking another person in violation of Code section 4-38, "Preventive measures/confinement requirements," the failure to comply with instructions to impose preventive measures/confinement requirements for the confinement of dogs; of section 4-25, "Run at large/restrain of animals," or of section 4-36, "Aggression-trained dogs". Such persons having possession of animals have imposed upon them a public duty to protect the safety of other persons; and a violation of any of those provisions is negligence per se and shall subject such person(s) damages for personal injuries in a civil action by an injured person against the person owning or having possession, charge, custody or control of the animals causing said injuries. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Sec. 4-74. - Appeals. 
    All appeals of any decision appealable under this chapter shall follow the following procedures with the exception of section 4-18, "Dangerous dogs" which appeals process is noted in that section. 
(a)  Appeals of decisions under this chapter shall be to the community appeals board established pursuant to section 11-18 of the City Code. The community appeals board shall perform the duties specified by this chapter and shall keep an accurate record of all its proceedings. 
(b)  Within ten (10) days from the receipt of an order of abatement, order of specific preventive measures/confinement requirements, or the denial of a required permit the owner or keeper of the animal or animals in question may appeal the order or denial by notifying the chief of police in writing of their wish to appeal. The chief of police shall within ten (10) days of receipt for appeal arrange a location and time for a hearing. The designated animal control supervisor shall present whatever relevant evidence the supervisor has that supports the order or denial. The owner shall be entitled to present whatever relevant evidence the owner wishes and to have legal representation. All testimony before the chief of police shall be sworn testimony. The chief of police shall make written findings of fact and conclusions if the appellant alleges that the chief of police cannot be an impartial hearing officer for that particular case. The findings of fact must be supported by competent and material evidence in the record. Within ten (10) days from the date of appeal hearing the chief of police shall notify the appellant of his/her findings in writing and shall abolish, uphold, or modify the original order or denial. Such findings shall be sent by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the owner's last known address as determined in the exercise of reasonable diligence. 
(c)  Appeals. The owner/responsible party shall have the right to appeal the determination of the chief of police to the community appeals board within ten (10) days following receipt of notice. The determination of the chief of police shall be final in the absence of an appeal. 
(d)  The community appeals board shall schedule a hearing no earlier than five (5) days and no later than thirty (30) days following receipt of the owner's notice of appeal. 
The owner shall be advised in writing of the date, time, and place of the hearing at least three (3) business days prior to the hearing. 
(e)  The community appeals board shall hear sworn testimony and review such relevant evidence as the chief of police and the owner or his/her authorized representative wish to present concerning the appeal. The failure of the owner to appear shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the determination of the chief of police. The appeals board shall render its written decision in a timely manner and may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the determination of the chief of police, and shall make any order, requirement, decision, or a determination that in its opinion should have been made. The ruling by the community appeals board shall be final. 
(f)  Redemption in animal seizure and impoundment cases. If the chief of police orders a public nuisance animal or animals be impounded rather than humanely destroyed, the animal may be redeemed pursuant to the provisions of Article V, "Impoundment and Reclamation" of this chapter prior to its destruction, but only upon the condition that the owner or keeper executes a written agreement to abate the public nuisance and, if deemed necessary by the chief of police, post a cash bond, surety bond, letter of credit, or other security in such amount as the chief of police deems necessary to secure the performance of the written agreement. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-13, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. A), adopted March 13, 2006, amended ch. 5 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said chapter pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of amendment. 
Cross reference- Inspection services advisory committee, § 2-116 et seq.; redevelopment commission, § 2-151 et seq.; alarm systems, Ch. 3; animals, Ch. 4; storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks prohibited, § 8-28; fire exit requirements, § 8-34; gas, Ch. 9; gas standards adopted, § 9-3; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; public health nuisances prohibited, § 10-71 et seq.; sound-producing devices regulated, § 10-151; loud or disturbing noises including bicycle and vehicle noises prohibited, § 10-152; housing, Ch. 11; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 13; parks and recreation, Ch. 15; soil erosion and sedimentation control, Ch. 17; solid waste, Ch. 18; construction, demolition, land clearing, landscaping, solid waste disposal, § 18-11; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, Ch. 19; utilities, land development code, App. A. 
State Law reference- Building inspection, G.S. § 160A-411 et seq.; state building code and building code council, G.S. § 143-136 et seq.; warrants to conduct inspections, G.S. § 15-27.2; fire limits, G.S. § 160A-435 et seq.; minimum housing standards, G.S. § 160A-441 et seq.; life safety in existing high-rise buildings; G.S. § 143-138(i); contractors, G.S. Ch. 87; public building contracts, G.S. § 143-128 et seq.; manufactured housing and mobile homes, G.S. § 143-143.8 et seq.; North Carolina Code Officials Qualification Board, G.S. § 143-151.8 et seq.; technical ordinances, G.S. § 160A-76; inspection of buildings for fire hazards, G.S. § 58-79.20; regulating and licensing businesses, trades, etc., G.S. § 160A-194. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter and of the regulatory codes adopted by reference in this chapter shall apply to the following: 
(1)  The location, design, materials, equipment, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, maintenance, moving, demolition, removal, use and occupancy of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such building or structure; 
(2)  The installation, erection, repair, use and maintenance of plumbing systems consisting of house sewers, building drains, waste and vent systems, hot and cold water supply systems, and all fixtures and appurtenances thereof; 
(3)  The installation, erection, alteration, repair and maintenance of mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, fuel-burning equipment and appurtenances thereof; 
(4)  The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of electrical systems and appurtenances thereof. 
(b)  The adoption of this chapter and the codes adopted by reference in this chapter shall constitute a resolution making regulatory codes adopted in this chapter applicable to dwellings and outbuildings used in connection therewith and to apartment buildings used exclusively as the residence of not more than two (2) families. 
(Code 1967, § 22-1) 
Sec. 5-2. - Fire limits. 
    The boundaries of the fire limits within the city are hereby established as follows: 
Beginning at a point in the intersection of Hammond St. and S. Church St.; 
Thence, along the centerline of S. Church St. in a northeasterly direction approximately one thousand six hundred (1,600) feet to a point in the intersection of S. Church St. and Sunset Ave.; 
Thence, along the centerline of Sunset Ave. in a northwesterly direction approximately four hundred eighty (480) feet to a point in the intersection of Sunset Ave. and N. Franklin St.; 
Thence, along the centerline of N. Franklin St. in a northeasterly direction approximately one thousand two hundred twenty (1,220) feet to a point in the intersection of N. Franklin St. and Gay St.; 
Thence, along the centerline of Gay St. in a southeasterly direction approximately four hundred seventy-five (475) feet to a point in the intersection of Gay St. and N. Church St.; 
Thence, along the centerline of N. Church St. in a southwesterly direction approximately four hundred eighty-five (485) feet to a point in the intersection of N. Church St. and W. Thomas St.; 
Thence, along the centerline of W. Thomas St./E. Thomas St. (street name changes to E. Thomas St. at the railroad tracks) in a southeasterly direction approximately one thousand (1,000) feet to a point in the intersection of E. Thomas St. and Albemarle Ave.; 
Thence, along the centerline of Albemarle Ave. in a southwesterly direction approximately four hundred fifteen (415) feet to a point in the intersection of Albemarle Ave. and Rose St.; 
Thence, along the centerline of Rose St. in a southwesterly direction approximately three hundred (300) feet to a point in the intersection of Rose St. and Tarboro St.; 
Thence, along the centerline of S. Washington St. in a southwesterly direction approximately five hundred fifty-five (555) feet to a point in the intersection of S. Washington St. and Hill St.; 
Thence, along the centerline of Hill St. in a southeasterly direction approximately five hundred sixty-five (565) feet to a point in the intersection of Hill St. and Arlington St.; 
Thence, along the centerline of Arlington St. in a southwesterly direction approximately three hundred thirty-five (335) feet to a point in the intersection of Arlington St. and Marigold St.; 
Thence, along the centerline of Marigold St./Nash St. (street name changes to Nash St. at the railroad tracks) in a northwesterly direction approximately seven hundred seventy-five (775) feet to a point in the intersection of Nash St. and S.W. Main St.; 
Thence, along the centerline of S.W. Main St./Hammond St. (street name changes to Hammond St. in the curve) in a southwesterly direction and then a northwesterly direction approximately one thousand fifty (1,050) feet to a point in the intersection of Hammond St. and S. Church St., the point and place of beginning. 
(Code 1967, § 21-1; Ord. No. 0-98-23, § 1, 3-23-98; Ord. No. O-2014-14, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-14) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; rollerskates, skateboards prohibited within the fire district, § 19-8. 
State Law reference- Fire limits, G.S. § 160A-435; restrictions within primary fire limits, G.S. § 160A-436. 
Sec. 5-3. - Enforcement of chapter, regulatory codes. 
    The department of development services shall be responsible for the enforcement of any ordinances or codes in this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 22-42; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06; Ord. No. O-2018-79, § 1, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 5-4. - Enforcement of Land Development Code. 
    The planning division is charged with enforcement of the Land Development Code therefore no permit for alteration, repair or construction of any building or structure shall be issued unless the plans and specifications show that the building or structure, and its proposed use, will be in compliance with applicable provisions of the Land Development Code. 
(Code 1967, § 22-43; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06) 
Sec. 5-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), adopted March 13, 2006, repealed § 5-5 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to street numbers of buildings as enacted by Code 1967, § 17-19. 
Secs. 5-6-5-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INSPECTIONS SERVICES DIVISION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Duties and responsibilities, G.S. § 160A-412; building inspection, stop orders, condemnation, G.S. § 160A-411 et seq. 

Sec. 5-26. - Organization. 
(a)  The inspections services division shall consist of an inspection services administrator and such other inspectors or deputy or assistant inspectors as may be authorized by the city council. The city manager may in his discretion designate a division head. 
(b)  For the purposes of this chapter whenever the designation inspection services administrator is made it shall include any duly authorized inspector or deputy or assistant inspectors of the inspections services division. 
(Code 1967, § 22-10; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06) 
Sec. 5-27. - General duties of division and inspectors. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the inspections services division to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter and of the regulatory codes adopted herein, and to make all inspections necessary to determine whether or not the provisions of this chapter and such codes are being met. 
(b)  The North Carolina State Building Code, Administration and Enforcement Requirements Code, Accessibility Code, Energy Code, Fuel Gas Code, General Construction Code, Residential Building Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, Existing Buildings Code, Regulations for Manufactured and Mobile Homes, and the Electrical Code, (National Electrical Code with NC amendments) shall be enforced by the inspection services administrator. 
(Code 1967, § 22-11; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06) 
Sec. 5-28. - Conflicts of interest. 
    No officer or employee of the inspections services division shall be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building or any part thereof, or in the making of plans or specifications therefor, unless he is the owner of such building. No officer or employee of the inspections services division shall engage in any work which is inconsistent with his duties or with the interests of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 22-12) 
Sec. 5-29. - Reports and records. 
    The inspections services division, and the inspection services administrator shall keep complete and accurate records in convenient form of all applications received, permits issued, inspections and reinspections made, and all other work and activities of the inspections services division. Periodic reports shall be submitted to the city manager and to other agencies as required. 
(Code 1967, § 22-13; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06) 
Sec. 5-30. - Inspection procedure. 
(a)  Inspections. 
(1)  The inspections services division shall inspect all buildings and structures and work therein for which a permit of any kind has been issued as often as necessary in order to determine whether the work complies with this chapter and the appropriate codes. 
(2)  When deemed necessary by the inspection services administrator, materials and assemblies may be inspected at the point of manufacture or fabrication or inspections may be made by approved and recognized inspection organizations. No approval shall be based upon reports of such organizations unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such organization. 
(3)  All holders of permits, or their agents, shall notify the inspections services division and the inspection services administrator at each of the stages of construction designated in the city inspection schedule for residential and nonresidential construction on file in the office of the inspection services administrator so that approval may be given before work is continued. 
(b)  Requests for inspection, reinspections. 
(1)  Request for inspections may be made to the office of the inspections services division. The inspections services division shall make inspections as soon as practicable after request is made therefore, provided such work is ready for inspection at the time the request is made. 
(2)  Reinspections may be made at the convenience of the inspection services administrator. No work shall be inspected until it is in proper and completed condition ready for inspection. All work which has been concealed before the inspection and approval shall be uncovered at the request of the inspection services administrator and placed in condition for proper inspection. Approval or rejection of the work shall be furnished by the inspection services administrator in the form of a notice posted on the building or given to the permit holder or his agent. Failure to call for inspections or proceeding without approval at each stage of construction shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Street or alley lines. Where the applicant for a permit proposes to erect any building or structure on the line of any street, alley or other public place, he shall secure a survey of the line of such street, alley or other public place, adjacent to the property upon which the building or structure is to be erected before the proceeding with construction of the building or structure. It shall be the duty of the inspection services administrator to see that the building does not encroach upon such street, alley or other public place. 
(d)  Certificate of occupancy/compliance. 
(1)  No land shall be used or occupied, except for rural farm purposes, and no building or structure erected, altered, used or changed in use for other than rural farm purposes until a certificate of occupancy/compliance has been issued by the inspection services administrator stating that the building, land and/or the proposed use has been determined to be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the appropriate regulatory codes and the Land Development Code for the occupancy intended. 
(2)  A certificate of occupancy/compliance shall be required for the purpose of changing any existing use, as well as for maintaining, renewing, changing or extending any nonconforming use. A conditional or partial certificate of occupancy/compliance may be issued for a portion or portions of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion and occupancy of the entire building. A certificate of occupancy/compliance either for the whole or part of a new building or alterations or additions to an existing building shall be applied for coincident with the application for a zoning certificate and/or building permit and shall be issued within five (5) days after the erection, additions or alterations of the building or part have been found in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the appropriate regulatory codes and the Land Development Code for the occupancy intended. A record of all such certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the inspection services administrator and shall be furnished, on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land. A fee as established in the fee schedule in the manual of city policies shall be charged for the issuance of each certificate of occupancy/compliance or copy thereof. 
(3)  A certificate of occupancy/compliance may, in the discretion of the inspection services administrator, be issued with respect to any building which is not then fully in compliance with this chapter, the appropriate regulatory codes or the Land Development Code for the occupancy intended but may be brought into compliance with some slight additional work or alterations; provided, however, that the certificate of occupancy/compliance shall only be issued upon the posting of a bond to be determined by costs deemed necessary to secure compliance with this chapter, the appropriate regulatory codes or Land Development Code for the occupancy intended. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy/compliance in these cases shall be at the sole discretion of the inspection services administrator. 
(Code 1967, § 22-14; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06) 
Sec. 5-31. - Oversight does not legalize violation. 
    No oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of the inspection services administrator or other official or employee of the inspections services division shall be deemed to legalize the violation of any provision of this chapter or any provision of any regulatory code adopted in this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 22-15; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06) 
Sec. 5-32. - Powers of inspection officials. 
(a)  Authority. The inspection services administrator is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter and the regulatory codes adopted in this chapter. 
(b)  Right of entry. The inspection services administrator shall have the right of entry on any premises within the jurisdiction of the regulatory codes adopted in this chapter at reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection or enforcement of the requirements of this chapter and the regulatory codes, upon presentation of proper credentials. 
(c)  Stop-work orders. Whenever any building or structure or part thereof is being demolished, constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired in a hazardous manner, or in violation of any provision of this chapter or any other city ordinance, or in violation of any provision of any regulatory code adopted in this chapter, or in violation of the terms of the permit or permits issued therefore, or in such manner as to endanger life or property, the inspection services administrator may order such work to be immediately stopped. Such order shall be in writing to the owner of the property or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the reasons therefore and the conditions under which the work may be resumed. 
(Code 1967, § 22-16; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06) 
Secs. 5-33-5-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION OF REGULATORY CODES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 5-51-5-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION OF CONTRACTORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 13. 

Sec. 5-66. - Required. 
    Every person carrying on the business of building contractor, plumbing contractor, heating/air conditioning contractor, refrigeration and ventilation contractor, electrical contractor, insulation contractor, moving or demolition contractor within the city shall register at the office of the inspections services division, giving name and place of business. Possession of a privilege license to perform work in the city shall be deemed to have satisfied the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 22-17; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06) 
Sec. 5-67. - Bond. 
(a)  Any demolition work, regardless of location, determined by the inspection services administrator services to involve an unusually hazardous activity or to be located in a hazardous area, or both, shall require a bond in an amount sufficient, in the opinion of the inspection services administrator to cover any damage which may result to city property. In no cases shall the bond amount be less than the amount established in the fee schedule in the manual of city policies. In work undertaken under the provisions of chapter 11 of this Code the total amount of the bond will be determined by the inspection services administrator after consultation with the director of development services. 
(b)  Cash or surety bond. Licensed contractors, in lieu of paying their inspection fees daily, may deposit a cash or surety bond with the city in the amount as determined by the fee schedule in the manual of city policies. Permits may be issued against this bond up to the full amount of the bond, but in no case will credit be extended beyond the amount of the bond. Contractors will be billed monthly with payment due within ten (10) days and delinquent within twenty-five (25) days. No further permits will be issued to delinquent accounts, regardless of the amount of the bill. 
(Code 1967, § 22-18; Ord. No. 0-90-34, § 1(a), 6-4-90; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06; Ord. No. O-2018-79, § 2, 8-13-18) 
Secs. 5-68-5-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 

Sec. 5-81. - Required. 
(a)  Building permit. 
(1)  No person shall commence or proceed with the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, removal or demolition of any building or other structure, or any part thereof, without a written permit from the inspection services administrator; provided, however, no building permit shall be required for work which does not involve any changes requiring an expenditure of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less. Local board of health approval of property for a septic tank is required where a sewerage system cannot be connected to the city sewer. 
(2)  In all cases of removal or demolition of a building or structure, including demolition work undertaken by order issued under chapter 11 of this Code, a good and sufficient bond in the amounts set out in section 5-67 shall be posted by the property owner or by his contractor at the time of application for a permit to insure complete removal or demolition, including all rubble and debris. Failure on the part of the property owner or his contractor to completely demolish, remove and clear the premises after thirty (30) days' notice by the inspection services administrator shall be cause of forfeiture of such bond. 
(b)  Plumbing permit. No person shall commence or proceed with the installation, extension or general repair of any plumbing system without a written permit from the inspection services administrator; provided, however, no permit shall be required for minor repairs or replacements on the house side of a trap to an installed system of plumbing if such repairs or replacements do not disrupt the original water supply, the waste system or ventilating systems. Local board of health approval of property for a septic tank is required where a sewage system cannot be connected to the city sewer. 
(c)  Mechanical permit. No person shall commence or proceed with the installation, extension, alteration or general repair of any heating or cooling equipment system without a written permit from the inspection services administrator; provided, however, no permit shall be required for minor repairs or minor burner services or filter replacements of warm air furnaces or cooling system. 
(d)  Electrical permit. No person shall commence or proceed with the installation, extension, alteration or general repair of any electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment without a written permit therefor from the supervisor of inspections; provided, however, no permit shall be required for minor repair work such as the replacement of lamps or the connection of portable devices to suitable receptacles which have been permanently installed; provided, further, no permit shall be required for the installation, alteration or repair of the electrical wiring, devices, appliances and equipment installed by or for an electrical public utility corporation for the use of such corporation in the generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electrical energy, or for the use of such corporation in the operation of signals or the use of transmission of intelligence. 
(e)  Insulation permit. No person shall commence or proceed with the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, removal or demolition of any building or other structure, or any part thereof in regards to insulation, without a written permit from the inspection services administrator; provided, however, no insulation permit shall be required for work which does not involve any changes requiring an expenditure of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less. 
(Code 1967, § 22-19; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06) 
State Law reference- Permits, G.S. § 160A-417; time limitations or validity of permits, G.S. § 160A-418. 
Sec. 5-82. - Application. 
    Written application shall be made for all permits required by this division, and shall be made on forms provided by the inspections services division. The application shall be made by the owner of the building or structure affected or by his authorized agent or representative and, in addition to such other information as may be required by the inspection services administrator. No person shall commence or proceed with the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, removal or demolition of any building or other structure, or any part thereof, without a written permit from the inspection services administrator; provided, however, no building permit shall be required for work which does not involve any changes requiring an expenditure of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less, to enable him to determine whether the permit applied for should be issued, shall show the following: 
(1)  Name, residence and business address of the owner; 
(2)  Name, residence and business of the authorized representative or agent, if any; 
(3)  Name and address of the contractor, if any, together with evidence that he has obtained a certificate from the appropriate state licensing board for such contractors, if such is required for the work involved in the permit for which application is made. 
(Code 1967, § 22-20; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06) 
Sec. 5-83. - Submission of plans, specifications. 
    Three (3) sets of detailed plans and specifications shall accompany each application for a permit under this division in accordance with the North Carolina State Building Code, for one- and two-family dwellings and for any other building or structure where plans and specifications are deemed necessary by the inspection services administrator. No person shall commence or proceed with the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, removal or demolition of any building or other structure, or any part thereof, without a written permit from the inspection services administrator; provided, however, no building permit shall be required for work which does not involve any changes requiring an expenditure of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less, in order for him to determine whether the proposed work complies with the appropriate regulatory codes or ordinances. Plans shall be drawn to scale with sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed, and the plans and specifications together shall contain information sufficient to indicate that the work proposed will conform to the provisions of this chapter and the appropriate regulatory codes. Where plans and specifications are required, a copy stamped "Approved" by the inspections services administrator of the same shall be kept at the job site until all authorized operations have been completed and approved by the inspection services administrator. No person shall commence or proceed with the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, removal or demolition of any building or other structure, or any part thereof, without a written permit from the inspection services administrator; provided, however, no building permit shall be required for work which does not involve any changes requiring an expenditure of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less. 
(Code 1967, § 22-21; Ord. No. 0-01-66, § 1, 8-27-01; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06) 
Sec. 5-84. - Limitations on issuance. 
(a)  No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure the estimated total cost of which is more than thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) unless the work is to be performed by a licensed general contractor or is otherwise exempt under state law. 
(b)  No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure, other than a one-or two-family dwelling, the estimated total cost of which is more than ninety thousand dollars ($90,000.00) unless the plans bear the state seal of a registered architect or a registered engineer. 
(c)  Where any provision of the general statutes of the state or of any ordinance requires that work be done by a licensed specialty contractor of any kind, no permit for such work shall be issued unless it is to be performed by such licensed specialty contractor. 
(d)  Where detailed plans and specifications are required under this division, no building permit shall be issued unless such plans and specifications have been provided. 
(e)  When any person makes application for a building permit in which the cost of construction exceeds thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00), the inspection services administrator or his authorized agent shall request that the person sign a letter of intent from the developer prior to issuance of building permit stating his intentions regarding the structure and use. This section shall not apply to a person who is properly licensed under G.S. Article 87, general contractors licensing requirements. 
(Code 1967, § 22-22; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06) 
Sec. 5-85. - Issuance. 
    When proper application for a permit has been made, and the inspection services administrator is satisfied that the application and the proposed work comply with the provisions of this chapter and the appropriate regulatory codes, he shall issue such permit, upon payment of the proper fee or fees as provided in section 5-89. 
(Code 1967, § 22-23; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06) 
Sec. 5-86. - Revocation. 
    The inspection services administrator may revoke and require the return of any permit issued under this division by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any material departure from the approved application, plans or specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with requirements of this chapter and the appropriate regulatory codes; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. A new permit may be issued when compliance has been obtained. A new permit fee will be imposed. 
(Code 1967, § 22-24; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06) 
Sec. 5-87. - Time limitations on validity. 
(a)  Permits generally. Except for buildings subject to vacate, repair, or demolition orders issued pursuant to the housing code, all permits issued under this division shall expire by limitation six (6) months after the date of issuance if the work authorized by the permit has not been commenced. If after commencement the work is discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months, the permit shall immediately expire. No work authorized by any permit which has expired shall thereafter be performed until a new permit has been secured. 
(b)  Permits for buildings subject to housing code orders. All permits issued under this division for buildings subject to a vacate, repair, or demolition orders issued pursuant to the housing code shall expire on the date established by the order for the work to be completed. Neither the issuance of a permit nor the commencement of the work shall extent the deadline date established by the order. If the deadline date established by the order for the work to be completed is extended in writing by the housing code inspector, the permit shall expire on the extended date. 
(Code 1967, § 22-25; Ord. No. 0-93-74, § 1, 12-13-93) 
Sec. 5-88. - Changes in work after approval. 
    After a permit has been issued, changes or deviations from the terms of the application and permit, or changes or deviations from the plans or specifications involving any work under the jurisdiction of this chapter or of any regulatory code adopted herein shall not be made until specific written approval of such changes or deviations has been obtained from the inspection services administrator. 
(Code 1967, § 22-26; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06) 
Sec. 5-89. - Fees. 
    Fees for permits under this division shall be based upon the total estimated cost of the proposed work, including all subcontracts if any, but in no case shall the total estimated cost be less than the market value of similar completed work in the city as determined by the inspection services administrator. Permit fees shall be determined by the city council and shall be published in the city's manual of city policies. 
(Code 1967, § 22-27; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06) 
Secs. 5-90-5-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BUILDING CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Inspection services advisory committee, § 2-116 et seq. 
State Law reference- North Carolina Building Code required, G.S. § 143-136 et seq. 

Sec. 5-106. - Building code adopted. 
    The 2002 Editions of the North Carolina State Building Code, General Construction, Accessibility and Existing Buildings as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein as the building code of the city to the extent such code is applicable for safe and stable design, methods of construction, minimum standards, and use of materials in building or structures hereafter erected, enlarged, altered, repaired or otherwise constructed or reconstructed. 
(Code 1967, § 22-2; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06) 
Sec. 5-107. - Plumbing code adopted. 
    The 2002 Edition of the North Carolina Plumbing Code as adopted and published by the North Carolina Building Code Council and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein as the plumbing code for the city. 
(Code 1967, § 22-3; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06) 
Sec. 5-108. - Mechanical, energy and fuel gas code adopted. 
    The 2002 Mechanical Code, Energy Code and Fuel Gas Code and as adopted and published by the North Carolina Building Code Council and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein as the heating, air conditioning, refrigeration and ventilation code for the city. 
(Code 1967, § 22-4; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06) 
Sec. 5-109. - Electrical code adopted; additional requirements. 
(a)  The 2005 North Carolina Electrical Code as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein as the electrical code for the city. 
(b)  Additional requirements. The following are adopted as requirements in addition to the North Carolina Electrical Code: 
(1)  Service equipment shall not be located in any attic, clothes closet, kitchen storage cabinet, bathroom, toilet room, bedroom, coal or trash bin. 
(2)  All wiring on or in permanent buildings or structures located within a defined first (number one (1) or primary) fire district shall utilize approved raceways or metal-jacketed cables such as MI or type MC metal-clad (type A.C. not allowed) as permitted by the National Electrical Code. Exceptions are sound equipment, communication circuits, class 2 and class 3 remote-control and signal circuits, and fire protection signaling circuits as permitted in the North Carolina Electrical Code. 
(Code 1967, § 22-5; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06) 
Sec. 5-110. - Residential building code adopted. 
    The North Carolina Residential Building Code as adopted and amended by the North Carolina Building Code Council, to the extent same is not inconsistent with this section, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein as the residential building code for one- and two-family residential buildings in the city. 
(Code 1967, § 22-6; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06) 
Sec. 5-111. - Amendments to codes. 
    Amendments to the regulatory codes adopted by reference in this article, which are from time to time adopted and published by the agencies or organizations referred to herein shall be effective in the city at the time such amendments are filed with the city clerk as provided in section 5-113. 
(Code 1967, § 22-7) 
Sec. 5-112. - Compliance with codes. 
(a)  All buildings or structures which are hereafter constructed, reconstructed, erected, altered, extended, enlarged, repaired, demolished or removed shall conform to the requirements, minimum standards and other provisions of either the North Carolina State Building Code, General Construction, or the North Carolina Residential Building Code, whichever is applicable, or both if both are applicable. 
(b)  Every building intended for human habitation, occupancy or use shall have plumbing, plumbing systems or plumbing fixtures installed, constructed, altered, extended, repaired or reconstructed in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements and other provisions of the North Carolina Plumbing Code. 
(c)  All mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, fuel-burning equipment and appurtenances shall be installed, erected, repaired, used and maintained in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements and other provisions of the North Carolina Mechanical Code and Fuel Gas Code. 
(d)  All electrical wiring, installations and appurtenances shall be erected, altered, repaired, used and maintained in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements and other provisions of the North Carolina Electrical Code. 
(e)  No request for electric service or water service for other than construction purposes shall be granted with respect to any structure including but not limited to dwellings, commercial buildings or mobile homes proposed to be served by the city's distribution systems until the supervisor of inspections finds the structure to be in full compliance with the provisions of this article and until a certificate of occupancy/compliance has been issued with respect to the same; provided, however, that the inspection services administrator may waive the requirements for a certificate of occupancy/compliance. 
(f)  Electric service and water service shall be discontinued to all structures found unfit and/or unsafe for human habitation and/or occupancy under the provisions of this chapter or chapter 11; provided, however, that the owners and occupants are notified in writing in advance of such discontinuance of service. 
(Code 1967, § 22-8; Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), 3-13-06) 
Sec. 5-113. - Copies of codes and amendments filed with clerk. 
    An official copy of each regulatory code adopted in this article, and official copies of all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. Such copies shall be the official copies of the codes and amendments. 
(Code 1967, § 22-9) 
Secs. 5-114-5-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT 

Sec. 5-131. - Demolition by neglect established. 
    There are hereby established procedures and requirements for the repair or elimination of decaying and deteriorating buildings in the Central City Local Historic District in the City of Rocky Mount, North Carolina. This article V shall be known as the city's "demolition by neglect ordinance." 
(Ord. No. O-2009-126, § 1, 12-14-09) 
Sec. 5-132. - Exercise of police powers: authority. 
    The city council hereby finds and declares that there exist in the Central City Local Historic District buildings or structures which are decaying or deteriorating, or which by neglect are being demolished. The general statutes authorize the city to exercise its authority to prevent the demolition by neglect of these structures. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-126, § 1, 12-14-09) 
Sec. 5-133. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect Rocky Mount's historic architectural resources by intervening when a building or structure in the Central City Local Historic District is undergoing demolition by neglect. Demolition by neglect is defined as a situation in which a property owner or other party in interest allows the condition of a property to suffer such deterioration, potentially beyond the point of repair, as to threaten the structural integrity of the building or structure or its relevant architectural detail to such a degree that the building or structure and its character may potentially be lost to current and future generations. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-126, § 1, 12-14-09) 
Sec. 5-134. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Central City Local Historic District means that area identified as the Central City Local Historic District on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Rocky Mount, the boundaries of which are shown as an overlay district on the zoning map. 
    Chief building inspector or inspector means the Chief Building Inspector of the City of Rocky Mount or his or her designee. 
    Hardship review committee means a committee composed of the director of development services, city engineer, and finance director of the City of Rocky Mount and the chairperson of the historic preservation commission, established to consider claims of undue economic hardship caused by the enforcement of this article. 
    Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
    Parties in interest means all individuals, associations and corporations who have interests of record in a building or structure and any who are in possession thereof. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-126, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. O-2018-79, § 2, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 5-135. - Standards. 
    The exterior features of any building or structure located within the Central City Historic District shall be preserved by the owner and/or parties in interest against decay, deterioration and structural defects. The owner and/or parties in interest shall upon written request of the city repair such exterior features if they are found to be deteriorating, or if their condition is contributing to deterioration, including but not limited to, any of the following defects: 
(1)  Deterioration of exterior walls, foundations, flooring, carpet walls, roofs, beams, chimneys and either horizontal or vertical load-bearing supports that cause leaning, sagging, splitting, listing or buckling; 
(2)  Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs and foundations, including broken windows/doors, failed paint, leaking roofing, decayed brickwork or failed siding materials; 
(3)  Rotting, holes and other forms of decay; 
(4)  Damages caused by fire or other calamity; 
(5)  Deterioration of exterior stairs, porches, handrails, window/door frames, cornices, entablatures, wall facings or other architectural details that cause delaminating, instability, loss of shape or crumbling; 
(6)  Deterioration of fences, gates, garden walls or accessory structures; 
(7)  Deterioration of any exterior feature that creates or permits a hazardous or unsafe condition to life, health or other property. 
Boarded up windows and street barricades are allowed if they are painted a similar color to the remaining exterior facade. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-126, § 1, 12-14-09) 
Sec. 5-136. - Inspection authority. 
    Authority to assure compliance with the standards set forth in this article is vested in the chief building inspector, who shall have the following duties: 
It shall be the duty of the chief building inspector to periodically examine the buildings and structures in the Central City Local Historic District for the purpose of determining their condition and for the purpose of the enforcement and administration of this article. In exercising this power, the chief building inspector shall, if required to fulfill his or her duties under this article, have the right to enter on any premises within the Central City Local Historic District at all reasonable hours (between 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and at the convenience of the occupant) for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action, upon presentation of proper credentials. Upon refusal by the owner or other person in legal possession to permit entry, the chief building inspector, after proper notice, shall have the right to inspect pursuant to an administrative search warrant issued in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 15-27.2. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the owner or parties in interest to relocate any moveable obstructions (furniture, boxes, appliances and construction material, for example) that would otherwise interfere with a complete inspection. The chief building inspector shall not be expected to detect violations of this article when such violations are concealed behind, under or above walls, floors, ceilings or other fixed components of the building. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-126, § 1, 12-14-09) 
Sec. 5-137. - Petition and action. 
    A property owner or any other interested person may file a petition with the chief building inspector listing the specific defects in a building or structure no earlier than six (6) months after the adoption of this article requesting that he or she act to require the correction of the deterioration or the making of repairs. The chief building inspector will use the six-month timeframe to systematically inspect buildings and structures in the Central City Local Historic District and contact property owners to notify them of any violations. Correction or repairs will be required under the following procedures: 
(1)  Whenever a petition is filed with the chief building inspector or whenever it appears to the inspector (on his or her own motion or otherwise) that a building or structure is undergoing demolition by neglect, the inspector shall, if his preliminary investigation discovers a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner and/or parties in interest a complaint stating: 
a.  The charges, including a description of the condition causing the demolition by neglect, and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the chief building inspector in city hall, not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days after the serving of such complaint; 
b.  That the owner and/or parties of interest shall have the right to answer and give testimony at the hearing; 
c.  That the hardship review committee, as defined in this article, shall also be given notice of the hearing; and 
d.  That the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in the hearing before the inspector. 
(2)  The purpose of the hearing is to receive evidence concerning the charge of demolition by neglect and to consider any claim of undue economic hardship made by the owner and/or parties in interest. 
(3)  If, after such notice and hearing, the chief building inspector determines that the building or structure is undergoing demolition by neglect according to the standards listed in this article, the inspector shall state in writing the findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and/or parties in interest an order to repair within a stated time period, which time period shall be reasonable in terms of the amount of work required, those elements of the building or structure that are deteriorating, contributing to deterioration or deteriorated. 
(4)  Complaints or orders issued by the chief building inspector shall be served upon persons either personally, or by registered or certified mail. When service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy of the complaint or order may also be sent by regular mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the registered or certified mail is unclaimed or refused, but the regular mail is not returned by the post office within ten (10) days after the mailing. 
(5)  If the identities of any owners or the whereabouts of persons are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the chief building inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence, or if the owners and or parties in interest are known but have refused to accept service by registered or certified mail, and the chief building inspector makes an affidavit to that effect, then the service of the complaint or order upon the owners and/or parties in interest may be made by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the city at least once no later than the time at which personal service would be required under the provisions of this article. When service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the building or structure thereby affected. 
(6)  Failure on the part of any owner and/or parties of interest to receive or have served upon them any complaint, notice or order herein provided for, shall not affect or invalidate the proceedings with respect to any other owner or party in interest or any other person. 
(7)  In the event that the owner and/or other parties in interest wish to petition for a claim of undue economic hardship, the chief building inspector's order shall be stayed until after the hardship review committee's determination of such hardship. All claims of undue economic hardship shall be made within fifteen (15) days of the issuance of the order to repair the building or structure by filing such claim with the chief building inspector. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-126, § 1, 12-14-09) 
Sec. 5-138. - Safeguards from undue economic hardship. 
    When a claim of undue economic hardship is made, the chief building inspector shall notify the hardship review committee within ten (10) days following the receipt of such claim. The committee shall schedule a hearing on the claim within fifteen (15) days of receiving notice that a hearing is requested. Enforcement proceedings shall be stayed until the committee makes a decision. 
    When a claim of undue economic hardship is made owing to the effects of demolition by neglect, the burden of proof shall be upon the owner and/or parties in interest to provide evidence during the hearing upon the claim, describing the circumstances of the hardship, which shall include: 
(1)  Nature of ownership (individual, business or nonprofit) or legal possession, custody, control, residency and a description of the building or structure; 
(2)  Financial resources of the owner and/or parties of interest; 
(3)  Cost of repairs; 
(4)  Assessed value of the land and improvements; 
(5)  Real estate taxes for the previous two (2) years; 
(6)  Amount paid for the property, date of purchase and party from whom purchased, including a description of the relationship between the owner and the person from whom the property was purchased or other means of acquisition of title, such as by gift or inheritance; 
(7)  Annual debt service, if any, for previous two (2) years; 
(8)  Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers received, if any; 
(9)  Proof of application status for historic tax credits as filed with the State of North Carolina; 
(10)  If the property is income producing: 
a.  Annual gross income from the property for last two (2) years; 
b.  Itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two (2) years, including proof that adequate and competent management procedures were followed; 
c.  Annual cash flow, if any, for the previous two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-126, § 1, 12-14-09) 
Sec. 5-139. - Committee's action on claim of undue hardship. 
    Within fifteen (15) days of the committee's hearing on a claim of undue economic hardship, the committee shall make a finding of undue or no undue hardship and shall enter the reasons for such finding into the record. In the event of a finding of no undue hardship, the committee shall report such a finding to the chief building inspector and the chief building inspector shall issue an order for such property to be repaired within the time recommended by the committee, if any, but not a shorter time than specified in the order originally issued by the inspector. 
    In the event of a finding of economic or other hardship, the finding may be accompanied by a recommendation to relieve the hardship. This plan may include, but is not limited to, loans or grants from the city or other public, private or nonprofit sources, acquisition by purchase, changes in applicable zoning regulations or relaxation of the provisions of this article sufficient to mitigate the hardship. The committee shall report the finding and plan to the chief building inspector. The inspector shall issue an order for such property to be repaired within a specified time and according to the provisions of the recommended plan. The hardship review committee may extend the deadline specified by the chief building inspector if substantial progress to remedy the situation is demonstrated. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-126, § 1, 12-14-09) 
Sec. 5-140. - Appeals. 
    Orders made by the chief building inspector or decisions of the hardship review committee may be appealed to the board of adjustment in accordance with the procedures found in the Land Development Code of the City of Rocky Mount. The aggrieved party must file the application for an appeal within thirty (30) days following the receipt of an order for repair of the building or structure or a determination by the committee on a claim for undue economic hardship. Decisions of the board of adjustment shall be subject to review by the superior court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. Any petition for review by the superior court shall be filed with the clerk of superior court within thirty (30) days after the decision of the board of adjustment is filed or delivered as provided by the rules and procedures of the board. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-126, § 1, 12-14-09) 
Sec. 5-141. - Penalties and remedies. 
    Enforcement of this article may be by any one (1) or more of the following methods, and the institution of any such action shall not relieve any party from any other civil or criminal proceeding prescribed for herein. 
(1)  Equitable remedy. The city may apply to the court for any appropriate remedy to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Order of abatement. The city may apply for and the court may enter an order of abatement. An order of abatement may direct that improvements or repairs be made, within a time period therein specified, and that any other action be taken that is necessary to bring the property into compliance with this article. When the order of court so provides, and the city executes the order of abatement, the city shall have a lien against the real property upon which the cost of improvements or repairs were incurred to execute the order of abatement, which lien shall have the same priority and be collected as the lien for special assessments provided in G.S. ch. 160A, art. 10. 
(3)  Civil penalty. No civil penalty shall be levied unless and until the chief building inspector has delivered a written notice by personal service or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person responsible for a violation stating the nature of the violation and ordering corrective action. The notice shall also set forth the time period when corrective measures must be completed. The notice shall state that the failure to correct the violation within the specified time period will result in the assessment of civil penalties and other enforcement action. If after the allotted time period has expired and after the hearing of an appeal, if any, by the board of adjustment, corrective action has not been completed, a civil penalty shall be assessed in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day of the continuing violation. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-126, § 1, 12-14-09) 
Sec. 5-142. - Other powers. 
    Nothing in this article shall diminish the city's power to declare a building unsafe or in violation of the minimum housing ordinance under the General Statutes of North Carolina or other public safety ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-126, § 1, 12-14-09) 
Secs. 5-143-5-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 0-2006-24, § 1(Exh. 1), adopted March 13, 2006, repealed art. VI, §§ 5-161-5-179, in its entirety. Formerly, said article pertained to journeyman electricians as enacted by Ord. No. 0-89-16, § 1, adopted Feb. 13, 1989. 

Secs. 5-161-5-179. - Reserved. 
Chapter 6 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, Ch. 19. 
State Law reference- Cemeteries, G.S. § 65-37 et seq.; § 160A-341 et seq. 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cemeteries means the city's burial parks or cemeteries. 
    Cemetery lot means a numbered division as shown on the record plat. 
    Cemetery plot means a space of sufficient size to accommodate one (1) adult interment approximately five (5) by ten (10) feet. 
    Cemetery plot plan means the plot plan dated August 15, 1962, and its amendments. 
    Marker means a memorial flush with the ground. 
    Monument means a tombstone or memorial of granite or marble which extends above the surface of the ground. 
(Code 1967, § 7-1; Ord. No. O-2012-71, § 1(Att.), 7-23-12) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-2. - Cemetery supervisor-Appointment. 
    The city manager shall appoint a competent person who shall have charge of the upkeep, protection and preservation of the cemeteries of the city, whose job title shall be cemetery supervisor. 
(Code 1967, § 7-2; Ord. No. O-02-82, § 1a., 9-9-02; Ord. No. O-2012-71, § 1(Att.), 7-23-12) 
Sec. 6-3. - Same-General duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the cemetery supervisor to supervise the digging of all graves and to supervise the laying out, posting and cleaning of all burial plots. In addition thereto, he shall see that all laws and regulations concerning the cemeteries are duly observed and enforced, and in case of any violation thereof, shall report the same in accordance with departmental policy. 
(Code 1967, § 7-3; Ord. No. O-2012-71, § 1(Att.), 7-23-12) 
Sec. 6-4. - Records. 
    It shall be the duty of the cemetery supervisor to report to the city clerk a record of all interments, disinterments, and lots sold in the cemeteries. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to keep such record. 
(Code 1967, § 7-5; Ord. No. O-2012-71, § 1(Att.), 7-23-12) 
Sec. 6-5. - Map; contents. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to keep diagrams of all cemetery lots. The names of the owners and the individual names of all burials shall be recorded on the diagrams of lots that have been purchased. 
(Code 1967, § 7-6; Ord. No. O-2012-71, § 1(Att.), 7-23-12) 
Sec. 6-6. - Purchase price of lots. 
    The purchase price of lots in the cemeteries shall be determined from time to time by the city council and published in the Administrative Policy Manual. 
(Code 1967, § 7-7; Ord. No. O-02-82, § 1b., 9-9-02) 
Sec. 6-7. - Deeds to lots. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to deliver a deed to the purchaser of any lot in any of the city's cemeteries upon payment of the full purchase price. However, no person shall purchase more than eight (8) burial plots in the cemeteries unless approved by the city council. Such deed shall incorporate therein the provisions of sections 6-8 and 6-11 through 6-23. 
(Code 1967, § 7-8; Ord. No. O-2012-71, § 1(Att.), 7-23-12) 
Sec. 6-8. - Transfer of lots. 
    No transfer or assignment shall be made of any cemetery lot without the written consent of the city manager. All such transfers or assignments shall be recorded in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 7-9; Ord. No. O-2012-71, § 1(Att.), 7-23-12) 
Sec. 6-9. - Indigent burials; stillborn babies. 
    The city shall maintain a section, in one (1) or more of the city's cemeteries for the burial of indigent persons and stillborn babies or babies less than one (1) week old at the time of death. 
(1)  Indigent burials. To qualify for indigent burial, the deceased must meet the city's definition of indigent (See Administrative Policy No. X.4.2) and be certified as indigent by the appropriate department of social services. Charges for the burial plot and opening and closing of the grave shall be waived in the case of authorized indigent burials. 
(2)  Stillborn babies. Stillborn babies and babies less than one (1) week old at the time of death shall be eligible for burial in any section the city's cemeteries reserved for the burial of indigent persons. There shall be no charge for the burial plot, however, fees for opening and closing graves shall be applicable as set forth in Policy No. X.4.2 of the city's administrative policy manual. An exception shall be made if the parents qualify as indigent and fees for opening and closing shall not be charged. 
(3)  Residency required. To qualify for indigent burial the deceased must be a resident of the City of Rocky Mount at the time of death, or, in the case of stillborn babies, or babies less than one (1) week old at the time of death, the parents or guardians must be city residents. Notwithstanding the above, applicants who were residents of the city but relocated to an assisted living, retirement or nursing facility outside the city limits within three (3) years prior to death shall be considered residents for the purposes of this policy. There shall be no residency exceptions for burial of stillborn babies or babies less than one (1) week old at the time of death. 
(4)  Application required. Applications for the burial of indigent persons or stillborn babies or babies less than one (1) week old at the time of death shall be submitted to the city clerk's office. Applications must be made by next of kin or someone who has authority to act on behalf of the deceased and accompanied by certification from the appropriate department of social services that the deceased meets the city's criteria for indigence. Applications will be considered on a case-by-case basis in accordance with the criteria set forth in Administrative Policy No. X.4.2, taking into consideration such factors, as the ability of family members to pay the burial costs, the amount of the bill from the funeral home and how the charges are expected to be paid, or expected financial assistance. 
(5)  Markers and monuments. Markers and monuments shall not be permitted on graves in the areas of the city's cemeteries reserved for indigent burials. A burial space will be assigned and the city will keep a record of such including the name of the deceased, the burial location and the date of burial. 
(6)  Scheduling burials. The final decision on scheduling burials under this section shall rest with the cemetery supervisor or designee. Funeral directors scheduling such burials shall contact the cemetery supervisor or designee at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to scheduling any burials under this section. No burial time shall be promised, nor assumed without the consent of the cemetery supervisor or designee. 
(7)  Weekend/holiday burials restricted. No burials under this section shall be scheduled for weekends or official holidays. All burials shall be scheduled at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance and no burial shall be scheduled to begin later than 2:30 p.m. There shall be no exception to this rule. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-92, § 1, 10-31-11; Ord. No. O-2012-71, § 1(Att.), 7-23-12) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2011-92, § 1, adopted Oct. 31, 2011, amended § 6-9 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former § 6-9 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1967, § 7-10; Ord. No. O-02-82, § 1c., adopted Sept. 9, 2002; Ord. No. O-08-117, § 1, adopted Sept. 22, 2008. 
Sec. 6-10. - Opening and closing of graves; fees. 
    The opening and closing of graves for all interments and disinterments in the cemeteries shall be done by the city under the supervision of the cemetery supervisor unless under a court order. The fees for opening and closing a grave in the cemeteries shall be determined from time to time by the city council and published in the Administrative Policy Manual. 
(Code 1967, § 7-11; Ord. No. O-02-82, § 1d., 9-9-02) 
Sec. 6-11. - Submission of burial permit prior to interment or disinterment. 
    A burial permit shall be submitted to the cemetery supervisor by a licensed funeral director at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to any interment. Notice shall be given at least one (1) week prior to any disinterment. 
(Code 1967, § 7-12; Ord. No. O-02-82, § 1e., 9-9-02) 
Sec. 6-12. - Cremations. 
    The cemetery supervisor must be notified of cremation burials in accordance with the provisions of section 6-11. The burial of cremated remains shall be done by the city and the standard fee for the opening and closing of graves shall be charged. The scattering of ashes across the cemetery plot is prohibited. 
    One (1) cremated body may be buried on a cemetery plot with the exception that the cremated remains of any two (2) members of the same family may be buried on a single plot. 
    For the purposes of this section, family members shall be defined as wife, husband, mother, father daughter, son, sister, brother, grandmother, grandfather, granddaughter and grandson. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-96, § 1, 12-14-92; Ord. No. 0-93-8, § 1, 1-25-93) 
Sec. 6-13. - Grave liners. 
(a)  Concrete or steel grave liners shall be used for all burials in city-owned cemeteries except in the areas designated for indigent burials and except for the burial of cremation urns. The minimum requirements for concrete vaults shall be one and one-half-inch average sidewall thickness, two-inch top thickness, two-inch bottom thickness with four thousand five hundred (4,500) psi. The minimum requirement for a steel vault shall be twelve-gauge thickness top, sides and bottom. Concrete or steel grave liners may be installed with bottoms left open upon request by the family of the deceased. 
(b)  If not already in compliance, all disinterments that are to be relocated to another area of the city's cemeteries shall be placed in a vault or liner as described in subsection (a) above. If any old vault or liner exists, it must be physically solid enough to withstand the disinterment. It shall be the responsibility of the cemetery supervisor to make this determination. If the supervisor deems the vault or liner unacceptable, it shall be replaced at the expense of the property owner, the property owner's estate or duly authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 0-88-25, § 1, 3-14-88; Ord. No. O-02-82, § 1f., 9-9-02; Ord. No. O-2012-71, § 1(Att.), 7-23-12) 
Sec. 6-14. - Application of rules, regulations. 
    All cemetery lots shall be held subject to all rules and regulations governing the cemeteries, either now in force or that may be hereafter prescribed by the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 7-15; Ord. No. O-02-82, § 1g., 9-9-02) 
Sec. 6-15. - Monuments-Location. 
(a)  Monuments shall be allowed or permitted only in those sections or portions of sections of the cemeteries as approved by the city council and as shown on the cemetery map. 
(b)  Monuments shall not be permitted within the areas in the cemeteries designated for indigent burials. 
(c)  Monuments shall not be allowed or permitted in Section Thirteen of Northeastern Cemetery. 
(Code 1967, § 7-17; Ord. No. O-02-82, § 1h., 9-9-02; Ord. No. O-2012-71, § 1(Att.), 7-23-12) 
Sec. 6-16. - Same-Number. 
    Only one (1) central family monument shall be allowed on a family lot in the cemeteries. 
(Code 1967, § 7-18) 
Sec. 6-17. - Same-Dimensions. 
    The face area of any monument shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the superficial area of the lot, its base length shall not exceed sixty (60) percent of the average width of the lot and its base width shall not exceed two (2) feet. Where there are four (4) or more graves, the base width may be a maximum of two (2) feet ten (10) inches. 
(Code 1967, § 7-19) 
Sec. 6-18. - Same-Materials. 
    Monuments of concrete, artificial stone, composition, wood, tin, iron or similar materials shall not be permitted within the cemeteries. 
(Code 1967, § 7-20) 
Sec. 6-19. - Same-Foundation. 
    Monuments shall be placed only on foundations approved by the cemetery supervisor. 
(Code 1967, § 7-21) 
Sec. 6-20. - Grave markers. 
(a)  Grave markers shall not exceed one (1) foot in width and two (2) feet in length and shall have a minimum of four-inch thickness and shall be placed at the end of the grave farthest from the monument or as specified in the cemetery plot plan. 
(b)  Grave markers must be set flush with the ground. 
(Code 1967, § 7-22; Ord. No. O-02-82, § 1i., 9-9-02) 
Sec. 6-21. - Mausoleums and tombs. 
(a)  Mausoleums or tombs may be constructed only on lots designated for that purpose as shown on the cemetery map. 
(b)  Specifications and the locations of the mausoleums or tombs on the lot shall be approved by the city manager or other such officers as the city council may designate. 
(c)  Mausoleums or tombs shall be erected so as to leave at least two (2) feet clearance from all lot boundary lines. 
(Code 1967, § 7-23; Ord. No. O-2012-71, § 1(Att.), 7-23-12) 
Sec. 6-22. - Care and upkeep. 
(a)  The general care and upkeep of the cemeteries including all grading, landscaping and improvements is assumed by the city; however, the general care assumed by the city shall in no case mean the maintenance, repair or replacement of any memorial, tomb or mausoleum placed or erected upon lots; nor the doing of any special or unusual work in the cemetery, nor does it mean the reconstruction of any marble or granite work on any section of the plot, or any portion thereof in the cemetery caused by the elements, an act of nature, enemy, thieves, vandals, strikes, malicious mischief makers, explosions, unavoidable accidents, invasions, insurrections, riots or by order of any military or civil authority, whether the damage is direct or collateral, other than as herein provided. 
(b)  If any monument, mausoleum, tomb or marker or ornament becomes unsafe, unsightly or in need of repair or resetting, the city, after giving notice to the owner of such condition and upon the failure of the owner to correct the condition within thirty (30) days after receiving the notice, reserves the right to correct or remove the same at the expense of the owner. 
(Code 1967, § 7-24; Ord. No. O-02-82, § 1j., 9-9-02; Ord. No. O-2012-71, § 1(Att.), 7-23-12) 
Sec. 6-23. - Shrubs and plants. 
(a)  No shrubs, plants or ornaments shall be planted upon any cemetery lot except as the same may be permitted by any applicable provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation. 
(b)  No copings, curb fencing, hedges, grave mounds or borders of any kind shall be allowed on any cemetery lot. 
(c)  The cemetery supervisor or his duly authorized agent shall have the authority to remove all floral designs, flowers, weeds, trees, shrubs, plants or herbage of any kind from the cemetery as soon as in the judgment of the cemetery supervisor they become unsightly, dangerous, detrimental or diseased, or when they do not conform to the standards maintained for the cemeteries. 
(Code 1967, § 7-25; Ord. No. O-2012-71, § 1(Att.), 7-23-12) 
Sec. 6-24. - Use as playground. 
    No person shall use any part of any cemetery within the city as a playground. 
(Code 1967, § 7-26) 
Sec. 6-25. - Discharge of firearms. 
    No person shall discharge any firearm within any cemetery within the city except as a lawful part of any recognized funeral service. 
(Code 1967, § 7-27) 
Sec. 6-26. - Use of motor vehicles, animals. 
    No person shall drive or ride any motor vehicle in the cemeteries at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour or lead any animal or drive any motor vehicle over, upon or across any burial plot in the cemeteries. 
(Code 1967, § 7-28; Ord. No. O-2012-71, § 1(Att.), 7-23-12) 
Sec. 6-27. - Defacing monuments, burial plots. 
    No person shall dig up, remove, injure or destroy any stake or grave stone or other monument placed or erected on a grave, or any burial plot without the permission of the cemetery supervisor. 
(Code 1967, § 7-29) 
Sec. 6-28. - Unauthorized removal or damage to flowers, ornaments, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the cemetery supervisor or his duly authorized agent, or a member of the owner's family or their duly authorized agent, to cut down, pluck or otherwise remove, injure or destroy any flowers, bulbs, vines, shrubbery or trees planted in the cemetery except under the supervision or with the approval of the cemetery supervisor, or to remove any flowers or other ornaments or any vase, basket or receptacle from any lot except under the supervision and with the approval of the cemetery supervisor. 
(Code 1967, § 7-30) 
Sec. 6-29. - Litter. 
    No person shall deposit any rubbish, filth, waste or other unclean or unsightly substance in the cemeteries. 
(Code 1967, § 7-31) 
Sec. 6-30. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  Any firm that performs a service of any type in any city owned cemetery such as installing vaults; installing monuments, mausoleums, or grave markers; setting up or taking down tents; directing funerals; or other work and services shall furnish the cemetery supervisor a current certificate of insurance for the following types of insurance coverage: 
(1)  Workers compensation as required by law; 
(2)  Comprehensive automobile liability insurance coverage with a combined single limit of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per accident for bodily injury and property damage; 
(3)  Standard comprehensive general liability insurance providing coverage for operations, products, and completed operations coverage with a combined single limit of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) at any city owned cemetery. 
(Ord. No. O-02-82, § 1k., 9-9-02) 
Sec. 6-31. - Installation of monuments, grave markers, mausoleums or tombs. 
(a)  A monument permit shall be submitted to the cemetery supervisor prior to any installation of a monument, grave marker, mausoleum or tomb. 
(b)  All installations of monuments, grave markers, mausoleums or tombs will occur during regular cemetery office hours. 
(Ord. No. O-02-82, § 1l., 9-9-02; Ord. No. O-2012-71, § 1(Att.), 7-23-12) 
Chapter 7 - EXPLOSIVES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Gas, Ch. 9; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10. 
State Law reference- Regulation of explosive substances, G.S. § 160A-183. 

Sec. 7-1. - Compliance. 
    It shall be unlawful to explode or otherwise use blasting agents and any dangerous explosives within the corporate limits of the city or within one (1) mile thereof except as provided in this chapter and the North Carolina State Fire Prevention Code. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1; Ord. No. O-2011-111, § 1A, 11-28-11) 
Sec. 7-2. - Storage. 
    No dangerous explosive shall be stored within the corporate limits of the city or within one (1) mile thereof unless the explosive is for immediate use and all provisions of the North Carolina State Fire Prevention Code have been complied with. Blasting caps and explosive materials shall be brought to the site of the permitted explosion in separate magazines. 
(Code 1967, § 27-2; Ord. No. O-2011-111, § 1A, 11-28-11) 
Sec. 7-3. - Permit-Required. 
    Any person desiring to use dangerous explosives within the corporate limits of the city or within one (1) mile thereof shall first apply for and obtain a permit for the same from the fire marshal. 
(Code 1967, § 27-3; Ord. No. O-2011-111, § 1A, 11-28-11) 
Sec. 7-4. - Application. 
    Application for a permit under this chapter shall be made on forms provided by the fire marshal. A copy shall be sent to the director of engineering. The application shall contain: 
(1)  The date, time and place of the proposed explosion or other use; 
(2)  The purpose of the same; 
(3)  The nature and amount of the dangerous explosive to be exploded or otherwise used; 
(4)  A full description of the manner in which the dangerous explosive is to be exploded or otherwise used, including all safety devices to be used and precautions to be taken to ensure that there will be no damage to person or property as a result of the same. 
(5)  A scaled site plan displaying the proposed blasting site, inhabited structure, public traffic route or utilities within a one-thousand-foot radius of any proposed magazine. 
(Code 1967, § 27-4; Ord. No. O-2011-111, §§ 1B, C, 11-28-11) 
Sec. 7-5. - Fee. 
    The application for a permit required under this chapter shall be accompanied by the payment of a nonrefundable fee to cover the cost of examining and investigating the same which shall be set by the city council and published in the Manual of Fees and Charges. 
(Code 1967, § 27-5; Ord. No. O-2011-111, § 1B, 11-28-11) 
Sec. 7-6. - Investigation of applicant; approval or disapproval; insurance requirements. 
(a)  Upon receiving an application for a permit under this chapter, the fire marshal shall examine the same and make such investigation in connection therewith as he deems necessary including the qualifications and experience of the individual proposing to do the blasting. 
(b)  If after examining such application and making such investigation the fire marshal finds that the proposed explosion or other use of dangerous explosives can be done safely and without danger of damage to person or property, he shall advise the applicant in writing that a permit for the same will be issued upon receipt of evidence that the applicant has and will keep in force when engaged in such explosion or other use a policy or policies of insurance providing coverage irrespective of negligence on the part of the user for the benefit of any person whose person or property is damaged as a result of such use in the sum of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for injury suffered by any one (1) person or one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for damage done to any single piece of property with such coverage including explosion and collapse. Upon receipt of such evidence the fire marshal shall issue the permit. 
(c)  If after examining such application and making such examination the fire marshal is of the opinion that such proposed explosion or other use cannot be done safely or without the danger of damage to person or property or such applicant does not furnish the fire marshal evidence that the applicant has and will keep in effect when engaged in such explosion or other use the insurance required hereby, the fire marshal shall refuse to issue the permit applied for. 
(Code 1967, § 27-6; Ord. No. O-2011-111, §§ 1B, C, 11-28-11) 
Sec. 7-7. - Issuance of permit for continual operation. 
    If an applicant for a permit under this chapter desires to explode or otherwise use dangerous explosives for a series of explosions or other use over a continuous period of time, the fire marshal may issue a permit for the same upon compliance with the provisions of section 7-6, except that such period of time shall not be for greater than six (6) months. The permit shall apply only to explosions or other use at the single site and shall be revocable at any time the fire marshal finds either of the following: 
(1)  Persons or property have been damaged as the result of such explosions or other use; 
(2)  There is danger that persons or property may be damaged from the continuation of such explosions or other use; or 
(3)  The insurance required under this chapter is no longer in effect. 
(Code 1967, § 27-7; Ord. No. O-2011-111, § 1C, 11-28-11) 
Sec. 7-8. - Appeal from permit denial. 
    If the fire marshal refuses to issue a permit required by this chapter to an applicant, or after issuing the same revokes it, and the applicant feels aggrieved thereby, the applicant may appeal the decision of the fire marshal with respect to the same to the city council which may, after a hearing upon the matter, either sustain the action taken by the fire marshal or overrule the same and direct that the permit applied for be issued or that the permit revoked be reinstated. 
(Code 1967, § 27-8; Ord. No. O-2011-111, § 1C, 11-28-11) 
Chapter 8 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; fire limits established, § 5-2; explosives, Ch. 7; gas, Ch. 9; use of unlined chimney as a gas vent prohibited, § 9-25; use of existing flues to vent gas appliances restricted, § 9-26; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; housing, Ch. 11; solid waste, Ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, Ch. 19; rollerskates, skateboards prohibited within the fire district, § 19-8; traffic and vehicles, Ch. 20; utilities, Ch. 21; subdivisions, App. A; zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- False fire alarms, G.S. § 14-286; investigation of fires and inspection of premises, G.S. § 58-79.1 et seq.; state volunteer fire department, G.S. §§ 58-80.1 et seq.; safety precautions in hotels, G.S. §§ 58-81.5 et seq.; power of the town to restrict, regulate and prohibit the keeping, use, etc., of explosives, inflammable substances, etc., see G.S. § 160A-183. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Flammable signs, banners, etc. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit any sign, banner, flag or pennant made of paper, cloth, oil cloth, plastic or similar flammable material to be posted, hung or otherwise affixed to or made to stand or lean against or suspended between any building, marquee, wall, fence, post, pole, gasoline pump or otherwise within the city. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Billboards that have been licensed, inspected and approved by the city building inspector; 
(2)  Construction signs posted on property where the construction is being carried on; 
(3)  Signs posted for the safety of the public; 
(4)  United States, State of North Carolina and other official flags or flags of civic, charitable and fraternal organizations; 
(5)  Signs, banners, flags or pennants placed upon privately owned premises calling attention to events being or to be carried on or conducted on the premises; 
(6)  Banners suspended across the street in accordance with policies approved by the city council. 
(c)  Any person desiring to temporarily display a sign, banner, flag or pennant which would otherwise be unlawful under subsection (a) above may do so after first obtaining a permit for the same from the city manager. The permit shall be issued by the city manager, provided that: 
(1)  The sign, banner, flag or pennant is of special interest to the people of the city. 
(2)  The person wishing to display the same: 
a.  Furnishes to the city manager a list of the locations at which the signs, banners, flags or pennants are to be displayed; the number of each to be displayed at each such location; the length of time each will be so displayed; and written evidence that the property owner upon whose property the same are to be displayed has consented to the same. 
b.  Agrees in writing that the signs, banners, flags or pennants shall be removed by him or at his expense not later than the expiration date of the permit. 
(3)  The sign, banner, flag or pennant does not violate any of the provisions of the city's zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1967, § 8-2) 
Cross reference- Sign regulations, App. B, § X. 
Sec. 8-2. - Parade floats to contain flameproof materials. 
    All floats participating in parades within the city shall contain flameproof materials approved by the fire marshal. 
(Code 1967, § 8-3; Ord. No. O-2010-84, § 1.A., 10-11-10) 
Cross reference- Parades and demonstrations, § 19-81 et seq. 
Secs. 8-3-8-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE MARSHAL'S OFFICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2010-84, § 1.B., adopted Oct. 11, 2010, amended art. II in its entirety as set out herein. Formerly, art. II pertained to life safety/emergency management division. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference- Inspection services advisory committee, § 2-116 et seq. 

Sec. 8-26. - Organization. 
(a)  The fire marshal's office shall consist of the fire marshal and other inspectors or deputy or assistant inspectors as authorized by the city council. 
(b)  For the purpose of this chapter, whenever the designation "fire marshal" is made it shall include any duly authorized inspector or deputy or assistant inspectors of the fire marshal's office. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-84, § 1.B., 10-11-10) 
Sec. 8-27. - General duties of division and inspectors. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the fire marshal's office to enforce all the provisions of this chapter and of the regulatory codes adopted herein, and to make all inspections necessary to determine whether or not the provisions of this chapter and such codes are being met. 
(b)  The current edition of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the fire marshal's office. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-84, § 1.B., 10-11-10) 
Sec. 8-28. - Conflicts of interest. 
    No officer or employee of the fire marshal's office shall be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building or any part thereof, unless he is the owner of such building. No officer or employee of the fire marshal's office shall engage in any work which is inconsistent with his duties or with the interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-84, § 1.B., 10-11-10) 
Sec. 8-29. - Reports and records. 
(a)  The fire marshal's office and the fire marshal shall keep complete and accurate records in convenient form of all applications received, permits issued, inspections and reinspections made, and all other work and activities of the fire marshal's office. Periodic reports shall be submitted to the fire chief, city manager and other agencies as required. 
(b)  All applications, inspections, reinspections, and maintenance reports, and any and all other reports and submissions required by law to be made to the fire marshal's office shall be submitted in a manner and format, and by a method prescribed by the fire marshal within five (5) business days after the inspection, reinspection, test, maintenance activity, or other activity required by law with respect to fire prevention and fire protection has been completed. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-84, § 1.B., 10-11-10; Ord. No. O-2017-13, § 1, 2-27-17) 
Sec. 8-30. - Inspection procedure. 
(a)  Inspections. 
(1)  The fire marshal's office shall inspect all buildings with the exception of one- and two-family dwellings periodically to determine that all buildings, structures and processes are in compliance with this chapter and the appropriate code. In accordance with the current edition of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code, all occupancies shall be inspected no less than the following schedule: 
Once every year: Hazardous, institutional, highrise, assembly (except churches and synagogues), residential (except one- and two-family dwellings and only interior common areas of dwelling units of multi-family occupancies). 
Once every two (2) years: Industrial and educational (except public schools). 
Once every three (3) years: Business, mercantile, storage, churches and synagogues. 
Frequency rates for inspection of occupancies mandated by N.C. General Statutes shall supersede this section. Nothing in this section is intended to prevent the fire marshal's office from conducting more frequent inspections than the schedule prescribed in this section. 
(2)  When deemed necessary by the fire marshal's office, materials and assemblies may be inspected at the point of manufacture or fabrication or inspections may be made by approved and recognized organizations. No approval shall be based upon reports of such organizations unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such organization. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-84, § 1.B., 10-11-10) 
Sec. 8-31. - Oversight does not legalize violation. 
    No oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of the fire marshal or other official employee of the fire marshal's office shall be deemed to legalize the violation of any provisions of this chapter or any provision of any regulatory codes adopted in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-84, § 1.B., 10-11-10) 
Sec. 8-32. - Powers of fire code officials. 
(a)  Authority. The fire marshal and other inspectors or deputy or assistant inspectors as authorized by the city council are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter and the regulatory codes adopted in this chapter. 
(b)  Right of entry. The fire marshal and other inspectors or deputy or assistant inspectors as authorized by the city council shall have the right of entry on any premises except one- and two-family dwellings, within the jurisdiction of the regulatory codes adopted in this chapter at reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection or enforcement of the requirements of this chapter and the regulatory codes, upon presentation of proper credentials. 
(c)  Stop-work orders. Whenever any building or structure or part thereof is being demolished, constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired in a hazardous manner, or in violation of any provisions of this chapter, or in violation of any regulatory codes adopted in this chapter, or in violation of the terms of the permit or permits issued therefor, or in such a manner as to endanger life or property, the fire marshal and other inspectors or deputy or assistant inspectors as authorized by the city council may order such work to be immediately stopped. Such order shall be in writing to the owner of the property or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the reasons therefor and the conditions under which the work may be resumed. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-84, § 1.B., 10-11-10) 
Secs. 8-33-8-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS 

Sec. 8-53. - Fire code permit required. 
    No person shall commence or proceed to maintain, store, or handle materials, or conduct processes which produce conditions hazardous to life or property, or to install equipment used in connection with such activities, which are required by this chapter, or any provisions of the regulatory codes adopted in this chapter without first obtaining a written permit from the fire marshal. 
    Such fire prevention permit shall not be a substitute for any other permits or license required by this code or other law. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-21, § 2, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-06-99, § 1a, 12-11-06; Ord. No. O-2010-84, § 1.C., 10-11-10) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2010-84, § 1.C., adopted Oct. 11, 2010, changed the title of § 8-53 from "Fire prevention code permit required" to "Fire code permit required." This historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Sec. 8-54. - Application. 
    Written application shall be made for all permits required by the fire marshal's office and shall be made on forms provided by the fire marshal's office. The application shall be made by the owner or occupant of the building, structure or vessel affected or by his authorized agent or representative and, in addition to such other information as may be required by the fire marshal to enable him to determine whether the permit applied for should be issued, shall show the following: 
(1)  Name, business address, and telephone number of the owner; 
(2)  Name, business address, and telephone number of the authorized representative or agent, if any; 
(3)  A statement of the intended use of the building or structure or operation to be conducted on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-21, § 2, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-06-99, §§ 1a, 1b, 12-11-06; Ord. No. O-2010-84, § 1.C., 10-11-10) 
Sec. 8-55. - Submission of plans, specifications. 
    Detailed plans and specifications shall accompany each application for a permit under this article when required by the fire marshal in order for him to determine whether the proposed work complies with the appropriate regulatory codes or ordinances. Plans shall be drawn to scale with sufficient clarity to indicate the nature or extent of the work or process proposed, and the plans and specifications together shall contain information sufficient to indicate that the work or process proposed will conform to the provisions of this chapter and the appropriate regulatory codes. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-21, § 2, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-06-99, § 1a, 12-11-06; Ord. No. O-2010-84, § 1.C., 10-11-10) 
Sec. 8-56. - Issuance. 
    When proper application for a permit has been made, and the fire marshal is satisfied that the application and the proposed work or processes comply with the provisions of this chapter and the appropriate regulatory codes, he shall issue such permit, upon payment of proper fee or fees as provided in section 8-60. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-21, § 2, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-06-99, § 1a, 12-11-06; Ord. No. O-2010-84, § 1.C., 10-11-10) 
Sec. 8-57. - Revocation. 
    The fire marshal may revoke and require the return of any permit issued under this article by notifying the permit holder in writing the reason for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any material departure from the approved application, plans or specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with requirements of this chapter and the appropriate regulatory codes; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing a permit. A new permit may be issued when compliance has been obtained. A new permit fee will be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-21, § 2, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-06-99, § 1a, 12-11-06; Ord. No. O-2010-84, § 1.C., 10-11-10) 
Sec. 8-58. - Time limitations on validity. 
    All permits issued under this article shall expire by limitation twelve (12) months after the date of issuance, with exception of open burning permits and other special use permits which will expire within the time limitations indicated on the permit. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-21, § 2, 3-9-98) 
Sec. 8-59. - Changes in work or use after approval. 
    After a permit has been issued, changes or deviations from the terms of the application and permit, or changes and deviations from the plans or specifications involving any work under the jurisdiction of this chapter or of any regulatory codes adopted herein shall not be made until specific written approval of such deviations has been obtained from the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-21, § 2, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-06-99, § 1a, 12-11-06; Ord. No. O-2010-84, § 1.C., 10-11-10) 
Sec. 8-60. - Fees. 
    Fees for the following permits under this article shall be as set forth in the city's administrative policy manual: 
(1)  Permits by use; 
(2)  Open burning permit fees; 
(3)  Special use permits; 
(4)  General inspection fees; 
(5)  Plans review fees; 
(6)  Operational permits; and 
(7)  Construction permits. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-21, § 2, 3-9-98; Ord. No. O-2010-84, § 1.C., 10-11-10) 
Secs. 8-61-8-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE STANDARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 0-2010-84, § 1.D., adopted Oct. 11, 2010, changed the title of art. IV from "North Carolina Fire Prevention Code Standards" to "Fire Prevention Code Standards." 

Sec. 8-71. - The current edition of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code adopted. 
    The current edition of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code, as adopted by North Carolina Building Code Council and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as though fully set forth herein as the current edition of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code for the city to the extent such code is applicable for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-21, § 2, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-06-99, § 1c, 12-11-06; Ord. No. O-2010-84, § 1.D., 10-11-10) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2010-84, § 1.D., adopted Oct. 11, 2010, changed the title of § 8-71 from "North Carolina Fire Prevention Code adopted" to "The current edition of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code adopted." This historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Sec. 8-72. - Amendments to code. 
    Amendments to the regulatory codes adopted by reference in this article, which are from time to time adopted and published by the agencies or organizations referred to herein shall be effective in the city at the time such amendments are filed with the city clerk as provided in section 8-73. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-21, § 2, 3-9-98) 
Sec. 8-73. - Copies of codes and amendments filed with clerk. 
    An official copy of the regulatory code adopted in this article, and official copies of amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. Such copies shall be official copies of the codes and amendments. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-21, § 2, 3-9-98) 
Sec. 8-74. - Penalties for violations of fire prevention code. 
(a)  Compliance responsibility for enforcement. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including all requirements of the current edition of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code adopted herein, shall be enforced by the fire marshal. The fire marshal, in exercising his enforcement responsibilities, shall employ enforcement alternatives that most effectively secure compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  Violations. Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, including the current edition of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code adopted herein, or who shall erect, alter or repair in violation of any specifications or plans submitted and approved herein, shall be deemed to have committed a violation of this chapter, including the current edition of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code, or any lawful order issued or plan approved herein; or any architect, builder, contractor, engineer, agent or other person who acts in concert, participates, directs or assists in the creation or maintenance of a violation of this article or any order issued or plan approved herein; or any person who shall erect or use any land, building or structure or any part thereof contrary to this article, the current edition of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code, any order issued or plan approved herein; or any person who shall omit, neglect or refuse to do any act provided for in this article, including the current edition of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code, or any order issued or plan approved herein, shall be held responsible for a violation of this chapter and be subject to the penalties and remedies herein provided. 
(c)  Penalties and remedies. Enforcement may be by any one (1) or a combination of the following methods, and the institution of an action under any of these methods shall not relieve any party from any other criminal or civil proceeding prescribed for violations. 
(1)  Criminal offense. A violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor offense as provided by General Statutes section 14-4, and the maximum fine or term of imprisonment, or both, as authorized by law is hereby imposed. 
(2)  Civil penalty. Any act constituting a violation shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the following amounts: 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate any technical provisions of the current edition of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code which creates an imminent safety to life shall be subject to a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall exceed any lawfully posted occupancy shall be subject to a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per person in excess of the posted occupancy. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall lock, block or obstruct an exit shall be subject to a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per exit for a first violation, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per exit for a second violation and five hundred dollars ($500.00) per exit for a third and all subsequent violations. 
No penalty shall be assessed until the person alleged to be in violation has been notified of the violation by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service (inspection). Any fire inspection officer who has a reason to believe that a violation of this chapter or the aforesaid technical provisions of the current edition of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code has been committed shall either send a civil penalty citation to the violator by certified mail or personally deliver such citation to the violator stating the nature of the violation, the penalty to be imposed upon the violator, and shall direct the violator to pay the penalty to the City Clerk, P. O. Drawer 1180, Rocky Mount, 27801 within fifteen (15) days of receipt. 
(3)  Appeals to civil penalty. Any person(s) cited for violating any provisions of this chapter may appeal such civil penalty to the fire chief, no later than five (5) business days from issuance of the civil penalty. The appeal shall be in writing and shall state appellant reason(s) for filing such appeal. The fire chief shall investigate such appeal, and shall render a decision based on evidence shown no later than five (5) business days from date appeal was filed. Such findings of the fire chief shall be in writing and shall be binding. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-21, § 2, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-06-99, §§ 1a, 1c, 1d, 12-11-06; Ord. No. O-2010-84, § 1.D., 10-11-10) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2010-84, § 1.D., adopted Oct. 11, 2010, changed the title of § 8-74 from "Penalties for violations of North Carolina Fire Prevention Code" to "Penalties for violations of fire prevention code." This historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Chapter 9 - GAS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; explosives, Ch. 7; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; housing, Ch. 11; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 13; utilities, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference- Interfering with gas appliances; G.S. § 14-151. 

Sec. 9-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known or may be cited as the gas ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 24-1) 
Sec. 9-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consumer means any person using gas, including gas for residential, commercial or industrial purposes or any combination of such purposes. 
    Gas means artificial gas, natural gas or mixed gas consisting of both artificial and natural gas; undiluted liquefied petroleum gas; butane gas. 
    Gas appliance means any appliance or device utilizing gas in its operation. 
    Gas distributor means a person or company holding and exercising a franchise, license or permit to distribute gas within the gas service area of the city, including the gas division of the utility department of the city. 
    Gas facility means piping, fittings, meters or other devices used for the distribution, transmission or delivery of gas to or for use in gas appliances. 
    Gas service area of the city means that area embraced within the corporate limits of the city and within one (1) mile thereof. 
    Permittee means a person having a valid permit issued under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Vent and vent connector means a pipe, flue or chimney designed or installed to carry the products of combustion from a gas appliance to the outside atmosphere. 
(Code 1967, § 24-2) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 9-3. - Standards applicable. 
    The construction, installation, extension, maintenance, alteration or repair of any gas facility, gas appliance, vent or vent connector, or any other work pertaining to gas facilities and gas appliances within the purview of this chapter shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and with the requirements, standards and provisions of the National Fuel Gas Code (ANSI Z223.1-1988; NFPA54-1988), Volume III, North Carolina State Building Code, 1980 Edition with amendments, "American Standard Requirements for Installation of Domestic Gas Conversion Burners," current edition (ANSI Z21.8-1971 with addendums), and section 2 of the "American Standard Code for Gas and Air Piping in Industrial Installations" (A.S.A. B31, section 2). All such code provisions are on file in the office of the city clerk and available for public inspection, and are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this chapter to the same extent as if included in verbatim from and constituting standards of the city for the purposes of this chapter. If any of the provisions of such codes conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall govern and be controlling. All amendments and additions to the provisions of the codes cited in this section shall before becoming effective be adopted by reference by the city council and shall be filed with the city clerk. Such amendments or additions thereupon shall become amendments and additions hereto and shall have the same force and effect as the original codes herein identified. 
(Code 1967, § 24-3) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; housing, Ch. 11; utilities, Ch. 21. 
Sec. 9-4. - Adoption of standards for liquefied petroleum gas. 
    All the provisions and requirements of the standards for the design, installation and construction of containers and pertinent equipment for the storage and handling of liquefied petroleum gases, as recommended by the National Fire Protection Association's copyrighted pamphlet No. 58, 1986 with addendums, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as fully and completely as though set out herein in verbatim. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with such provisions and requirements within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 24-4) 
Sec. 9-5. - Liability of city. 
    This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or any official or employee thereof any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by any defect in any gas facility or appliance or by any work in connection therewith; nor shall the city or any official or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections authorized hereunder or by the issuance of any certificate of approval, permit or license hereunder by the inspections services division. 
(Code 1967, § 24-5) 
Sec. 9-6. - Enforcement. 
    The inspections services division shall and is authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The city shall promulgate and enforce reasonable rules and regulations for the carrying out the provisions and intent of this chapter. The inspections services division, upon presentation of proper credentials, may enter any building or premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making inspections and ascertaining whether there has been compliance with the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the division to confer, from time to time, with appropriate representatives of the gas company, the local health department and the local fire department and otherwise obtain from proper sources all helpful information and advice respecting the safe and proper operations of gas facilities and gas appliances, and the division shall present to the city council recommendations for its consideration with reference thereto. 
(Code 1967, § 24-7) 
Sec. 9-7. - Permit required. 
    No construction, installation, extension, alteration or repair of a gas facility or the gas control components of a gas appliance shall be done unless the person doing the work first obtains a permit therefor from the inspection services division; provided, however, that a permit is not required for adjusting any gas appliance or for the repair of leaks in any gas facility in which the supplying meter was not locked due to an unsafe condition. Each permit shall state the kind of work to be performed thereunder and that it shall be designated in the permit. Such permit shall also state the location by street and number of the consumer's premises where such work is to be done and shall be valid only for the location so stated. A separate permit shall be issued for each consumer's premises and shall terminate one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance unless extended by the inspections services division for good and sufficient cause. The city shall collect a fee in accordance with the schedule of fees adopted by the city council and on file in the office of the supervisor of inspections. 
(Code 1967, § 24-12; Ord. No. 0-02-104, § 1a, 11-11-02) 
Sec. 9-8. - Effect of permit. 
    The issuance or granting of a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for or approval of any violation of the provisions hereof or any other applicable law. No permit purporting to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter shall be valid. 
(Code 1967, § 24-13) 
Sec. 9-9. - Temporary use of gas. 
    When only the temporary use of gas is desired, the inspections services division, upon application, may issue a permit for the temporary use for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days, provided that the consumer's gas facility is given a test similar to that required for any facility for which a longer use is contemplated. 
(Code 1967, § 24-14) 
Sec. 9-10. - Interfering with gas company facilities. 
    No person, unless in the employ of the gas company or having express authorization of the gas company shall repair, alter or open a gas facility of the gas company or set or remove a gas service meter or do any other work on the gas supply system of the gas company. 
(Code 1967, § 24-15) 
Sec. 9-11. - Emergency repairs. 
    In the event of any emergency endangering the life, health, safety or property of any person necessitating immediate repairs to any gas facility or gas appliance, such emergency repairs may be done without first obtaining the permit required by this chapter. Not later than the next succeeding business day the permit required under this chapter shall be applied for. 
(Code 1967, § 24-16) 
Sec. 9-12. - Notice requesting inspection. 
    When any work done under a permit issued by the inspections services division is completed and ready for inspection, the person to whom the permit has been issued shall, within twenty-four (24) hours after completion, give notice to the gas inspector that the same has been completed and is ready for inspection. The inspections services division shall cause the work to be inspected within forty-eight (48) hours thereafter to see that the work done conforms to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 24-17) 
Sec. 9-13. - Certificate of approval. 
    Upon the completion of the work for which a permit has been issued the inspections services division shall issue a certificate of approval if, after inspection, it is found that such work has complied with the provisions of this chapter and has been performed in full conformity with this chapter. A duplicate of each certificate of approval shall be delivered to the gas company and used as its authority to grant gas service. The form and contents of such certificate shall be prescribed by the city. 
(Code 1967, § 24-18) 
Sec. 9-14. - Disconnection of dangerous or defective facilities. 
    The inspections services division is authorized to cause to be disconnected any gas facility or appliance connected before a certificate of approval has been issued which upon inspection is found defective or in such condition as to endanger life, health, safety or property. In all cases where such disconnection is made a notice shall be affixed thereto and shall state that the same has been disconnected by the inspections services division, together with the reason or reasons therefor, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove the notice or to reconnect the gas facility or appliance until authorized by the inspections services division to do so. 
(Code 1967, § 24-19) 
Sec. 9-15. - Privilege license. 
    No person shall construct, install, extend, alter, repair or improve any gas facility or gas appliance within the gas service area of the city unless such person has first procured a privilege license therefor from the inspections services division, or unless such person works under the direct supervision of a licensed gas serviceman. All applications for such license shall be in writing, upon forms to be prescribed by the city. All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire June 30 next following the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked as herein provided, shall be nontransferable and shall be posted conspicuously to public view in the principal place of business of the licensee. 
(Code 1967, § 24-20) 
Sec. 9-16. - Liability insurance, bond required. 
    Before any license is granted to any person as provided in this chapter, such person shall file with the city a certificate or other evidence that he has in force a comprehensive general liability insurance policy including products liability-completed operations, with coverage for the hazards of explosion, collapse and damage to underground equipment, with limits of not less than one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) for bodily injury to any one (1) person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) bodily injury for any one (1) accident and sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00) property damage for any one (1) accident. Such policy shall be issued by an insurer licensed to do business in the state and may be procured in the name of the person by which the licensee is employed. In addition such person shall give a good and sufficient bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Code 1967, § 24-21) 
Sec. 9-17. - Rough piping inspection. 
    Rough piping inspections shall be made by the inspections services division after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed, before such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixture or gas appliance has been attached thereto (ANSI Z223.1, NFPA54). 
(Code 1967, § 24-22) 
Sec. 9-18. - Final piping inspection. 
    Test or final piping inspection for the city shall be made by the inspection services division after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions thereof which are to be concealed by plaster or otherwise have been installed but before being concealed and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been attached thereto. This inspection shall include the test procedure for gas piping in accordance with the International Fuel Gas Code (§ 406.4.1). All tools, apparatus, labor and assistance necessary for the test shall be furnished by the permittee. All piping connected to the supplying meter shall be rigid and securely supported. 
(Code 1967, § 24-23; Ord. No. 0-02-104, § 1b, 11-11-02) 
Sec. 9-19. - New permit required after twelve months' disuse. 
    A new permit and pipe test shall be required for a facility which has been piped for gas, but has been inactive (no gas on facility) for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months or more. 
(Code 1967, § 24-24) 
Sec. 9-20. - Defective work or materials. 
    If the inspection shows that defective materials have been used or defective workmanship has been performed in the construction, installation, alteration, repair or extension of any gas pipe fixture in or on any consumer's premises, such defective materials or work shall be replaced by the permittee within three (3) days, after which the inspections services division shall reinspect the replaced materials or work. 
(Code 1967, § 24-25) 
Sec. 9-21. - Gas company may refuse service to defective facility. 
    The gas company is authorized to discontinue or refuse to supply gas for any gas facility or gas appliance which it may find to be defective or leaky or in such condition as to endanger life, health, safety or property. In such case, the gas company shall immediately give written notice of discontinuance or refusal of service to the inspections services division and to the consumers. The inspections services division shall immediately make an investigation of the conditions reported by the gas company and it shall be unlawful for any person to reconnect the gas facility or appliance until authorized by the inspection services division. 
(Code 1967, § 24-26) 
Sec. 9-22. - Approval of new and used gas appliances. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install or use any new gas appliance which has not been approved by the inspections services division. If a new gas appliance is approved by the American Gas Association Testing Laboratories or "Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc." it shall be considered an approved appliance within the meaning of this section provided it is marked or labeled with a distinctive trademark or name as a means of identification and bears information showing the approval of such laboratories and the rated heat input in Btu per hour. All hot water heaters shall be equipped with an approved one hundred (100) percent complete shut-off-type pilot; and all heating appliances in excess of twenty-five thousand (25,000) Btu shall be equipped with an approved one hundred (100) percent complete shut-off pilot. 
(b)  All automatic safety devices used in connection with gas appliances must be of the one hundred (100) percent safety shut-off type which means that both the burner and pilot will be extinguished in case of an interruption or if the pilot goes out. The automatic safety device also must be controlled by an approved device which when properly installed will, within a matter of seconds, automatically shut off the entire flow to the gas appliance. All burners that are equipped with electrically ignited pilots and are approved, in addition to the electrically ignited pilots must also be equipped with a constant burning pilot, one hundred (100) percent shutoff. 
(c)  Used gas appliances hereafter installed for use on consumer's premises shall be approved by the inspections services division for safety and shall be identified accordingly. 
(Code 1967, § 24-27) 
Sec. 9-23. - Exceeding rated capacity. 
    In no case shall a gas appliance be fired or adjusted to pass a greater amount of gas than the rated capacity of the particular gas appliance. 
(Code 1967, § 24-28) 
Sec. 9-24. - Repairs or alterations. 
    Repairs or alterations to gas facilities or gas appliances shall be made with such materials, by such methods and according to such standards as are provided for by this chapter for new work except when in the opinion of the inspections services division it is impractical to do so. 
(Code 1967, § 24-29) 
Sec. 9-25. - Use of unlined chimneys. 
    No unlined chimney shall be used as a gas vent unless specifically approved by the inspection services division. All brick, concrete or masonry chimneys should be provided with an approved corrosion-resistant liner. (Refer to North Carolina State Building Code, section 1006.) 
(Code 1967, § 24-30) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8. 
Sec. 9-26. - Use of existing flues. 
    No existing flues shall be used to vent gas appliances unless it will deliver the products of gas combustion to the outer atmosphere in a manner in accordance with accepted standards for the protection of health and safety and as approved by the inspections services division. (Refer to North Carolina State Building Code, section 1006.) 
(Code 1967, § 24-31) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8. 
Sec. 9-27. - Vent and vent connection for heaters. 
    No person shall install or use any gas-fired water heater or room heater without a proper vent and vent connection unless specifically approved by the American Gas Association, Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., or the inspection services division. Such approval shall be so designated on the nameplate. (Refer to North Carolina State Building Code, section 1006.) 
(Code 1967, § 24-32) 
Cross reference- Housing, Ch. 11. 
Sec. 9-28. - Vents for gas appliances. 
    Type C vents shall not be used to vent gas appliances directly to the outside atmosphere. Any single wall vent shall be considered a type C vent unless such vent has been approved as type B vent by the inspections services division. (Refer to North Carolina State Building Code, section 1006.) 
(Code 1967, § 24-33) 
Cross reference- Housing, Ch. 11. 
Sec. 9-29. - Black flue pipe. 
    No person shall install any black flue pipe for the purpose of venting products of combustion for a gas-fired appliance. (Refer to North Carolina State Building Code, section 1006.) 
(Code 1967, § 24-34) 
Cross reference- Housing, Ch. 11. 
Sec. 9-30. - Annoying vents. 
    No person shall permit or suffer any vent to unduly annoy the residents, occupants or owners or any building in the neighborhood. If such annoyance is caused by any vent, the inspections services division shall cause the vent to be altered, relocated or improved, or carried to such heights as may be necessary for the protection of the neighboring property. (Refer to North Carolina State, Building Code, section 1006.) 
(Code 1967, § 24-38) 
Sec. 9-31. - Cleaning of converted appliances. 
    All heating appliances which are converted to gas shall be vacuumed, cleaned and brushed down. 
(Code 1967, § 24-39) 
Sec. 9-32. - Location of shut-off service. 
    Gas service shutoffs shall be installed on all new service lines, including replacements, at the curb or property line for each service or at an easily accessible place outside of the building served. 
(Code 1967, § 24-40) 
Sec. 9-33. - Underground service lines. 
    All underground service piping shall rise above ground before entering a building or shall pass through a vented pit or encasement adjacent to the building. 
(Code 1967, § 24-41) 
Sec. 9-34. - Gastight pipes. 
    Any gas line entering a building underground shall be sealed gastight at the building line in a manner approved by the inspection services division. (Refer to pamphlet NFPA No. 54.) 
(Code 1967, § 24-42) 
Sec. 9-35. - Conversion of appliances to gas. 
    Before a natural gas supply is finally approved by the gas company to a consumer who has previously been using butane or other liquefied petroleum gases, the consumer shall have all appliances properly adjusted to ensure safe operation of the burners and proper combustion of the gas. 
(Code 1967, § 24-43) 
Sec. 9-36. - Devices for reducing gas consumption. 
    No person shall install or use any device intended as an adjunct or addition to a gas appliance or to be suspended above or wholly or partially to enclose any burner of a gas appliance in such manner as to reduce the effectiveness of the ignition of the gas issuing from the burner or impair combustion of the burner. No person shall cause gas supplied by the gas company to bypass the meter by which the amount of gas supplied by the company is measured. 
(Code 1967, § 24-44) 
Sec. 9-37. - Proximity of gas line to water line. 
    No person shall install a gas service line on a consumer's premises in the same ditch as the water service line without written permission of the city water department. 
(Code 1967, § 24-45) 
Sec. 9-38. - Unauthorized devices. 
    No person shall sell or offer to sell, lease, connect or install within the gas service area of the city any device purporting to reduce the effectiveness of ignition of the gas issuing from the burner, or impair the combustion of such burner. 
(Code 1967, § 24-46) 
Sec. 9-39. - Prohibited pipe installations. 
    Rubber, plastic or nonmetallic pipe shall not be used in any house piping for natural gas; for L.P. installations the provisions of NFPA Pamphlet No. 58 shall govern. 
(Code 1967, § 24-47) 
Chapter 10 - HEALTH, SANITATION AND NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; animals, Ch. 4; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; explosives, Ch. 7; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 13; parks and recreation, Ch. 15; solid waste, Ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, Ch. 19; traffic and vehicles, Ch. 20; utilities, Ch. 21; vehicles for hire, Ch. 22; land development regulations, App. A. 
State Law reference- Abatement of health nuisances, G.S. § 160A-193; junked and abandoned motor vehicles, G.S. §§ 160A-303, 160A-303.2; nuisance as subject of action, G.S. § 1-539; public health, G.S. Ch. 130A; littering, G.S. § 14-399. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Fish trucks. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any fish truck or fish-bearing vehicle to permit water to drain from such vehicle in the city. It shall also be unlawful to park within the city any such fish-bearing vehicle unless adequate provision is made to take care of such refuse water by its drainage into buckets or other suitable receptacles and disposed of in a sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1967, § 10-39) 
Cross reference- Peddlers and solicitors, § 13-66 et seq.; traffic and vehicles, Ch. 20; trucks and other commercial vehicles, § 20-181 et seq. 
Secs. 10-2-10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOSQUITO CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Mosquito control, G.S. § 130A-346 et seq. 

Sec. 10-26. - Definition. 
    For the purpose of this article, the term "collection of water" shall be held to mean and be those contained in ditches, pools, ponds (natural or artificial), excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, foundations, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs, urns, cans, bottles, tubs, buckets, tires, house roof gutters, toilet tanks or other similar containers. 
(Code 1967, § 10-22) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-27. - Presumption of violation. 
    The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are there, and failure to prevent such breeding within three (3) days after notice by the superintendent of environmental services shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 10-23) 
Sec. 10-28. - Enforcement. 
    Should the person responsible for the condition giving rise to the breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take necessary measures to prevent the same, within three (3) days after due notice has been given to him, the city is hereby authorized to do so. All necessary cost incurred by it for this purpose shall be a charge against the property owner or other person offending, as the case may be. 
(Code 1967, § 10-24) 
Sec. 10-29. - Breeding places. 
    It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit within the city any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, unless such collection of water is treated so as to effectually prevent such breeding. 
(Code 1967, § 10-25) 
Sec. 10-30. - Right of entry. 
    For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the superintendent of environmental services or his duly authorized agent may at all reasonable times enter any premises within his jurisdiction. 
(Code 1967, § 10-26) 
Sec. 10-31. - Methods of treatment. 
    The method of treatment of any collection of water directed toward the prevention of breeding of mosquitoes shall be approved by the superintendent of environmental services, and may be one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Screening with wire netting of at least sixteen (16) meshes to the inch each way or with any other material which will effectually prevent the ingress or egress of mosquitoes; 
(2)  Complete emptying every seven (7) days of unscreened containers, together with their thorough drying or cleaning; 
(3)  Using an approved larvicide applied under the direction of the superintendent of environmental services; 
(4)  Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and other obstructions, and stocking with mosquito-destroying fish; 
(5)  Proper disposal by the removal or destruction of tin cans, tin boxes, broken or empty bottles and similar articles likely to hold water; 
(6)  Effective drainage of all impounded water in ditches, pools, ponds, excavation, holes, depressions and marshes. 
(Code 1967, § 10-27) 
Secs. 10-32-10-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 13; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, Ch. 19; traffic and vehicles, Ch. 20; zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Abatement of public health nuisances authorized, G.S. § 160A-193. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-51. - Distribution of handbills. 
(a)  The word "distribute," for the purposes of this section shall mean and include the scattering, throwing, handing out, or any other means of dispensing circulars, handbills or other printed matter. 
(b)  No person shall distribute handbills or advertisements of any kind by placing or throwing the same on any street or lot, or otherwise. Such handbills or advertisements shall be rolled or securely bound and placed upon the front porch or stoop or under a piece of furniture thereon of each house where such advertising matter is left. 
(Code 1967, §§ 3-5, 3-6) 
Sec. 10-52. - Spillage from vehicles. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any public street or highway within the city limits unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substance may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining such roadway. 
(b)  Trucks, trailers or other vehicles when loaded with rock, gravel, stone or other similar substances which could blow, leak, sift or drop shall not be driven or moved on any public street or highway within the city limits unless the height of the load against all four (4) walls does not extend above a horizontal line six (6) inches below their tops when loaded at the loaded point or, if not so loaded, unless the load is securely covered by a tarpaulin or some other suitable covering, or unless it is otherwise constructed so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking, blowing or otherwise escaping therefrom. 
(c)  Trucks, trailers or other vehicles when loaded with limbs, leaves, sand, refuse or other substances which could blow, leak, sift or drop shall not be driven or moved on any public streets or highway within the city limits unless the load is securely covered by a tarpaulin or some other suitable covering or unless it is otherwise constructed so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking, blowing or otherwise escaping therefrom. 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, Ch. 20. 
Secs. 10-53-10-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WEEDS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2009-56, § 2, adopted June 8, 2009, repealed and re-enacted division 2. Formerly, division 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. O-2009-31, § 1, 4-13-09. 

Sec. 10-71. - Noxious weeds. 
    The city council hereby finds and determines any growth of weeds or grass to a greater height than eighteen (18) inches that is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the property line of a residential structure, place of business, or any other structure occupied or intended to be occupied for human habitation, whether temporarily or permanently, on real estate within the city limits or within one (1) mile thereof constitutes a public nuisance and is detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare in that such conditions lead to unsightliness, the infestation of rodents, birds, snakes, insects, or other animals or fowl, and decreases in property values, and that such conditions entitle the city to exercise its police power to protect the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens and residents and has therefore declared such conditions to be public nuisances and to require the abatement of the same. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-56, § 2, 6-9-09) 
Sec. 10-72. - Enforcement officer; right of entry. 
    The director of public works shall appoint an enforcement officer to enforce the provisions of this division. The enforcement officer or his or her designee shall have the right of entry on any premises at reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection or enforcement, upon presentation of proper credentials. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-56, § 2, 6-9-09) 
Sec. 10-73. - Abatement procedure; notice. 
    Upon the discovery of a condition constituting a public nuisance, as defined in section 10-71, the enforcement officer shall give notice to the owner of the property where the condition exists to cause the abatement of such condition. The owner is responsible for abating any nuisance on property that is under his control, including, but not limited to, curbs, right-of-way, one-half (1/2) of alleyways and grassy areas between the sidewalk and roadway. The notification shall be personally served or sent by first class mail to the owner of the property where the condition exists based on the owner contact information maintained by either the Nash County or Edgecombe County Tax Office, as appropriate. Such owner shall have seven (7) calendar days from the date the notice is mailed to abate the public nuisance. If the identity or whereabouts of the owner or his agent is unknown and cannot be ascertained by the enforcement officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, then a copy of such notice shall be posted on the property. In the case of service by posting, the owner shall have seven (7) calendar days from the date of posting to abate the public nuisance. 
    The notice to abate shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE TO ABATE PUBLIC NUISANCE 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that as of the ___ day of ________, 20___, there existed on the real property commonly known or identified as _____ , 
the following conditions which constitute a public nuisance as defined in section 10-71 of the Code of the City of Rocky Mount: 
_____
_____
_____ . 
NOTICE IS FURTHER GIVEN that you have seven (7) calendar days from the date of service of this notice to abate the above described public nuisance by taking the following action: _____
_____
_______. Failure to abate the nuisance is a misdemeanor and may subject you to a fine. In addition, if you fail to abate the nuisance the city may remedy the condition and charge you with the cost of abating the nuisance, and in such case shall have a lien on the real estate where the condition arose to be collected as unpaid taxes. If the city abates the nuisance, the hourly labor rate charged by the city's contractor will be $_____ and the hourly equipment rate charged by the city's contractor will be $_____. 
Dated: _____ _____Enforcement officer Address: _____ _____Telephone: _____  
(Ord. No. O-2009-56, § 2, 6-9-09; Ord. No. O-2011-85, § 2A, 9-12-11) 
Sec. 10-74. - Abatement by city. 
    If the owner upon whom a notice to abate a noxious condition or nuisance has been served pursuant to section 10-73 fails, neglects or refuses to remedy the condition within the time specified in the notice, the enforcement officer shall forthwith cause such condition to be removed, abated, or remedied. The cost of such action shall be paid by the owner, and if not paid shall be a lien upon the real estate or premises upon which the condition arose, and shall be collected as unpaid taxes. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-56, § 2, 6-9-09) 
Sec. 10-75. - Right of appeal. 
    Any person served with a notice to abate shall have a right of appeal to the city council to contest the amount of the assessment cost charged by the city to abate the nuisance and that if such assessment is not paid the same shall be a lien against the real estate where the condition arose. Notice of appeal must be given to the enforcement officer within ten (10) calendar days from the date of assessment billing. If an appeal is filed, the appellant shall be given written notice by first class mail of the date, time and place that the city council will hear the appeal. Such notice shall be mailed not later than ten (10) business days before the appeal is to be heard. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-56, § 2, 6-9-09) 
Sec. 10-76. - City council to hear appeal. 
    The city council shall hear any appeal taken from an assessment billing levied by the enforcement officer as soon as practicable. The city council may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the assessment or findings set forth therein, and shall make any order, requirement, decision or determination that in its opinion should have been made, and to that end that the city council shall have all the power and authority of the enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-56, § 2, 6-9-09) 
Sec. 10-77. - Effect of voluntary abatement. 
    If the public nuisance is abated by the owner of the property within seven (7) calendar days after mailing of the notice, then the city's enforcement action as to the condition described in the notice to abate shall terminate. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-56, § 2, 6-9-09) 
Sec. 10-78. - Failure to abate public nuisance. 
    Any owner who fails to abate a public nuisance as defined in this division within seven (7) calendar days from the date of mailing a notice to abate shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined as provided in G.S. § 14-4. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-56, § 2, 6-9-09) 
Sec. 10-79. - Annual notice to chronic violators. 
    A chronic violator is any person who owns property whereupon, in the previous calendar year, the city took action at least three (3) times under this division to abate the public nuisance caused by overgrown grass or weeds as defined in section 10-71. The enforcement officer may, by annual notice, notify such chronic violator that the city shall, without further notice in the calendar year in which the annual notice is given, take action under section 10-74 to abate the nuisance, with the cost of such action to be a lien upon the real estate or premises upon which the condition arose, and shall be collected as unpaid taxes. The annual notice shall be served by registered or certified mail upon the chronic violator. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-56, § 2, 6-9-09) 
Secs. 10-80-10-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC NUISANCES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2009-56, § 2, adopted June 8, 2009, repealed and re-enacted division 3. Formerly, division 3 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. O-2009-31, § 1, 4-13-09. 

Sec. 10-91. - Public nuisances enumerated. 
    The city council, having found and determined that the existence of any one or more of the following conditions on real estate within the city limits or within one (1) mile thereof constitutes a public nuisance and is detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare in that such conditions lead to unsightliness, blight, fire hazards, infestation of rodents, birds, insects, snakes, or other animals or fowl, increases in crime in neighborhoods, or decreases in property values and that such abuses of property entitle the city to exercise its police power to protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens and residents and has therefore decided to declare the following conditions to be public nuisances and to require the abatement of the same: 
(1)  Material which consists of such matter and material as trash, rubbish, refuse, debris, or similar matter, including, but not limited to, rubble, asphalt, concrete, plaster, dry wall, tile, rocks, bricks, piles of dirt or soil, building materials, demolition materials, crates, cartons, containers, boxes, plastic, plumbing fixtures, appliances, electronics, furniture, mattresses, tree limbs and trimmings from plants and trees, automobile parts, machinery or parts thereof, scrap metal and other pieces of ferrous and nonferrous metal, cans, bottles, and barrels. 
(2)  Any accumulation of animal or vegetable matter that is offensive by virtue of strong odors or vapors or by the inhabitance therein of birds, rats, mice, snakes or vermin of any kind, or any condition on any real estate that attracts or permits birds, insects, rodents, or other animals or fowl to congregate, either continually or periodically. 
(3)  Any of the following enumerated and described conditions occurring in an open place: household or office furniture, any household fixtures, white goods or other appliances, metal products of any kind and similar items not designed to withstand the elements or for outdoor use. This subsection shall not prevent: 
a.  The use of household furniture on a totally enclosed porch having a roof, walls, screens, or glass windows, or 
b.  The use of furniture in good condition which is designed for outdoor use, such as patio or lawn furniture, on porches or landings or in yard areas or other open places. 
(4)  Any house, apartment, or other building, structure, or mobile home, or part thereof, intended to be occupied for human habitation, whether temporarily or permanently, that is open to vagrants or minors due to its lack of windows or doors, or is otherwise open and accessible by vagrants or minors and has been used or occupied by vagrants or minors due to its open nature. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-56, § 2, 6-9-09) 
Sec. 10-92. - Enforcement officer; right of entry. 
    The director of public works shall appoint an enforcement officer to enforce the provisions of this division. The enforcement officer or his or her designee shall have the right of entry on any premises at reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection or enforcement, upon presentation of proper credentials. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-56, § 2, 6-9-09) 
Sec. 10-93. - Abatement procedure; notice. 
(a)  Upon the discovery of a condition constituting a public nuisance, as defined in section 10-91, the enforcement officer shall give notice to the owner and/or his agent, and occupant, if any, of the property where the condition exists to cause the abatement of such condition. The notification shall be personally served or sent by first-class mail and certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner and occupant, if any, of the property where the condition exists. Such owner, agent, and occupant, if any, shall have seven (7) calendar days from the date of receipt to abate the public nuisance. If the identity or whereabouts of the owner or his agent is unknown and cannot be ascertained by the enforcement officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, then a copy of such notice shall be posted on the property. In the case of service by posting, the owner, agent, and occupant, if any, shall have seven (7) calendar days from the date of posting to abate the public nuisance. 
(b)  The notice to abate shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE TO ABATE PUBLIC NUISANCE 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that as of the ___ day of ________, 20___, there existed on the real property commonly known or identified as _____ 
_____ , 
the following conditions which constitute a public nuisance as defined in section 10-91 of the Code of the City of Rocky Mount: 
_____
_____
_____ . 
NOTICE IS FURTHER GIVEN that you have seven (7) calendar days from the date of service of this notice to abate the above described public nuisance by taking the following action: _____
_____
_______. Failure to abate the nuisance is a misdemeanor and may subject you to a fine. In addition, if you fail to abate the nuisance, the city may remedy the condition and charge you with the cost of abating the nuisance, and in such case shall have a lien on the real estate where the condition arose to be collected as unpaid taxes. If the city abates the nuisance the approximate cost of such abatement will be $_______. 
Please note that material removed in order to comply with this notice is not eligible for collection by the City of Rocky Mount Environmental Services Division as part of routine solid waste collection. 
Dated: _____ _____Enforcement officer Address: _____ _____Telephone: _____  
(Ord. No. O-2009-56, § 2, 6-9-09) 
Sec. 10-94. - Right of appeal. 
    Any person served with a notice to abate shall have a right of appeal to the community appeals board established pursuant to subsection 11-18(b) of the City Code. Notice of appeal must be given to the enforcement officer within ten (10) calendar days from the date of service of the notice to abate. If an appeal is filed, the appellant shall be given written notice by first-class mail of the date, time and place that the community appeals board will hear the appeal. Such notice shall be mailed not later than ten (10) business days before the appeal is to be heard. The notice of the right of appeal shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF APPEAL 
If you believe that the enforcement officer has made an erroneous determination you have the right to appeal the decision to the community appeals board by giving written notice of such appeal to the enforcement officer at the address shown above within ten (10) calendar days from the date of receipt of the notice or publication of the notice to abate. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-56, § 2, 6-9-09; Ord. No. O-2011-85, § 2B, 9-12-11) 
Sec. 10-95. - Community appeals board to hear appeal. 
    The community appeals board shall hear any appeal taken from a notice to abate served by the enforcement officer as soon as practicable. The community appeals board may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the notice to abate or findings set forth therein, and shall make any order, requirement, decision or determination that in its opinion should have been made, to that end that the community appeals board shall have all the power and authority of the enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-56, § 2, 6-9-09; Ord. No. O-2011-85, § 2C, 9-12-11) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2011-85, § 2C, adopted Sept. 12, 2011, changed the title of § 10-95 from "City council to hear appeal" to "Community appeals board to hear appeal". This historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Sec. 10-96. - Effect of voluntary abatement. 
    If the public nuisance is abated by the owner or occupant of the property within seven (7) calendar days after service of the notice, then the city's enforcement action as to the condition described in the notice to abate shall terminate. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-56, § 2, 6-9-09) 
Sec. 10-97. - Failure to abate public nuisance. 
(a)  Any owner or occupant who fails to abate a public nuisance as defined in this division within seven (7) calendar days from the date of service of a notice to abate or within seven (7) calendar days after the decision of the community appeals board, in the event of an appeal, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and/or fined as provided in G.S. 14-4 and as set forth in the city's administrative policy manual. Fines assessed under this subsection shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) or greater. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  A repeat offender is any person who owns property whereupon, in the previous or current calendar year, has received a notice to abate from the city. Repeat offenders shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and/or receive an increased fine as provided in G.S. 14-4 and as set forth in the city's administrative policy manual. Fines assessed under this subsection shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) or greater. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-56, § 2, 6-9-09; Ord. No. O-2011-85, § 2D, 9-12-11) 
Sec. 10-98. - Abatement by city. 
    If the owner or occupant upon whom a notice to abate a public nuisance has been served fails, neglects, or refuses to remedy the condition within seven (7) calendar days from the date of service of such notice, or within seven (7) calendar days from the date the determination of the enforcement officer is affirmed or modified by the city council in the case of an appeal, then the enforcement officer is hereby authorized to cause such condition to be abated, removed, or remedied. The cost of such action shall be paid by the owner or other person deemed responsible for the condition. If it is not paid, it shall be a lien upon the real estate or premises upon which the condition arose and shall be collected as unpaid taxes. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-56, § 2, 6-9-09) 
Sec. 10-99. - Public nuisance in the right-of-way. 
(a)  Any condition enumerated in section 10-91(1), (2), or (3) existing in the public right-of-way or in close proximity thereto which is especially dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or public safety may be summarily removed, abated, or remedied without prior notice to the owner of such matter, materials, or other property. The expense of such action shall be paid by the person in default. If the expense is not paid, it is a lien on the land or premises where the nuisance occurred or the land or premises adjacent to the right-of-way where the nuisance occurred. A lien established pursuant to this subsection shall have the same priority and be collected as unpaid taxes. 
(b)  The person in default shall be served with notice of the amount of the lien and shall have a right to appeal to the city council to contest the amount of the assessment cost charged to abate the nuisance. Notice of appeal must be given to the enforcement officer within ten (10) calendar days from the date of service of the notice setting forth the amount of the lien. If an appeal is filed, the appellant shall be given written notice by first-class mail of the date, time and place that the city council will hear the appeal. Such notice shall be mailed not later than ten (10) business days before the appeal is to be heard. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-56, § 2, 6-9-09) 
Secs. 10-100-10-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - NOISE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2009-31, § 2, adopted April 13, 2009, repealed the former div. 4, §§ 10-126-10-10-129, which pertained to public health nuisances. Section 2 of said ordinance renumbered the former div. 5 as div. 4. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 10-151. - Loud and raucous noise prohibited. 
    The generation or maintenance of any loud and raucous noise within the city limits is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any loud and raucous noise, which term shall mean any sound which, because of its volume level, duration, and character, annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, health, peace, or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities within the city limits. The term "loud and raucous noise" shall include, but shall not be limited to, the kinds of noise generated by the activities enumerated in section 10-152, except as provided in section 10-153. The term shall be limited to loud and raucous noise heard upon the public streets, in any public park, in any school or public building, or upon the grounds thereof while in use, in any church, synagogue, or other place of worship, or hospital, or upon the grounds thereof while in use, in any parking lot open to members of the public as invitees or licensees, or in any occupied residential dwelling unit or upon the grounds thereof. The term is further limited to noise which is clearly audible at a distance of more than one hundred (100) feet from the source of the noise, measured in a straight line from the noise source. 
(Ord. No. 0-93-15, § 1, 3-22-93; Ord. No. 0-94-14, § 1a, 4-11-94) 
Sec. 10-152. - Prohibited noise activities. 
    The following acts, as limited by section 10-151 and subject to the exemptions of section 10-153, are hereby declared to be public nuisances in violation of section 10-151, but the acts enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  The use or operation of any mechanical or electrical device, apparatus, or instrument to amplify, intensify, or reproduce the human voice, or to produce, reproduce, intensify or amplify any other sound when the sound from such activity is clearly audible more than one hundred (100) feet from the device, apparatus or instrument. 
(2)  The playing or operation of any radio, cassette tape player, compact disk player, or any other sound producing instrument, device or apparatus installed or located in a motor vehicle when the speaker volume is elevated to such an extent that the would is clearly audible more than one hundred (100) feet from the vehicle. The provisions of this subsection shall apply regardless of whether the vehicle is traveling upon the streets of the city, parked on public or private property or stopped in traffic. 
(3)  The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bicycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a danger signal, so as to create an unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or the sounding of such device for an unreasonable period of time, or the use of siren horns on bicycles, automobiles, or other vehicles except upon automobiles and other apparatus of the police and fire departments or upon authorized emergency service vehicles. 
(4)  The playing of any radio, cassette tape player, compact disk player, phonograph, or mechanical or nonmechanical musical or sound producing instrument in such a manner or with such volume that the sound therefrom creates a loud and raucous noise. 
(5)  The owning, keeping or harboring of any animal or bird which frequently or for continued duration howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes other sounds which disturb the reasonable comfort and peace of any person in the vicinity by creating a loud and raucous noise. 
(6)  The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair or so loaded, or in such manner or combination with other vehicles as to create by virtue of its grating, grinding or rattling sound, a loud and raucous noise. 
(7)  The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of danger. 
(Ord. No. 0-93-15, § 1, 3-22-93; Ord. No. 0-94-14, § 1b, 4-11-94) 
Sec. 10-153. - Exemptions. 
    The following acts or activities are exempt from the provisions of this division: 
(1)  The use of a permanently installed loud speaker or public address system at railroad and bus stations to announce the arrival and departure of trains and buses. 
(2)  The use of a permanently installed loud speaker or public address system at athletic stadiums to announce athletic contents. 
(3)  Musical chimes or the sounding of bells emanating from a public or religious institution or facility, provided the sound is less than fifteen (15) minutes in duration and occurs not more than three (3) times within any twenty-four-hour period. 
(4)  Sounds emanating from any authorized emergency vehicle responding to an emergency or acting in the time of emergency. 
(5)  Noise sources associated with or created by construction, repair, remodeling, demolition, or grading of any real property, provided such activities do not take place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, or at any time on Sunday. 
(6)  Noise sources associated with the maintenance of real property, provided such activities take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any day. 
(7)  Noise emanating from any burglar alarm or security device on any building, dwelling or vehicle, provided such noise terminates within thirty (30) minutes of being activated. 
(8)  Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been pre-empted by state or federal law. 
(9)  The use of a sound producing or sound amplifying device, instrument, or apparatus for nonadvertising purposes when a permit has been issued for such use pursuant to section 10-154, provided such activity is conducted in conformity with the permit. 
(Ord. No. 0-93-15, § 1, 3-22-93) 
Sec. 10-154. - Permit for mechanical sound producing device. 
(a)  Application. Each applicant for a permit to use or operate a sound producing device, instrument or apparatus within the city limits shall complete and sign an application on a form supplied by the city and file the same with the chief of police at least seven (7) days prior to the date upon which the sound producing equipment is to be used or operated. Where good cause is shown, or in the judgment of the chief of police the activity would involve significant political or religious features and therefore be entitled to enhanced deference or protection under the state or federal constitutions, the chief of police shall consider applications filed after the deadline. The application shall describe the sound producing equipment, state the specific location at which such sound producing equipment is to be used or operated, the day and the hour or hours during which it is proposed to be used or operated, and such other pertinent information as is necessary for the chief of police to carry out his duties under this section. If the sound producing equipment is to be used or operated on private property the owner of such property must consent in writing. 
(b)  Issuance of permit. The chief of police shall issue a permit for the use of the requested sound producing instrument, device or apparatus to any applicant who complies with the provisions of this section unless he finds in writing that one (1) or more of the restrictions specified in subsection (c) hereof apply, or unless the issuance of a permit for the time and location requested would overlap a previously applied for permit. Each permit issued pursuant to this section shall describe the specific location or locations at which such sound producing equipment may be used or operated thereunder, the period of time for which the sound producing equipment may be operated in such location, and shall specify such other terms and conditions as are essential to secure and protect the public safety. The person signing the application shall be required to be present at the time and place the sound producing equipment is operated or used and the permit shall be invalid unless in his possession. 
(c)  Special restrictions. The chief of police shall not issue any permit for the use of a sound producing instrument, device or apparatus: 
(1)  At any location within five hundred (500) feet of a school, courthouse, synagogue, or other place of worship, respectively, or within five hundred (500) feet of any hospital, nursing home, or other institution caring for the sick, aged or infirmed; 
(2)  At any location where the chief of police, upon investigation, shall determine that the conditions of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or both are such that the use of a sound producing instrument, device or apparatus will constitute a threat to the safety of pedestrians or vehicle operators; provided, however, that before such determination is made the chief of police shall find that it is more likely than not that the traffic count at such location on the date and time requested will exceed two hundred fifty (250) vehicles per hour, or two hundred fifty (250) pedestrians per hour, or both; 
(3)  At any location where the chief of police, upon investigation, shall determine that the conditions of street repair or other physical conditions are such that the use of a sound producing instrument, device or apparatus will deprive the public of the reasonable right to safe and peaceful enjoyment of any public street, park, or other public place, nor shall the chief of police issue a permit for any location when some other event has been scheduled with the city for the same street, park or other public place at a location within earshot of the sound producing equipment described in the application; provided, however, that before a permit is denied under this subsection because of street repair the chief of police shall find that it is more likely than not that on the date and time requested that at least one (1) lane of travel on the street will be blocked due to such repair, or if denied because of the physical condition of a street, park, or other public place that construction work has commenced or will commence near the location requested and will not be completed by the date requested; 
(4)  For a period of continued use exceeding two (2) hours without a thirty-minute break, unless the chief of police, upon investigation, determines that a longer period of time will not annoy or disturb reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities residing in the area; 
(5)  In or on any vehicle or other device while it is in motion; or 
(6)  Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
(d)  Alternate permit. If the chief of police denies any application as submitted under this section he shall grant a permit for a date, time, or place different from that requested by applicant, or subject to different requirements or conditions than requested by an applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within twenty-four (24) hours after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police on a form supplied by the city. 
(e)  Processing time; notice; right of appeal. Applications for permits to use a sound producing instrument, device or apparatus shall be processed and decisions made as expeditiously as possible, and in any event before 5:00 p.m. on the fifth business day following the day of receipt. If the application was submitted more than ten (10) days in advance of the event, the permit, alternate permit, or written notice of denial shall be mailed to the applicant. If the application was submitted less than ten (10) days in advance of the event, the police department shall exercise reasonable diligence in attempting to notify by telephone or other means. Any person aggrieved by action taken on a permit application may file a written notice of appeal, first with the city manager and then with the city council. The notice of appeal must be filed within seven (7) days from date notice of the action, regardless of the means used to convey such notice, is received by the applicant. The city manager shall act on the appeal as expeditiously as possible. The city council shall hear any appeal taken from the decision of the city manager at its next regularly scheduled meeting. In hearing any appeal the city manager or the city council may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, the action of the chief of police, or may grant an alternate permit for a date, time, or place different from that requested by the applicant or subject to different requirements or conditions than requested by an applicant. An alternate permit must be accepted in writing within twenty-four (24) hours after notice that it is available. 
(f)  [Revocation of permit.] The chief of police may revoke any permit issued hereunder for the following reasons or causes: 
(1)  The substantial violation of this division or the terms and conditions of a permit; or 
(2)  A material misstatement of any fact on the application for a permit. 
(Ord. No. 0-93-15, § 1, 3-22-93; Ord. No. 0-94-14, § 1c, d, 4-11-94) 
Secs. 10-155-10-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ABANDONED, NUISANCE, AND JUNKED VEHICLES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2009-31, § 2, adopted April 13, 2009, renumbered the former div. 6 as div. 5. 
Cross reference- Housing, Ch. 11; traffic and vehicles, Ch. 20; 

Sec. 10-176. - [Administration; enforcement.] 
    The police department and the department of public works shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this division. The police department shall be responsible for administering the removal and disposition of vehicles determined to be "abandoned" on the public streets and highways within the city and on property owned by the city. Any police officer shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this division with regard to such abandoned vehicles. The department of public works shall be responsible for administering the removal and disposition of "abandoned," "nuisance" or "junked motor vehicles" located on private property. The city may, on an annual basis, contract with private tow truck operators or towing businesses to remove, store and dispose of abandoned vehicles, nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles in compliance with this division and applicable North Carolina law. Nothing in this division shall be construed to limit the legal authority or powers of officers of the police department and the fire department in enforcing other laws or in otherwise carrying out their duties. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-17, § 1, 3-25-91) 
Sec. 10-177. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases when used in this division shall have the meaning indicated unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
    Abandoned vehicle means a motor vehicle that is: 
(1)  Left upon a street or highway in violation of a law or ordinance prohibiting parking; or 
(2)  Left on any public street or highway for longer than seven (7) days; or 
(3)  Left on property owned or operated by the city for longer than twenty-four (24) hours; or 
(4)  Left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant or lessee thereof for longer than two (2) hours. 
    Classic motor vehicle means a motor vehicle that is in high demand for restoration purposes and when restored sells for a higher price than it did when it was new. 
    Enforcement officer means the supervisory employee of the department of public works designated to enforce the provisions of this division. 
    Junked motor vehicle means a motor vehicle that does not display a current license plate lawfully upon that vehicle and that: 
(1)  Is partially dismantled or wrecked; or 
(2)  Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it was originally intended to move; or 
(3)  Is more than five (5) years old and appears to be worth less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
    Motor vehicle or vehicle means all machines designed or intended to travel over land by self-propulsion or while attached to a self-propelled vehicle. 
    Nuisance vehicle means a motor vehicle located on public or private property that is determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, or a public nuisance, including a vehicle found to be: 
(1)  A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other insects, rats or other pests; or 
(2)  A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over eight (8) inches in height; or 
(3)  A point of collection of pools or ponds of water; or 
(4)  A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil or other flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor; or 
(5)  So situated or located that there is a danger of it falling or turning over; or 
(6)  One which is a point of collection of garbage, food waste, animals waste, or any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind; or 
(7)  One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp edges of metal or glass; or 
(8)  Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and safety hazard and a public nuisance by the city council. 
    Tow means to remove a vehicle by any means and includes towing and storing the vehicle. 
    Towing fee means the fee charged for towing and storage of a vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-17, § 1, 3-25-91) 
Sec. 10-178. - Enforcement officer's right of entry. 
    The enforcement officer or his designee shall have the right, upon presentation of credentials identifying such person as an enforcement officer of the city, to enter any premises within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-17, § 1, 3-25-91) 
Sec. 10-179. - Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be an abandoned vehicle as the term is defined herein. 
(b)  Upon investigation, the enforcement officer or a police officer may determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle removed. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-17, § 1, 3-25-91) 
Sec. 10-180. - Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle. 
(b)  Upon investigation, the enforcement officer may determine and declare that a vehicle is a nuisance vehicle as defined above, and order the vehicle removed. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-17, § 1, 3-25-91) 
Sec. 10-181. - Junked motor vehicle regulated; removal authorized. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to leave or allow such vehicle to remain on the property after the vehicle has been ordered removed. 
(b)  Upon investigation, the enforcement officer may order the removal of a junked motor vehicle after finding in writing that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicles outweigh the burdens imposed on the owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle, and the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located. Such finding shall be based on a balancing of the monetary loss of the aforesaid owner(s) or apparent owner(s) against the corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing community, neighborhood or area appearance. The following, among other relevant factors, may be considered: 
(1)  Protection of property values; 
(2)  Promotion of tourism and other economic development opportunities; 
(3)  Indirect protection of public health and safety; 
(4)  Preservation of the character and integrity of the community; and 
(5)  Promotion of the conform, happiness and emotional stability of area residents. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-17, § 1, 3-25-91) 
Sec. 10-182. - Removal of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles; pre-towing notice requirements. 
    Except as set forth in section 10-183 below, an abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle which is to be removed shall be towed only after notice to the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle. In the case of a nuisance vehicle or a junked motor vehicle, if the names and mailing addresses of the registered owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle, or the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located can be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the notice shall be given by first class mail. The person who mails the notice(s) shall retain a written record to show the name(s) and address(es) to which mailed, and the date mailed. If such names and addresses cannot be ascertained or if the vehicle to be removed is an abandoned motor vehicle, notice shall be given by affixing on the windshield or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle, a notice indicating that the vehicle will be removed by the city under authority of this division. The notice shall state that the vehicle will be removed by the city on a specified date, no sooner than seven (7) days after the notice is affixed or mailed, unless the vehicle is moved by the owner or legal possessor prior to that time. 
    With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property, nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles to which notice is required to be given, if the registered owner or person entitled to possession does not remove the vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle is abandoned, a nuisance vehicle or in the case of a junked motor vehicle that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweighs the burdens, such appeal shall be made to the community appeals board. Any appeals of fines assessed pursuant to section 10-192 shall also be to the community appeals board. In the event of an appeal, further proceedings to remove the vehicle shall be stayed until the appeal is heard and decided. 
    Notice of appeal must be made to the community appeals board in writing seven (7) days after receipt of the notice or the affixing of the notice to the vehicle. The city shall send a notice of hearing to the owner setting the time and place for the hearing. The notice of hearing shall inform the owner of: 
(1)  The specific grounds for the classification of the vehicle as an abandoned, junked, or nuisance vehicle under this division; 
(2)  The schedule of towing fees and storage charges; 
(3)  The rules and regulations for the hearing; 
(4)  The opportunity to present evidence in order to show cause why the vehicle should not be removed in accordance with this division; and 
(5)  The right to have counsel present at the hearing. 
    The community appeals board shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures stated in this section. The community appeals board shall issue a written decision within five (5) days of the hearing stating its conclusion concerning whether the vehicle was in violation of this division and the reasons and evidence upon which the conclusion has been based. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by first-class mail to the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-17, § 1, 3-25-91; Ord. No. O-2011-85, § 2E, 9-12-11) 
Sec. 10-183. - Exceptions to prior notice requirement. 
    The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle may, as determined by the enforcement office, be omitted in those circumstances where there is a special need for prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and welfare. Such findings shall, in all cases, be entered by the enforcement officer or police officer in the appropriate daily records. Circumstances justifying the removal of vehicles without prior notice include: 
(1)  Vehicles abandoned on the streets. For vehicles left on the public streets and highways, the city hereby determines that immediate removal of such vehicles may be warranted when they are: 
a.  Obstructing traffic; 
b.  Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or restricting parking; 
c.  Parked in a no-stopping or standing zone; 
d.  Parked in a loading zones; 
e.  Parking in bus zones; 
f.  Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions imposed under code sections. 
(2)  Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles. With respect to abandoned or nuisance vehicles left on city-owned property other than the streets and highways, and on private property, such vehicles may be removed without giving prior notice only in those circumstances where the enforcement office finds a special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the public health, safety and welfare. By way of illustration and not of limitation, such circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstructing ingress and egress to businesses and residences, vehicles parked in such a location or manner as to pose a traffic hazard, and vehicles causing damage to public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-17, § 1, 3-25-91) 
Sec. 10-184. - Removal of vehicles; post-towing notice requirements. 
    Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which has been ordered removed may, as directed by the city, be removed to a storage garage or area by the tow truck operator or towing business contracted to perform such services for the city. Whenever such a vehicle is removed, the enforcement officer or the police officer directing removal shall immediately notify the last known registered owner of the vehicle, such notice to include the following: 
(1)  The description of the removed vehicle; 
(2)  The location where the vehicle is stored; 
(3)  The violation with which the owner is charged if any; 
(4)  The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and 
(5)  The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause hearing on the removal. 
    The city shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written notice, including the information set forth in subsections (1) through (5) above, shall also be mailed to the registered owner's last known address, unless this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his agent. 
    If the vehicle is registered in North Carolina, notice shall be given within twenty-four (24) hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the state, notice shall be given to the registered owner within seventy-two (72) hours from the removal of the vehicle. 
    Whenever an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle is removed, and such vehicle has no valid registration plates, the enforcement officer or the police officer shall make reasonable efforts, including checking the vehicle identification number, to determine the last known registered owner of the vehicle and to notify him of the information set forth in subsections (1) through (5) above. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-17, § 1, 3-25-91) 
Sec. 10-185. - Right to prohibit cause hearing before sale or final disposition of vehicle. 
    After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle or junked motor vehicle, the owner or any other person entitled to possession is entitled to a hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause existed for removing the vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed in writing with the county magistrate in the county where the vehicle was towed designated by the chief district court judge to receive such requests. The magistrate will set the hearing within seventy-two (72) hours of receipt of the request, and the hearing will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 20-219.11, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-17, § 1, 3-25-91) 
Sec. 10-186. - Redemption of vehicle during proceedings. 
    At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the towing fee, including any storage charges, or by posting a bond for double the amount of such fees and charges to the tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the removed vehicle. Upon regaining possession of a vehicle, the owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle shall not allow or engage in further violations of this division. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-17, § 1, 3-25-91) 
Sec. 10-187. - Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicle. 
    Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which is not claimed by the owner or other party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle. Disposition of such a vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the city and in accordance with Article 1 of Chapter 44A of the North Carolina General Statutes. 
Sec. 10-188. - Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property. 
    As a general policy, the city will not remove a vehicle from private property if the owner, occupant or lessee of such property could have the vehicle removed under applicable state law procedures. In no case will a vehicle be removed by the city from private property without a written request of the owner, occupant or lessee, except in those cases where a vehicle is a nuisance vehicle or is a junked motor vehicle which has been ordered removed by the enforcement officer. The city may require any person requesting the removal of an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle from private property to indemnify the city against any loss, expense or liability incurred because of the removal, storage or sale thereof. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-17, § 1, 3-25-91) 
Sec. 10-189. - Protection against criminal or civil liability. 
    No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle, for disposing of such vehicle as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-17, § 1, 3-25-91) 
Sec. 10-190. - Exceptions. 
(a)  This division shall not apply to any vehicle: 
(1)  Which is located in a bona fide "automobile graveyard" or "junkyard" as defined in G.S. § 136-143, in accordance with the "Junkyard Control Act," G.S. § 136-141 et seq.; 
(2)  Which is in an enclosed building; 
(3)  Which is on the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the operation of the enterprise and if the vehicle is stored on the property in such a manner that it is screened from view by a fence or vegetation screen; 
(4)  Which is in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city; or 
(5)  Which is used on a regular basis for business or personal use. 
(b)  This division shall not apply to classic motor vehicles as defined in section 10-177, provided the following conditions are complied with: 
(1)  The vehicle owner possesses a valid exemption permit issued by the enforcement officer. The permit shall be issued for a six-month period and may be renewed every six (6) months providing restoration progress continues to be carried on. The total permit period shall not exceed twenty-four (24) months. 
(2)  The vehicle shall be on property owned by or occupied by the vehicle owner. 
(3)  The area around and under the vehicle shall be kept free of weeds, trash and other debris. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-17, § 1, 3-25-91) 
Sec. 10-191. - Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any storage facility designated by the city any vehicle which has been impounded pursuant to the provisions of this division unless and until all towing and impoundment fees which are due, or bound in lieu of such fees, have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-17, § 1, 3-25-91) 
Sec. 10-192. - Violation a misdemeanor. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation who fails to remove any vehicle in violation of this division within seven (7) calendar days from the date of service of a notice or within seven (7) calendar days after the decision of the community appeals board in the event of appeal shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and/or fined as provided in G.S. 14-4 and as set forth in the city's administrative policy manual. Fines assessed under this subsection shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) or greater. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  A repeat offender is any person who in the previous or current calendar year has received notice pursuant to section 10-182 of the City Code. Repeat offenders shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and/or receive an increased fine as provided in G.S. 14-4 and the city's administrative policy manual. Fines assessed under this section shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) or greater. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-17, § 1, 3-25-91; Ord. No. O-2011-85, § 2F, 9-12-11) 
Secs. 10-193-10-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HAZARDOUS MATERIAL AND SUBSTANCE ABATEMENT 

Sec. 10-200. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish the authority and procedure for the city to respond to hazardous materials which have been spilled, released, or emitted into the environment and to provide a procedure to recover the cost incurred by the city in containing and cleaning up such hazardous materials. 
(Ord. No. 0-99-59, § 1, 8-9-99) 
Sec. 10-201. - Authority. 
    The fire chief or his designee shall have the authority to summarily abate, remove, or remedy hazardous materials which have been released, spilled, or emitted into the environment. The fire chief or his designee shall have the authority to enter public or private property, with or without the owner's consent, to respond to any hazardous material emergency. The fire chief or his designee shall determine the type, amount, and quantity of equipment and personnel required to adequately abate, remove, and remedy any hazardous material emergency. 
(Ord. No. 0-99-59, § 1, 8-9-99) 
Sec. 10-202. - Definitions. 
    The following terms when used or referred to in this article shall have the following meanings for the purposes of this article, unless a different meaning appears from the context: 
    Having control over means any person owning, using, transferring, storing or transporting a hazardous material immediately prior to the spill, release, or emission of such hazardous material into the environment. 
    Hazardous material means any substance which, when released, spilled, or discharged into the environment in any quantity presents an eminent danger to the public health or safety. 
    Hazardous material emergency means the spill, release, or emission of hazardous materials into the environment in any quantity that creates an eminent danger to the public health or safety. 
    Hazardous material response means the sending of fire department equipment and personnel, other city owned equipment and personnel, and/or agents or subcontractors of the city to abate the hazardous materials which have been released, spilled, or discharged into the environment. 
    Person means and includes individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, institutions, corporations, local governments and governmental agencies. 
(Ord. No. 0-99-59, § 1, 8-9-99) 
Sec. 10-203. - Responsibility. 
(a)  Any person having control over hazardous materials that have been released, spilled, or emitted into the environment shall immediately institute and complete all actions necessary to remedy the effects of such discharge, whether sudden or gradual, at no cost to the city. 
(b)  When deemed necessary by the fire chief, the cleanup shall be done by the fire department, or other city departments, or by a qualified individual or firm regularly engaged in the hazardous material cleanup business. 
(c)  Any person having control over the hazardous materials shall render assistance to the fire department by: 
(1)  Complying with the direction of the fire department, 
(2)  Supplying emergency response plan information for the site, and 
(3)  Supplying emergency response equipment, personnel and materials available on site. 
(Ord. No. 0-99-59, § 1, 8-9-99) 
Sec. 10-204. - Schedule of fees and charges. 
(a)  All cost associated with a hazardous material response shall be the joint and severable obligation of the person having control over the hazardous materials and the person causing the spill, release, or emission of the hazardous materials. 
(b)  For non-commercial hazardous material emergency responses for which control, containment or mitigation activities by city personnel are limited to one (1) hour or less, there will be no charge made for city equipment or personnel. Materials and supplies used will be billed at the approved rate. 
(c)  In the event non-city personnel or equipment are required for control, containment or mitigation purposes in response to any hazardous material emergency, the full cost for such services will be the joint and severable responsibility of the person having control over the material prior to the incident and the person causing the release of the material. 
(d)  The fees and charges for responses to hazardous materials emergencies by the fire department, its agents, designees, or subcontractors shall be based upon a schedule approved by the city council from time to time and set forth in the administrative Manual of City Policies, a copy of which shall be maintained in the fire department and the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 0-99-59, § 1, 8-9-99) 
Sec. 10-205. - Payment of costs. 
(a)  Upon completion of a hazardous materials response, the city shall mail or deliver a bill to the person responsible for the costs of the response, including, but not limited to, abatement, remediation, control, and removal. The bill shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the billing date. 
(b)  Pursuant to the North Carolina General Statutes, the amount of the bill shall become a lien upon the land or premises where the hazardous materials emergency arose and, if not paid within thirty (30) days of the billing date, shall be collected in the same manner provided for the collection of unpaid taxes. 
(Ord. No. 0-99-59, § 1, 8-9-99) 
Sec. 10-206. - Penalties. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit the spill, discharge, breakage, or leakage of any hazardous material in the city. Any person violating this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 0-99-59, § 1, 8-9-99) 
Secs. 10-207-10-209. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ILLEGAL DISCHARGES INTO THE STORMWATER SYSTEM[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 0-2004-67, § 1, adopted Aug. 6, 2004 provided for an effective date of Sept. 15. 2004. 

[Sec. 10-209. - Findings.] 
    The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has designated specific local governments in the Tar Pamlico River Basin and has required them to develop stormwater management in conformance with 15A NCAC 2B.0258, Tar-Pamlico River Basin-Nutrient Sensitive Waters Management Strategy. This section is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in N.C.G.S. [ch.] 113A, Article 4 (Pollution Control Act), N.C.G.S. 143 Article 21 (Water and Air Resources); N.C.G.S. § 160A-185 (Emission of pollutants or contaminants) and the requirements of 15A NCAC 2B.0258. Any modifications to this section are subject to the approval by the NC Division of Water Quality (DWQ). 
(Ord. No. 0-2004-67, § 1, 8-9-04) 
Sec. 10-210. - Purpose. 
(a)  This chapter is adopted for the purposes of: 
(1)  Protecting the public health, safety and welfare by controlling the discharge of pollutants into the stormwater conveyance system; 
(2)  Promoting activities directed toward the maintenance and improvement of surface and ground water quality; 
(3)  Satisfying the requirements imposed upon the City of Rocky Mount under its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Discharge Permit issued by the State, and the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources Tar Pamlico Nutrient Management Regulations; and 
(4)  Establishing administration and enforcement procedures through which these purposes can be fulfilled. 
(Ord. No. 0-2004-67, § 1, 8-9-04) 
Sec. 10-211. - Applicability. 
    The terms of this article shall apply only within the areas within the city limits and shall not apply within the city's ETJ unless expressly approved in an agreement between the city and the appropriate county. 
(Ord. No. 0-2004-67, § 1, 8-9-04) 
Sec. 10-212. - Acronyms. 
DENR: North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources. 
DWQ: North Carolina Division of Water Quality. 
MS4: Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System. 
NPDES: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
(Ord. No. 0-2004-67, § 1, 8-9-04) 
Sec. 10-213. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following definitions apply: 
    Illicit connection. Any physical connection, actual or potential flow discharge, or other condition, which could permit non-stormwater to enter the stormwater conveyance system or waters of the state in violation of this article. 
    Illicit discharge. Any unlawful disposal, placement, emptying, dumping, spillage, leakage, pumping, pouring, emission, or other discharge of any substance other than stormwater into a stormwater conveyance, the waters of the state, or upon the land in such proximity to the same, such that the substance is likely to reach a stormwater conveyance or the waters of the state. 
    Improper disposal. The releasing of matter or fluids other than atmospheric precipitation at a location where the matter or fluid can enter the stormwater system. 
    Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4). A stormwater conveyance or unified stormwater conveyance system (including without limitation: roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, stormwater detention facilities, curbs, gutters, ditches, natural or man-made channels, or storm drains), that: 
(1)  Is located within the corporate limits of Rocky Mount, North Carolina; 
(2)  Is owned or operated by the state, county, the city, or other public body; and 
(3)  Discharges to waters of the state, excluding publicly owned treatment works, and lawful connections thereto, which in turn discharge into the waters of the state. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. A permitting system established pursuant to § 402 of the Clean Water Act et seq. 
    Non-stormwater. Any flow, which is not from a form of natural precipitation 
    Pollution. Man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, thermal, and/or radiological integrity of water. 
    Receiving stream. The body of water, stream, or watercourse receiving the discharge waters from the stormwater system, or formed by the water discharged from the stormwater system. 
    Stormwater. Any flow resulting from, and occurring during or following, any form of natural precipitation. 
    Stormwater conveyance or stormwater conveyance system. Any feature, natural or man-made, that collects and transports stormwater, including but not limited to roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made and natural channels, pipes, culverts, and storm drains, and any other natural or man-made feature or structure designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater. 
    Waters of the state. Any stream, river, brook, swamp, lake, sound, tidal estuary, bay, creek, reservoir, waterway, or other body or accumulation of water, whether surface or underground, public or private, or natural or artificial, that is contained in, flows through, or borders upon any portion of this state, including any portion of the Atlantic Ocean over which the state has jurisdiction. Treatment systems, consisting of man-made bodies of water, which were not originally created in waters of the state and which are not the result of impoundment of waters of the state, are not waters of the state. 
(Ord. No. 0-2004-67, § 1, 8-9-04) 
Sec. 10-214. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Regulate the discharge of substances which may contaminate or cause pollution of stormwater, stormwater conveyances, or waters of the state; 
(2)  Regulate connections to the stormwater conveyance system; 
(3)  Provide for the proper handling of spills; and 
(4)  Provide for the enforcement of same. 
(Ord. No. 0-2004-67, § 1, 8-9-04) 
Sec. 10-215. - Non-stormwater discharge controls. 
(a)  Illicit discharge. No person shall cause or allow the discharge, emission, disposal, pouring, or pumping directly or indirectly to any stormwater conveyance, the waters of the state, or upon the land in such proximity to the same (such that the substance is likely to reach a stormwater conveyance or the waters of the state), any fluid, solid, gas, or other substance, other than stormwater; provided that non-stormwater discharges associated with the following activities are allowed provided that they do not significantly impact water quality: 
(1)  Dechlorinated filter backwash and draining associated with swimming pools; 
(2)  Filter backwash and draining associated with raw water intake screening and filtering devices; 
(3)  Condensate from residential or commercial air conditioning; 
(4)  Residential vehicle washing; 
(5)  Flushing and hydrostatic testing water associated with utility distribution systems; 
(6)  Discharges associated with emergency removal and treatment activities, for hazardous materials, authorized by the federal, state, or local government on-scene coordinator; 
(7)  Uncontaminated ground water [including the collection or pumping of springs, wells, or rising ground water and ground water generated by well construction or other construction activities]; 
(8)  Collected infiltrated stormwater from foundation or footing drains; 
(9)  Collected ground water and infiltrated stormwater from basement or crawl space pumps; 
(10)  Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands; 
(11)  Irrigation water, including landscape irrigation and lawn watering; 
(12)  Street wash water; 
(13)  Flows from fire fighting; 
(14)  Discharges from the pumping, diverting or draining of natural watercourses or waterbodies; 
(15)  Flushing and cleaning of stormwater conveyances with unmodified potable water; 
(16)  Wash water from the cleaning of the exterior of buildings, including gutters, provided that the discharge does not pose an environmental or health threat; 
(17)  Other discharges from unmodified potable water sources; and 
(18)  Other non-stormwater discharges for which a valid NPDES discharge permit has been approved and issued by DWQ, and provided that any such discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system shall be authorized by the city. 
Illicit discharges include, but are not limited to, pipelines, ditches and overland flow carrying non-stormwater flow from wastewater lines such as those from washing machines or sanitary sewers, commercial wash water from cleaning vehicles or equipment, flushing water such as that from industrial operations, floor drains, overflowing septic systems, and misuse of fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides, oil, anti-freeze, chemicals, paints, garbage, and litter. 
Any illicit discharges into, or having the potential to be indirectly transported to, the stormwater conveyance system shall be contained, controlled, collected, and removed promptly. Any areas determined by the director of public works or his designee to be damaged as a result of said discharge shall be restored to their preexisting condition. 
(b)  Illicit connections. 
(1)  Connections to a stormwater conveyance or stormwater conveyance system which allow the discharge of non-stormwater, other than the exclusions described in section (a) above, are unlawful. Illicit connections include, but are not limited to: floor drains, waste water from washing machines or sanitary sewers, wash water from commercial vehicle washing or steam cleaning, and waste water from septic systems. 
(2)  Where such connections exist, and said connections were made prior to the adoption of this provision or any other ordinance prohibiting such connections, the property owner or the person using said connection shall remove the connection within one (1) year following application of this regulation; provided that, this grace period shall not apply to connections which may result in the discharge of hazardous materials or other discharges which pose an immediate threat to health and safety, or are likely to result in immediate injury and harm to real or personal property, natural resources, wildlife, or habitat. 
(3)  Where it is determined that said connection was made in violation of any applicable regulation or ordinance or where said connection may result in the discharge of hazardous materials or may pose an immediate threat to health and safety, or is likely to result in immediate injury and harm to real or personal property, natural resources, wildlife, or habitat, the director of public works or his designee shall designate the time within which the connection shall be removed. In setting the time limit for compliance, the city shall take into consideration: 
a.  The quantity and complexity of the work; 
b.  The consequences of delay; 
c.  The potential harm to the environment, to the public health, and to public and private property; and 
d.  The cost of remedying the damage. 
(c)  Improper storage and disposal. Polluting substances, which may be harmful to biological life, shall not be stored or disposed of in or near the stormwater system or at a location exposed to wind or rain, which could transport the substances to the stormwater system. Prohibited substances include, but are not limited to, oil, grease, fertilizer, household, and industrial chemical waste. 
(d)  Hazardous material spills and discharges. Persons associated with the spill or leak of hazardous materials shall immediately notify the City of Rocky Mount Fire Chief or his designee in accordance with the provisions of City Code Article IV, Hazardous Material and Substance Abatement. Notification shall not relieve any person of any expenses related to the restoration, loss, damage, or any other liability which may be incurred as a result of said spill or leak, nor shall such notification relieve any person from other liability which may be imposed by state or other law. 
(e)  Solid waste, yard waste and other obstructions. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, dump, roll or in any manner place or cause to be placed any objects or materials in a drainage pipe, culvert, drainage ditch or any other stormwater carrier receiving street runoff which may cause a blockage, reduction in flow capacity or build up of excess nutrients or pollutants. These objects and materials include but are not limited to leaves, pine straw, grass clippings, tree limbs, lumber, construction and landscaping debris, bulky items or any other type of solid waste capable of causing an obstruction or otherwise degrading water quality and/or the stormwater conveyance system; 
(2)  The director of public works or his representative may grant temporary authority to block or obstruct a drainage system for construction, repair or maintenance activity. This temporary authority is for limited duration and does not relieve the grantee of responsibility for any damages caused by such blockage or obstruction. 
(Ord. No. 0-2004-67, § 1, 8-9-04) 
Sec. 10-216. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Powers and authority for inspection and correction. City personnel or other duly authorized representative(s), bearing proper identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. No person shall obstruct, hamper, or interfere with any such representative while carrying out official duties. If an illicit connection is found or evidence of an illicit discharge or improper disposal is found, city personnel or other duly authorized representative bearing proper identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of determining the corrective actions required for said violations including but not limited to removal of said violations and restoration or repair of any damages caused by said violations. If the required actions are not completed within the time period specified in the notice of violation the property owner will become subject to further enforcement action in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  Illicit discharges. Any designer, engineer, contractor, agent, or any other person who allows, acts in concert with, participates, directs, or assists directly or indirectly in the creation of a violation of this chapter shall be subject to civil penalties as follows: 
a.  For first time offenders, if the quantity of the discharge is equal to or less than five (5) gallons and consists of domestic or household products in quantities considered ordinary for household purposes, said person shall be assessed a civil penalty not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation or per day for any continuing violation, and if the quantity of the discharge is greater than five (5) gallons or contains non-domestic substances, including but not limited to process waste water, or if said person cannot provide clear and convincing evidence of the volume and nature of the substance discharged, said person shall be assessed a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or per day for any continuing violation; 
b.  For repeat offenders, the amount of the penalty shall be double the amount assessed for the previous penalty, not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per violation or per day for any continuing violation; 
c.  In determining the amount of the penalty, the city manager or his/her designee shall consider: 
1.  The degree and extent of harm to the environment, the public health, and public and private property; 
2.  The cost of remedying the damage; 
3.  The duration of the violation; 
4.  Whether the violation was willful; 
5.  The prior record of the person responsible for the violation in complying or failing to comply with this chapter; 
6.  The costs of enforcement to the public; and 
7.  The amount of money saved by the violator through his, her, or its noncompliance. 
(2)  Illicit connection. Any person found with an illicit connection in violation of this chapter and any designer, engineer, contractor, agent, or any other person who allows, acts in concert, participates, directs, or assists directly or indirectly in the establishment of an illicit connection in violation of this chapter, shall be subject to civil penalties as follows: 
a.  First time offenders shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day of continuing violation. 
b.  Repeat violators shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day of continuing violation. 
c.  In determining the amount of the penalty, the city manager or his designee shall consider: 
1.  The degree and extent of harm to the environment, the public health, and public and private property; 
2.  The cost of remedying the damage; 
3.  The duration of the violation; 
4.  Whether the violation was willful; 
5.  The prior record of the person responsible for the violation in complying or failing to comply with this chapter; 
6.  The costs of enforcement to the public; and 
7.  The amount of money saved by the violator through his, her, or its noncompliance. 
d.  Procedures for assessing penalties pursuant to violations of this article. Said penalties shall be assessed by the director of public works or his designee. No penalty shall be assessed until the person alleged to be in violation is served written notice of the violation by registered mail, certified mail-return receipt requested, or personal service. Refusal to accept the notice shall not relieve the violator of the obligation to pay the penalty. The notice shall describe the violation with particularity and specify the measures needed to come into compliance. The notice shall designate the time within which such measures must be completed. In setting the time limit for compliance, the city shall take into consideration: 
1.  The quantity and complexity of the work; 
2.  The consequences of delay; 
3.  The potential harm to the environment, the public health, and public and private property; and 
4.  The cost of remedying the damage. The notice shall warn that failure to correct the violation within the specified time period will result in the assessment of a civil penalty and/or other enforcement action. If after the allotted time period has expired, and the violation has not been corrected, the penalty shall be assessed from the date of receipt of notice of violation and each day of continuing violation thereafter shall constitute a separate violation under this section. 
(3)  Other violations. Any person found in violation of other provisions of this chapter, not specifically enumerated elsewhere, shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation or per day for any continuing violation. 
(4)  Payment/collection procedures. The director of public works or his/her designee shall make written demand for payment upon the person in violation, consistent with the conditions set forth in section 10-216(b). If the payment of the penalty assessed is not received or an equitable settlement reached within thirty (30) days after demand for payment is made, the matter shall be referred to the city attorney for institution of a civil action in the name of the city, in the appropriate division of the general court of justice in Nash or Edgecombe County, as appropriate, for recovering the penalty. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. 
(1)  Whenever the city manager has a reasonable cause to believe that any person is violating or threatening to violate this chapter, rule, regulation, order duly adopted or issued pursuant to this article or making a connection to a stormwater conveyance or stormwater conveyance system other than in accordance with the terms, conditions, and provisions of approval, the city may, either before or after the institution of any other action or proceeding authorized by the Code, institute a civil action in the name of the city for injunctive relief to restrain and abate the violation or threatened violation. 
(2)  The institution of an action for injunctive relief under subsection (c) shall not relieve any party to such proceeding from any further civil or criminal penalty prescribed for violations of this Code. 
(d)  Criminal penalties. Any person who knowingly or willfully violates any provision of this article, rule, regulation, order duly adopted or issued pursuant to this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not longer than thirty (30) days. Each violation shall be a separate offense. 
(e)  Corrective actions by the city. If the party that receives a notice as described above fails, neglects, or refuses to remedy the condition(s) outlined in the notice within the time specified in the notice, the public works director or designee may elect to enter the property and cause such condition to be removed, abated or remedied in order to prevent further damage or escalation of the cost to remedy the violation. The cost of such action shall be paid by the owner of the property or other responsible party and if not paid shall be a lien against the real estate or premises upon which the illicit connection was constructed or improper occurred and shall be collected as unpaid taxes. The initiation of such actions by the city does not relieve the offending party of any liability for fines or criminal penalties related to the offense. 
(Ord. No. 0-2004-67, § 1, 8-9-04; Ord. No. O-2009-30, § 1, 3-23-09) 
Chapter 11 - HOUSING CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 0-98-20, § 1, adopted March 9, 1998, amended Ch. 11, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Subsequently, Ord. No. 0-01-57, § 1, adopted July 23, 2001, amended said chapter to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference- Housing authority, § 2-76 et seq.; alarm systems, Ch. 3; animals, Ch. 4; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks prohibited, § 8-28; fire exit requirements, § 8-34; gas, Ch. 9; gas standards adopted, § 9-3; vent and vent connections for gas heaters, § 9-27; requirements for vents for gas appliances, § 9-28; gas black flue pipes prohibited, § 9-29; public health nuisances prohibited, § 10-71 et seq.; loud or disturbing noises including bicycle and vehicle noises prohibited, § 10-152; fair housing, § 12-26 et seq.; abandoned vehicles, § 10-176 et seq.; solid waste, Ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, Ch. 19; traffic and vehicles, Ch. 20; utilities, Ch. 21; subdivisions, App. A, zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Minimum housing standards, G.S. § 160A-441 et seq. 

Sec. 11-1. - Housing code established, title. 
    There are hereby established rules and regulations for the repair or elimination of unfit and/or unsafe housing conditions in the City of Rocky Mount, North Carolina, which shall be known as "The Housing Code of the City of Rocky Mount", and will be referred to hereafter as "code". 
(Ord. No. 0-98-20, § 1, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-01-57, § 1, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 11-2. - Exercise of police powers; authority. 
    The city council hereby finds and declares that there exist in the city dwellings and certain abandoned structures which are unfit for human habitation due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities, lack of ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities, or due to other conditions rendering the dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, morals, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city, and that a public necessity exists to exercise the police powers of the city pursuant to Article 19 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes of North Carolina, as now or hereafter amended, to repair, close, or demolish such dwellings in accordance with the procedure herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-20, § 1, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-01-57, § 1, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 11-3. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this code is to remedy and prevent the decay and deterioration of places of human habitation or intended for human habitation, and/or certain abandoned structures by providing minimum requirements for the protection of the life, health, welfare, safety, and property of the general public and the owners and occupants of places of human habitation. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-20, § 1, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-01-57, § 1, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 11-4. - Scope. 
    The provisions of the code are applicable to all existing dwellings and all dwellings hereafter constructed within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction which are used or intended for use for human habitation and/or abandoned structures. Manufactured or modular dwellings or manufactured or modular dwellings being moved and temporarily stored prior to relocation, when used or intended for use for human habitation within the city, shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-20, § 1, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-01-57, § 1, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 11-5. - Definitions. 
    [For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.] 
    Abandoned structure means any structure, other than a dwelling, dwelling unit, habitable room, multiple dwelling room unit or boardinghouse, which is a health or safety hazard as a result of the attraction of insects or rodents, conditions creating a fire hazard, dangerous conditions constituting a threat to children, or frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in the absence of sanitary facilities, and which cannot be repaired, altered or improved so as to no longer constitute such health or safety hazard at a cost of less than forty (40) percent of its value, as determined by the findings of the code enforcement official. 
    Apartment house means any dwelling which is designed, built, rented, leased, let, or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied as the home or residence of three (3) or more families living independently of each other in dwelling units. 
    Approved means performed in a manner and/or with materials consistent with the North Carolina State Building Code in effect at the time of construction or substantial renovation unless otherwise provided herein. 
    Area as applied to the dimensions of a room shall mean the total square footage or floor area between finished walls or when applied to the dimensions of a dwelling shall mean the maximum horizontal projected area of the dwelling at grade. 
    Basement means a story having a clear height of at least seven (7) feet from finished floor to finished ceiling, the floor level of which is below finished grade but not less than four (4) feet below the average finished grade, having floor and walls of approved construction, and/or having direct access to light and air from windows located above the level of the adjoining ground. 
    Boardinghouse (or rooming house ) means any dwelling unit or that part of any dwelling unit containing one (1) or more rooms in which space is let by the resident owner or operator to three (3) or more tenants. 
    Building means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof". 
    Ceiling height means the clear vertical distance from the finished floor to the finished ceiling. The minimum allowable ceiling height shall be seven (7) feet six (6) inches. 
    Cellar means that portion of a building located partly or wholly underground having an inadequate access to light and air from windows located partly or wholly below the level of the adjoining ground. 
    Certificate of exemption (temporary C/O) means a document issued pursuant to section 11-16(c)(2) of this Code by the housing code supervisor certifying that no housing certificate is required prior to reoccupancy of an owner-occupied dwelling. 
    City means City of Rocky Mount, North Carolina. 
    Code enforcement official means any employee of the city whose assigned duties include the enforcement of one (1) or more provisions of this code. 
    Demolish means the tearing down and disposal of the entire dwelling in a lawful manner, leaving the property free and clear of any debris and without holes or pockets. 
    Deteriorated means a dwelling that is unfit for human habitation or unsafe and can be repaired, altered, or improved to comply with all of the standards established by this code at a cost not in excess of forty (40) percent of its value, as determined by the finding of the code enforcement official. 
    Dilapidated means a dwelling that is unfit for human habitation or unsafe and cannot be repaired, altered, or improved to comply with all of the standards established by this code at a cost in excess of forty (40) percent of its value, as determined by finding of the code enforcement official. 
    Dwelling means any building or structure, or part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used, and including any outhouse and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith, apartment houses, boarding or rooming houses, hotels, motels, and other transient places of habitation and dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating. 
    Exit (egress) means a clear and unobstructed way of departure from the interior of a dwelling to the exterior at street or grade level. 
    Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents, and other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and lawful pest elimination methods approved by the code enforcement official. 
    Family means one (1) or more persons living together and having common housekeeping facilities. 
    Garbage means the waste produced by the handling, processing, preparation, cooking and consumption of animal or vegetable products used for human consumption. This definition shall include any other matter that is also subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction or the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors or which before, during or after decay may serve as feeding or breeding material for animals or flies or other insects. 
    Habitable space or habitable room means any room or enclosed floor space in a dwelling used or intended for use for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating, including kitchens, but excluding bathrooms, toilets, halls, corridors, pantries, storage space, closets, laundries, and other spaces not used frequently or during extended periods. 
    Hazardous materials means any chemicals or substances which are physical or health hazards as defined and classified under OSHA 29 CFR 1910.10. 
    Housing certificate (certificate of compliance) means a permit issued by the housing code supervisor or his designated agents, certifying that the named dwelling complies with the minimum requirements of this code. 
    Housing code division means the office and staff of the housing code division. 
    Infestation means the presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents, or other pests in such number as to constitute a menace to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or to the public. 
    Inspect means the act of examining areas and parts of a dwelling to determine its compliance with the standards set out in this code. 
    Inspection services means the office and staff of the inspection services code administrator. 
    Manufactured building means a structure consisting of one (1) or more transportable sections built and labeled within a manufacturing plant facility in accordance with the appropriate state or federal construction code which governs the structure's intended usage when erected on a building site. 
    Manufactured home (mobile home) means a manufactured building designed to be used as a single-family dwelling unit which has been constructed and labeled indicating compliance with the HUD administered National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. 
    Modular building means a manufactured building constructed in accordance with the North Carolina State Building Code. 
    Modular Home means a manufactured building designed to be used as a one- or two-family dwelling unit which has been constructed and labeled indicating compliance with the North Carolina Uniform Residential Code, Volume VII. 
    Modular building (commercial) means a manufactured building designed to be used as a multi-family dwelling unit (three (3) or more families) or as a commercial structure which has been constructed and labeled indicating compliance with the North Carolina State Building Code. 
    North Carolina State Building Code or North Carolina Building Code means any or all volumes of the North Carolina State Building Code as promulgated by the North Carolina Building Code Council. 
    Occupant means any person living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in or having actual possession of a dwelling. 
    Owner means any person who alone, or jointly, or severally with others: 
(1)  Has title to any dwelling, dwelling unit or abandoned structure, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Has charge or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit or abandoned structure, as owner or agent of the owner as executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this code, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner. 
    Parties in interest means all individuals, associations, and corporations who have interests of record in a dwelling and any who are in possession thereof. 
    Pier means a post, pole or column of masonry, concrete, steel or pressure-treated wood, or any other material that complies with the N.C. State Building Code for use as a pier, extending from a concrete or masonry footing to and supporting the building or portion thereof. 
    Plumbing means the water supply system, sanitary drainage system, vent system, fixtures, and traps and shall include their respective connections, devices, appliances, and appurtenances within the property lines of the premises. 
    Public authority means any official who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city or of the state relating to health, fire, building regulations or other activities concerning dwellings or abandoned structures in the city, including but not limited to the housing authority of the city. 
    Public space or common space means that space within any dwelling which is open to use by the general public or to occupants of more than one (1) dwelling. 
    Rodent proof means construction of a new structure or repair of an existing structure using materials and methods that prevents entry of rodents. Openings one-half (1/2) inch or greater may allow rats to enter and openings one-quarter (1/4) inch or greater may allow mice to enter. 
    Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; including, but not limited to, ashes, wood, coal, coke, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, leaves, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, dust and dirt. 
    Supplied means paid for, furnished or provided by, or under the control of, the owner or operator. 
    Story means that part of the dwelling comprised between a floor and the floor or roof next above having the required amount of ceiling height. 
    Supervisor means the supervisor or person in charge of the housing code division. 
    Temporary housing means any tent, mobile home, manufactured type home, or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the ground, or another structure, or to any utilities system on the same premises for more than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
    Tenant means any person who alone or jointly or severally with others occupies a dwelling under an oral or written lease or holds a legal tenancy in a dwelling. 
    Unfit for human habitation means conditions existing in a dwelling which violate or do not comply with one (1) or more of the minimum standards of fitness or one (1) or more of the requirements established by this code. 
    Unsafe means especially dangerous to life because of a dwelling's liability to fire or because of bad conditions of walls, overloaded floors, defective construction, decay, dangerous wiring or heating system, inadequate means of egress, or other causes or conditions enumerated in section 11-9(a) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-20, § 1, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-01-57, § 1, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 11-6. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-7. - Administration. 
(a)  Enforcement agency. 
(1)  There is hereby created and established a division within the government of the city to be known as the housing code division, which shall be composed of a supervisor, code enforcement officials, and such other employees as shall be authorized by the city manager. The housing code division shall be a division of the city department designated by the city manager. 
(2)  The supervisor of the housing code division is hereby designated the public official to exercise, by and through his duly appointed agents, the powers described by this code. 
(b)  Consulting agency. 
(1)  The code enforcement official shall have authority to request advice and assistance from any agency he deems appropriate in performing his duties. 
(2)  The departments of the city and other public agencies may report in writing to the code enforcement official any dwelling or abandoned structure they may encounter which is, may be, or is suspected of being unfit for human habitation or unsafe within the terms of this code. 
(c)  Administrative liability. 
(1)  Except as may otherwise be provided by statute or local law or ordinance, no officer, agent, or employee of the city charged with the enforcement of this code shall be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this code. No person who institutes or assists in the prosecution of a criminal proceeding under this code shall be liable for damages hereunder unless he acted with actual malice and without reasonable grounds for believing that the person accused or prosecuted was guilty of an unlawful act or omission. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-20, § 1, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-01-57, § 1, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 11-8. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-9. - Unsafe conditions. 
(a)  The code enforcement official shall determine that a dwelling or abandoned structure is unsafe and represents a threat to life and property, if any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  No operating heating; 
(2)  No potable water supply; 
(3)  No hot water supply; 
(4)  No electricity; 
(5)  Failing or failed primary structural members that threaten the stability of the dwelling and or visible structural defects that appear to render the structural members ineffective; 
(6)  Improperly operating or no sanitary facilities; 
(7)  Overloaded, non-isolatable electrical circuits or unsafe or exposed electrical wiring; 
(8)  Presence of raw sewage or open sewer, inside or outside the dwelling, whether from broken, plugged or inoperative fixtures or pipes inside the dwelling, or migrating into the dwelling from outside; 
(9)  Presence of uncontained flammable or combustible liquids or gases, poisonous solids, liquids or gases, poisonous solids, liquids or gases or life or health threatening depletion of oxygen or other hazardous materials; 
(10)  Missing roof, or part of roof missing; 
(11)  Chimney flues clogged; 
(12)  The dwelling is a physical threat due to immediate possibility of collapse; 
(13)  The primary means of exit or escape in the event of fire or other emergency is blocked or structurally unsafe; 
(14)  Occupancy of habitable space that does not meet below-grade occupancy standards; 
(15)  Internal accumulation of garbage; 
(16)  Interior wall sheathing or sheeting that is not present, or has been removed, to a point where there is little or no protection from spread of fire from story to story, or from other habitable spaces to bedrooms; 
(17)  No operable smoke detection system; 
(18)  Multiple violations of the standards set forth in section 11-10. 
(b)  The code enforcement official shall give priority enforcement to any dwelling that falls within the provisions of section 11-9. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-20, § 1, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-01-57, § 1, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 11-10. - Minimum standards. 
    Without excluding other ways and means of determining that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation, the code enforcement official shall apply the minimum standards set forth in section 11-10 of this Code in determining whether a dwelling is unfit. 
(a)  Facilities. 
(1)  Sanitary. Every dwelling shall be furnished with a potable water supply system. "Potable water supply" shall mean direct connection to a well, to a public water utility or equivalent water service delivery system, and does not include water delivered through a hose or via containers. Every dwelling shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, and a water closet all in good working condition and properly connected to an approved water and sewer system. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition free from defects, leaks, and obstruction. "Properly connected" means connected with approved plumbing materials (no radiator hose, duct tape, etc.). "Properly installed" means continuous piping that met the North Carolina State Building Code in effect at the time of installation. Any new, additional or repair plumbing must meet the current requirements of the North Carolina State Building Code. Provided, however, that the kitchen sink standards enumerated herein shall not apply to hotels, motels and other transient places unless kitchen sinks are otherwise required. 
(2)  Location of sanitary facilities. All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling and be accessible to the occupants of same. The water closet, tub or shower and lavatory shall be located in a room (or adjoining rooms) affording privacy to the user. Required bathrooms shall be accessible from habitable rooms, hallways, corridors or other protected or enclosed areas. 
(3)  Hot and cold water supply. Every dwelling shall have connected to the kitchen sink, lavatory, and tub or shower an adequate supply of both cold and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved distribution system connected to a potable water supply. 
(4)  Water heating. 
a.  Every dwelling shall have water heating facilities which are properly installed and maintained in a safe and good working condition and are capable of heating water to such a temperature so as to permit hot water to be drawn consecutively (that is, at one (1) tap after the other, and not simultaneously) at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than one hundred sixteen (116) degrees Fahrenheit. Such water heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this subsection when the dwelling's heating facilities required under the provisions of the code are not in operation. Apartment houses may use a centralized water heating facility capable of delivering an amount of hot water in the quantity and at the temperature described above. 
b.  Water heaters shall be equipped with approved relief valves, which are piped to a point not more than six (6) inches above the floor. The pipe material for the relief valve shall be threaded pipe approved for interior water service lines. 
c.  Provided, however, that the provision in subsection (a)(4) of this section for hot water supplies for a kitchen sink shall not apply to hotels, motels, and other transient dwellings where kitchen sinks are not required. 
(5)  Heating. 
a.  Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working conditions, and are capable of safely and adequately heating one (1) habitable room, excluding the kitchen in every dwelling regulated herein to a temperature of at least sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit at a distance three (3) feet above floor level, during ordinary winter conditions. Each heating system shall have at least one (1) readily adjustable control for regulation of living space temperature in each dwelling unit. Radiator control knobs in good working order shall be regarded as a readily adjustable control. If heat is not provided in every habitable room, the dwelling shall be provided with sufficient fireplaces, chimneys, flues or gas vents whereby heating appliances may be connected so as to heat all habitable rooms and bathrooms to a temperature of sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit at a distance three (3) feet above the floor level during ordinary winter conditions. 
b.  Where a central heating system is not provided for a dwelling, the dwelling shall be provided with properly installed baseboard electric heat, properly installed and properly vented wood or fossil fuel heater(s), or unvented natural gas heater(s) having oxygen depletion sensors listed for residential use by UL, ETL, or other recognized testing laboratory and installed in strict accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
c.  The following heating devices do not meet the requirements of subsections (5)a. and (5)b. of this section: 
1.  Portable electric heating units; and 
2.  Unvented fuel-burning heaters. 
d.  The use of unvented fuel-burning heaters is prohibited in any bedroom. 
(6)  Chimneys. 
a.  Chimneys must be safe for use as specified and intended. "Specified" means use in connection with specific heating appliance or systems, or limitations of such use. "Intended" means use in connection with combustion of fuel, for which the following minimum chimney standards apply: 
1.  Flue liner intact; 
2.  Chimney mortar and bricks secure; 
3.  Flue unobstructed; 
4.  Fireplace bricks intact; 
5.  Stove piping placed and secured with clearances as follows: 
(i)  Minimum twelve-inch brick clearance separation from combustibles; or 
(ii)  Minimum nine-inch air separation for insulated listed stove piping; or 
(iii)  Minimum one-inch air clearance surrounded by six-inch glass fiber insulation and ventilated thimble assembly; or 
(iv)  Minimum two-inch air separation for insulated listed stove piping with one-inch air space between inner and outer chimney components; and as otherwise described in National Fire Protection Association Standard 211 (NFiPA), "Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents and Solid Fuel-Burning Appliances". 
6.  Heating appliance clearances maintained at thirty-six (36) inches from combustible materials and/or surfaces, except that clearances may be reduced as provided in NFiPA Standard 211, "Chimneys Fireplaces, Vents and Solid Fuel-Burning Appliances". 
b.  Chimneys that do not meet these standards shall either be repaired or sealed. 
(7)  Cooking equipment. All cooking equipment and facilities shall be installed in an approved manner. Portable cooking equipment employing flame is prohibited as a substitute for approved cooking equipment. Portable cooking equipment is prohibited outside the kitchen area of a boarding or rooming house. 
(8)  Smoke detector systems. Every dwelling or dwelling unit shall be provided with an approved U.L. listed smoke detector on each level of the dwelling and in interior enclosed stairwells, hallways, and other common areas of multiple-unit dwellings, installed in accordance with N.F.P.A. 72 and the manufacturer's recommendations and listings. 
Dwellings constructed after July 1, 1975, and prior to January 1, 1999, shall be equipped with a 110-volt hard-wired smoke detector installed in accordance with the North Carolina State Building Code. 
Dwellings or dwelling units constructed after January 1, 1999, shall be equipped with listed 110-volt hard-wired interconnecting smoke detector(s) with battery back-up installed inside every sleeping room and in the area outside of each sleeping room in accordance with the North Carolina State Building Code. 
When battery-operated smoke detectors are allowed by this code or the North Carolina State Building Code, batteries shall be replaced at least once annually. 
(9)  Street address. Each dwelling shall bear a street address number of a color contrasting with the surface on which the number is mounted, such number shall be of sufficient size to be visible from the nearest public street, but not less than three (3) inches in height. If the dwelling is not visible from the nearest public street, a sign or standard bearing the address number shall be placed on the principle public street access point to the dwelling, such number to meet the standards set forth herein. 
(b)  Light and ventilation. 
(1)  Windows. Every habitable room shall have at least one (1) window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be eight (8) percent of the floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face windows of any such room and such light-obstruction structures are located less than three (3) feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top of such room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least fifteen (15) percent of the total floor area of such room. 
(2)  Ventilation. 
a.  Every habitable room (except kitchens with exhaust fans in good working order) shall have at least one (1) window or skylight which can easily be opened. The total of openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least forty-five (45) percent of the minimum window area size or minimum skylight-type window size, as required, or shall have other approved, equivalent ventilation. 
b.  Year-round mechanically ventilating conditioned air systems may be substituted for windows, as required herein, in rooms other than rooms used for sleeping purposes. Window type air conditioning units are not included in this exception. 
(3)  Bathroom. 
a.  Every bathroom shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms except that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms equipped with an operable ceiling electrical exhaust fan. 
(4)  Lighting in halls and stairways. 
a.  Every hall and stairway of every dwelling, shall be lighted, including exterior stairways and stairways in halls and public space. Every interior stairway shall have a three-way wall switch at the top and bottom of the stairs. 
(c)  Electrical systems. 
(1)  Electrical service. Adequate electric service must be provided to the dwelling. "Adequate" means a [minimum] of one hundred (100) ampere service. If the connected electrical load exceeds the capacity of a one hundred (100) ampere service, a service of sufficient capacity to safely bear the connected load shall be furnished. "Edison base" fuses shall not be permitted as components of any modified or updated electrical service, and no more than one (1) two-wire branch circuit shall be connected to any fuse, circuit breaker or other approved over current protection device. Drop cords from a neighboring source, generator or similar source are not "adequate" for the purpose of this code. 
Every new or additional electrical outlet and fixture required by the code shall be installed, maintained and connected to a source of electric power in accordance with the provisions of the North Carolina State Building Code. 
If the connected electrical load exceeds the capacity of a one hundred (100) ampere service, a service of sufficient ampere capacity to safely bear the connected electrical load shall be furnished. 
If it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city inspection services administrator or his designee that an electrical service of a lesser size than a one hundred (100) ampere service is adequate to serve a structure, that electrical service will be approved. In this case, "adequate" means that the service conforms to the standards of National Electrical Code, does not have more than one (1) two-wire branch circuit connected to any fuse or circuit breaker, shows no signs of damage, overfusing or tampering and calculations provided show the existing service is adequate for the loads imposed. 
(2)  Lights and outlets. 
a.  Every habitable room or space shall contain at least two (2) separate and remote duplex receptacle outlets. 
b.  Bedrooms shall have, in addition, at least one (1) wall switch controlled lighting outlet or ceiling light fixture or permanent fixture controlled by a pull chain. 
c.  In kitchens, three (3) separate, remote and accessible receptacle outlets shall be provided, and a wall or ceiling lighting outlet controlled by a wall switch or fixture pull-chain shall be provided. An outlet dedicated to powering an appliance and/or not easily accessible because it is blocked by an appliance shall not be counted as a separate outlet. In kitchens with less than six (6) linear feet of counter top, two (2) of the three (3) required outlets may be within the counter top space. All new receptacles added over counters must be ground fault protected. 
d.  Every hall, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room or furnace room shall contain at least one (1) ceiling-mounted or wall-mounted fixture outlet. For purposes of this section a laundry closet shall not be considered a laundry room. 
e.  In bathrooms, the lighting outlet shall be controlled by a wall switch or fixture pull chain. In addition to the lighting outlet in every bathroom and laundry room, there shall be provided at least one (1) receptacle outlet. Any new or replacement bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection. 
f.  All outlets, switches, wiring and light fixtures shall be safe and operable. No extension cords shall be spliced or used as fixed wiring of a dwelling. Electrical odor, flickering lights, visibly frayed wiring, broken switch plates or failure of circuit-tester check shall be evidence of an unsafe electrical system. 
g.  Every exterior entrance shall be lighted at grade level and controlled with a wall mounted interior switch. 
(d)  Exterior and interior. 
(1)  Foundation. The building foundation system shall be maintained in a safe manner and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. Beneath the dwelling, there must be firm, reasonably dry ground free of rubbish and debris, ("reasonably dry" means no mud, standing water, running water or evidence of same). The area beneath the dwelling must also be reasonably free of debris and rubbish. Manufactured homes shall be set up and secured as required by the North Carolina State Building Code's Regulations for Manufactured/Mobile Homes. 
(2)  Exterior walls. 
a.  Every exterior wall shall be reasonably weathertight, (free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other conditions which might admit rain, dampness, vermin or air to the wall cavity or to the occupied spaces of the building). All siding material shall be kept in repair. "Kept in repair" includes maintenance of painted surfaces areas where the protective paint surface no longer protects wood or other organic building materials from weather damage, repair or cracks or holes exceeding one-quarter (1/4) inch in width and replacement of wood or other organic components that show visual signs of rot, are soft to the touch or otherwise show evidence of rotting. 
b.  Existing skirting for manufactured shall be maintained free from broken or missing sections, pieces or cross-members which compromise the insulation characteristics of the skirting. Skirting shall be securely attached and sized from the ground to the lower outside perimeter of the structure. 
c.  Replacement or new skirting for manufactured shall be constructed of materials intended for exterior use and properly sized and mounted to prevent free access to the crawl space of the dwelling. Adequate means to gain access to the dwelling crawl space, to heating or other mechanical equipment, via inside or outside, shall be furnished. 
d.  The space between the ground and the first floor of every dwelling other than manufactured dwellings shall be enclosed with a masonry curtain wall which shall be reasonably weathertight and rodent proof. 
(3)  Roofs. 
a.  Roofs shall be structurally sound, and maintained in a safe manner and have no defects which might admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or interior portion of the dwelling. The following may constitute evidence of defects: 
1.  Missing shingles; 
2.  Flashing(s) missing; 
3.  Roof deflection deeper than one-sixth ( 1/6 ) of the depth of the rafter and/or rafters cracked; 
4.  Damage to ceilings (ceiling plaster loose or falling, brown spots, etc.), sheet rock hanging, etc. in rooms below roof; or 
5.  Fire damage. 
b.  No more than three (3) layers of roofing materials (shingles, shakes, roofing) shall be permitted. 
(4)  Attics. All attics shall be ventilated and shall be provided with a minimum fourteen (14) inch by twenty-four (24) inch access opening from the interior of the structure. 
(5)  Insulation. Insulation rated at least R-19 (or a minimum thickness of four (4) inches) and consisting of rock wool (glass), fiberglass or other material exhibiting fire-resistance and insulation capabilities equal to (or greater than) rock wool or fiberglass shall be required in the accessible ceilings or attics of the highest story containing habitable rooms in dwellings. 
(6)  Means of egress (exits). In multi-family houses having two (2) or more dwelling units above the first floor, every dwelling unit above the first floor shall have access to at least two (2) exit ways. One (1) common exit is permitted provided that all of the following are met: 
Exception: 
a.  Maximum distance of travel to reach the exit or stairs from the entrance door to any dwelling unit shall not exceed thirty (30) feet. 
b.  Maximum number of dwelling units served by the exit shall not exceed four (4) per floor. 
c.  Maximum gross area of the dwelling units shall not exceed three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet per floor. 
d.  Maximum building height shall be one (1) floor above the level of exit discharge. 
(7)  Stairs, porches and appurtenances. 
a.  Every inside and outside stair, porch and any appurtenances thereto shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Stairs and steps shall be free of holes, grooves and/or cracks large enough to constitute accidental hazards. Risers shall be reasonably uniform in height. Stair coverings shall be securely mounted and shall not interfere with safe use of the stairs. 
b.  Every exit more than thirty-six (36) inches above the finished grade shall be equipped with a porch with dimensions at least as wide and deep as the width of the exit doorway at the exit. 
(8)  Protective railings. Every porch, terrace or entrance platform thirty-six (36) inches above adjacent finish grade shall be equipped with railings or guards not less that thirty (30) inches high. Handrails, continuous on all open sides of stairs exceeding four (4) risers, leading to a platform, porch or terrace, shall be installed at least thirty (30) inches high. Interior stairs exceeding four (4) risers, open on both sides, including basement stairs, shall have a continuous handrail on one (1) side and railing on open portions of the other side. Stairs open on one (1) side exceeding four (4) risers shall have a continuous handrail and railing on the open side. Stairs exceeding four (4) risers, enclosed on both sides, shall have a minimum on one (1) continuous handrail. When exterior stairwell step flight has a total rise of thirty (30) inches or more, a continuous, durable handrail must be maintained. 
Handrails or protective railings shall be capable of bearing normally imposed loads and be maintained in good and safe condition. Adjacent horizontal or vertical rails or rail members shall be spaced no more than four (4) inches apart for protection of children when such protective railing is along a platform or stair thirty-six (36) inches or more in height. 
(9)  Windows and window assemblies. 
a.  Each window shall be weathertight, watertight and rodent proof, and shall be kept in good repair. If daylight can be seen around the inside or outside perimeter of the window casing, that window does not meet this standard. Every openable window shall be equipped with an effective locking mechanism or other mechanism that functions as a lock. 
b.  Each window sash shall be fully supplied with glass windowpanes or an approved substitute which are without open cracks or holes. Wood, cardboard or polyethylene or other plastic film are not approved substitutes. A windowpane with a crack or hole must be replaced, provided, however, holes less than one-quarter (1/4) inch in surface diameter may be sealed with a clear silicone seal. A broken window (pieces missing or exposed glass edge) must be replaced. 
c.  Each window sash shall be properly fitted and weathertight within the window frame. If daylight can be seen around the inside or outside perimeter of the window sash, that window does not meet this standard. 
d.  Each window required for ventilation for habitable rooms shall be capable of being easily opened or closed and secured in position by window hardware. 
(10)  Exterior doors. 
a.  Every exterior door, basement or cellar door and hatchway shall be substantially weathertight, watertight, and rodent proof, and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. "Good repair" includes no delamination or splitting of wood doors. 
b.  Every exterior door to a dwelling shall be provided with properly installed hardware that is maintained to insure reasonable ease of operation to open, close or secure in an open or closed position, as intended by the manufacturer of the door and the attached hardware. Properly installed hardware shall consist of knob, bib and operating lock with sufficient strength to prevent unauthorized entry short of disassembly, force or use of a key or pick. All exterior doors shall be capable of being locked from the inside and outside in a manner that will provide for the safety and security of the occupant(s). 
(10)  Exterior door frames. 
a.  Exterior doorframes shall be properly maintained and shall be equipped with weather-stripping and thresholds as required to be substantially weathertight, watertight, and rodent and insect restrictive when the door is in a closed position. If daylight can be seen from inside around the inner perimeter of an exterior doorframe, that door frame does not meet this standard. 
b.  Exterior door jambs, stops, headers and moldings shall be securely attached to the dwelling, maintained in good condition without splitting or deterioration that would minimize the strength and security of the door in a closed position. If daylight can be seen from inside around the outer perimeter of an exterior doorframe, that door frame does not meet this standard. 
(12)  Screens. In order to provide for safe ventilation and to provide for the safety of children, dwelling units which do not have central air-conditioning systems shall have fitted screens in good repair for all operable windows in rooms where the floor level is eight (8) or more feet above finished grade below the window. On floors below eight (8) feet above finished grade, screens are required on operable windows required by section 11-10(b) of this Code. "Good repair" means screens providing a continuous barrier to insects constructed of undamaged metal or plastic screen with at least sixteen (16) by sixteen (16) meshes to the inch or fourteen (14) by eighteen (18) meshes to the inch. Screens shall not be permanently affixed to the window frame or sash by nails, staples or screws. 
(13)  Protective treatment. All exterior wood surfaces (other than decay-resistant woods, such as cedar, redwood, cypress or pressure-treated lumber) shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Minimal chipping or peeling of surfaces not directly exposed to the elements and not reasonably expected to contribute to decay of wood is not required to be treated. All siding shall be weather-resistant and water tight. All masonry joints shall be sufficiently tuckpointed to insure water and airtightness. "Sufficiently tuckpointed" means that mortar shall not be removable by finger pressure. 
(14)  Outbuildings. Garages, storage buildings and all other accessory structures shall be structurally sound. When the condition of plumbing, heating, structural or electrical facilities present an imminent danger to occupants, or to the public, if such outbuilding is accessible to the public, those facilities shall be made safe in a manner consistent with this Code. 
(15)  Interior floors, walls and ceilings. Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be substantially vermin-proof, shall be kept in sound condition and good repair and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. Interior finish shall be free of excessive holes and cracks. No cardboard or other highly combustible or improper wall finish or ceiling finish shall be allowed. All floors shall be level enough so as not to present a tripping hazard. Every bathroom floor surface and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be readily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. Every tub or shower area shall have a wall surface constructed and maintained so as to be substantially impervious to water. 
(16)  Structural supports. Every structural element of the dwelling shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition and show no evidence of deterioration which would render it incapable of carrying normal loads. Termites, termite damage, fire damage, absence of footings or cracked or split wood structural supports are examples of evidence of deterioration. 
When additional direct support is required, piers shall be used under girders, at walls or other primary support points. Stiff knees shall not be used for girders, at walls or at other primary support points, but may be used for indirect support only. 
(17)  Firestopping and draftstopping. Firestopping shall be maintained to cut off all concealed draft openings both horizontal and vertical and to form a fire barrier between floors and between the upper floor and the roof space. 
Draftstopping shall be maintained to cut off all concealed draft openings in floor/ceiling assemblies and in attics. 
(18)  Interior door hardware. Every interior door shall be provided with proper hardware, securely attached and maintained in good condition. Hasp lock assemblies are not permitted on any side of the door of habitable rooms. 
(19)  Bathroom access. Bathroom access shall be provided in a manner that does not require an occupant to leave the dwelling to gain access. Privacy of bathrooms shall be afforded by doors complete with privacy hardware intended by the manufacturer for that purpose. 
(20)  Bedroom access. Privacy of bedrooms shall be afforded by doors complete with privacy hardware intended by the manufacturer for that purpose. 
(21)  Water closet, lavatory and bath facilities for boardinghouses. At least one (1) flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower, properly connected to a water and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each four (4) rooms within a rooming house wherever such facilities are shared. All such facilities shall be located on the floor they serve within the dwelling so as to be private and reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. 
(e)  Space requirements. 
(1)  Required space. Every dwelling shall contain at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least one hundred (100) additional square feet of floor area per additional occupant. The floor area shall be calculated on the basis of the total area of all habitable rooms. Provided, however, the requirement of this section shall not be applicable to hotels, motels, and other transient dwellings. 
(2)  Required space in sleeping rooms. In every dwelling, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one (1) occupant shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one (1) occupant shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof. 
(3)  Ceiling height. Habitable rooms other than kitchens, storage rooms and laundry rooms shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven (7) feet six (6) inches. Hallways, corridors, bathrooms, water closet rooms and kitchens shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven (7) feet six (6) inches measured to the lowest projection from the ceiling. 
If any room in a dwelling has a sloping ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height of the room is required in only one-half (1/2) the room area. No portion of the room measuring less than five (5) feet from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall be included in any computation of the minimum floor area. 
(4)  Occupancy below grade. No basement or cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unless: 
a.  The floor and walls are resistant to leakage of underground and surface runoff water, and show no evidence of recent water leakage or accumulation; and 
b.  The total window area (or window well area) is equal to at least the minimum window and ventilation areas described in section 11-10(b) of this Code, except that in non-sleeping rooms, mechanical ventilation and electric light may be used in place of window ventilation and light; and 
c.  An easily accessible means of fire escape in addition to the basement or cellar stair is provided. Windows which are easily accessible and of sufficient size to accommodate occupants escaping a fire are acceptable. 
(f)  Sanitation requirements. Every owner of a dwelling shall provide a clean, safe and sanitary dwelling at the time of tenant occupancy or reoccupancy and shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean, safe and sanitary condition outbuildings and appurtenances to the extent that such outbuildings and appurtenances are regulated by this code. 
    Tenants shall be responsible for maintaining a clean and sanitary structure in regard to cleanliness, accumulation of garbage and/or rubbish inside the dwelling and any outside areas associated with the dwelling. 
(g)  Extermination. Every owner of a multifamily dwelling or a boardinghouse dwelling shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests within the dwelling or premises. If the owner fails to provide such extermination services and evidence of insect, rodent or other pest infestation is present, extermination shall be ordered by a code enforcement official. Such extermination shall be conducted by a licensed exterminator. Monthly extermination treatment is the maximum that an owner shall be required to provide. 
    Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises. 
(h)  Violation(s) of state building code regulations for existing dwellings. A dwelling that is not in compliance with Volume I, Chapter 34 of the N.C. State Building Code or Volume IX of the N.C. State Building Code shall be considered unfit and ineligible for a housing certificate under this Code unless the owner has been granted a building permit for work that would bring the structure into compliance with either Volume I, Chapter 34 or Volume IX of the North Carolina State Building Code. Expiration of the permit without completion of such work shall result in revocation of the housing certificate issued for such dwelling. 
(i)  [Compliance with building codes required for ordered repairs.] All repairs made as a result of orders issued under this code shall be completed in compliance with the North Carolina State Building Code and in accordance with construction and repair methods generally accepted in the industry. All materials used in a specific application shall be approved for use in that application and shall be compatible in appearance with surrounding materials. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-20, § 1, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-01-57, § 1, 7-23-01; Ord. No. 0-06-70, § 1, 7-10-06; Ord. No. O-2009-34, § 1, 4-27-09) 
Sec. 11-11. - Alternate means. 
(a)  The supervisor may authorize an alternate means of meeting the requirements of this code only under the following circumstances as established by the owner(s): 
(1)  The condition for which the alternate means is sought is not one (1) of the conditions set forth in section 11-9 of this Code. 
(2)  The condition for which the alternate means is sought is an element of the fundamental and original construction of the dwelling. "Fundamental and original construction" includes foundation dimensions, ceiling height, organization of habitable space, and any other condition governed by the original structure of the dwelling; and 
(3)  There exists a demonstrable alternate means of meeting the intent of this code. 
(b)  In the event that the code enforcement official withholds approval of one (1) or more plumbing, electrical, mechanical, structural or fire safety components, the code enforcement official may accept approval of such components without further corrections upon receipt of a report from an appropriately licensed contractor, architect or engineer certified in North Carolina, as specified by the code enforcement official in writing. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-20, § 1, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-01-57, § 1, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 11-12. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-13. - Duties of tenants. 
    This code is not intended to interfere with or abrogate the duties imposed on tenants of rental property by G.S. § 42-43, or with lawful written agreements between property owners and tenants. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-20, § 1, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-01-57, § 1, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 11-14. - Responsibility of owner. 
    The owner remains responsible for complying with the provisions of this code, even though: 
(1)  An obligation is also imposed on the occupants. 
(2)  The owner has, by agreement, imposed on the occupant the duty of complying with this code. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-20, § 1, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-01-57, § 1, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 11-15. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-16. - Powers of code enforcement official. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  The supervisor shall have such powers as may be necessary, lawful, or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this code, including (without limiting the generality of the foregoing) the following powers: 
a.  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation. 
b.  To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence. 
c.  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making inspections in a manner that will cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession. 
d.  To appoint and fix the duties, as provided in this code, of such officials, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this code. 
(b)  Inspections. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the code enforcement official to periodically examine the dwellings located in the city for the purpose of determining the fitness of dwellings for human habitation, and for the enforcement and administration of this code. 
In exercising this power, the code enforcement official shall have a right to enter on any premises within the city at all reasonable hours (between 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday and at the convenience of the occupant) for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action, upon presentation of proper credentials. Upon refusal after proper notice, the code enforcement official shall have the right to inspect pursuant to Article 4A of Chapter 15 of the N.C. General Statutes, as amended. 
(2)  If, during the course of an inspection, the code enforcement official finds evidence of construction in progress that would require a permit (or permits) pursuant to North Carolina General Statutes, Section 160A-417, the owner shall produce evidence that such permit(s) have been obtained prior to issuance of any housing certificate. 
(3)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner to relocate any moveable obstructions (furniture, boxes, appliances and construction materials, for example) that would otherwise interfere with a complete housing certificate inspection. The code enforcement official shall not be responsible for failure to detect violations of this code when such violations are concealed behind, under or above walls, floors, ceilings or other fixed components of the dwelling. 
(4)  An inspection undertaken on behalf of the owner of one (1) or more dwellings by a third-party federal agency or insurer may be considered equivalent in whole or in part to a housing certificate inspection conducted pursuant to this code, provided that the following conditions are met: 
a.  Such inspections are undertaken no less frequently than otherwise required by this code; 
b.  Inspections standards utilized by the third-party inspector are approved by the supervisor in writing as equivalent in whole or in part; 
c.  The third-party inspector acknowledges in writing that this inspection may be considered equivalent in whole or in part to a housing certificate inspection conducted pursuant to this code and agrees in writing to hold the city harmless against any and all claims in connection with such inspection; 
d.  Should such third-party inspection be considered equivalent only in part to a housing certificate inspection conducted pursuant to this code, all other provisions of this section shall continue to apply, and the code enforcement official shall assume responsibility for reinspections required subsequent to the initial inspection; and 
e.  Should the code enforcement official learn that the third-party inspection does not meet the standards represented to the supervisor for approval in writing, all dwellings inspected through such third-party inspections may be subsequently subject to housing certificate inspections on an annual basis for three (3) years. 
(5)  For purposes of this section, the Rocky Mount Housing Authority is herewith authorized to enforce this code in dwelling units owned or regulated by the Rocky Mount Housing Authority, using inspection report forms approved by the supervisor. 
(6)  The results of an inspection conducted under authority of this section shall be turned over to the code enforcement official in written form within five (5) working days of completion of such inspection. The code enforcement official shall proceed with any enforcement actions as if the inspection had taken place under the authority of this code. 
(7)  The supervisor shall maintain a listing of approved third-party inspection programs. 
(c)  Housing certificate (certificate of compliance). 
(1)  The supervisor shall issue a housing certificate (certificate of compliance) upon conducting a final inspection and finding that said structure fully complies with this code, however no housing certificate or temporary housing certificate shall be issued if electrical service, smoke detection system, and/or water service is not present at the time of inspection. 
(2)  Where no condition as described in section 11-9 of this Code is involved, the code enforcement official may issue a temporary housing certificate to an owner for up to ninety (90) days contingent upon completion of specified corrections or improvements, provided that the owner agrees to vacate the dwelling immediately upon the failure to complete those corrections or improvements within the effective period of any temporary certificate. Under such circumstances, upon expiration of the temporary housing certificate, the dwelling shall be deemed unfit, and the code enforcement official may proceed to enforce this code. Temporary housing certificates are not renewable or extendible. 
(d)  Fee. The housing code division will charge the owner such inspection fees as may be established from time to time by the city council as set forth in the manual of city policies. 
(e)  Reports. Inspection findings will be recorded on standardized report forms and provided to the owner and/or occupants. Such standardized reports shall include specific references to sections of this code when any violations are recorded. The reports shall contain notice of any deficiencies under this code and inform the owner of any deadline to remedy the deficiencies. Within five (5) days of the owner's receipt of such report, the owner(s) shall advise the occupants of the dwelling, if any, of any deficiencies under this code that are identified in the report. If any of the deficiencies enumerated in such report are among those set forth in section 11-9 of this Code, the owner(s) shall advise all occupants of the building of such deficiencies within five (5) days of the owner's receipt of such report. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-20, § 1, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-01-57, § 1, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 11-17. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Issuance of complaint. 
(1)  Whenever a petition or complaint is filed with the code enforcement official by a public authority, by at least five (5) residents of the city, charging that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation or whenever it appears to the public official (on his own motion) that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, the code enforcement official shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such dwellings a complaint stating the charges of violations of this code. Said complaint shall list the code deficiencies, and contain a notice that a hearing will be held before the supervisor at a place within the city at a time fixed not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the serving of said complaint. The notice shall also notify the owner and parties in interest that they have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the supervisor. All complaints, notices of hearing, and orders issued by the code enforcement official may be filed as notice of lis pendens in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court for Edgecombe or Nash County, as appropriate. A copy of the notice of lis pendens when filed shall be served upon the owner(s) and parties in interest of such dwellings at the time of filing. 
(2)  Provided, however, the code enforcement official may, prior to the issuance of a complaint, serve the property owner or property owner's agent with a violation notice giving the property owner up to ninety (90) days to correct the violation(s). 
(b)  Findings of fact and order. If, after such notice and hearing, the supervisor determines that the dwelling under consideration is unsafe or unfit for human habitation, according to the standards of this code, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of that determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order. All orders issued by the supervisor may be filed in the notice lis pendens in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Edgecombe or Nash County, as appropriate. 
(1)  Deteriorated. If the dwelling is found to be deteriorated as defined in this code, the supervisor shall require the owner to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling so as to bring it into compliance with this code within a period not to exceed ninety (90) days of the service of the order upon the owner. Such order may also direct and require the owner to vacate and close the dwelling as a human habitation. Where the supervisor finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may be necessary. If the dwelling is vacant at the time the order is issued, it may not be occupied until the dwelling is in full compliance with the order; or if the dwelling becomes vacant after the order is issued, the dwelling shall not be reoccupied and utilities shall not be connected until the dwelling is in full compliance with the order. 
(2)  Dilapidated. If the dwelling is found to be dilapidated as defined in this code, the supervisor may require the owner to remove or demolish such dwelling within a period not to exceed ninety (90) days of the service of the order. Where the supervisor finds that there imminent danger to life or other property, he may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may be necessary to bring the dwelling into compliance with this code within the correction action period imposed by such order. 
(3)  Prior orders or ordinances not directing demolition. If the city council has adopted an ordinance, or the supervisor has issued an order, ordering a dwelling to be repaired or vacated and closed, as provided in section 11-17(b)(1), and if the owner has vacated and closed such dwelling and kept such dwelling vacated and closed for a period of one (1) year pursuant to the ordinance or order, then if the city council shall find that the owner has abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter or improve the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation and that the continuation of the dwelling in its vacated and closed status would be inimical to the health, safety, morals and welfare of the city in that the dwelling would continue to deteriorate, would create a fire and safety hazard, would be a threat to children and vagrants, would attract persons intent on criminal activities, would cause or contribute to blight and the deterioration of property values in the area, and would render unavailable property and a dwelling which might otherwise have been made available to ease the persistent shortage of decent and affordable housing in this state, then in such circumstances, the city council may, after the expiration of such one (1) year period, enact an ordinance and serve such ordinance on the owner, setting forth the following: 
a.  That the repair of the dwelling to render it fit for human habitation can be made at a cost not exceeding forty (40) percent of the then current value of the welling, the ordinance shall require that the owner either repair or demolish and remove the dwelling within ninety (90) days; or 
b.  That the repair of the dwelling to render it fit for human habitation cannot be made at a cost not exceeding forty (40) percent of the then current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require the owner to demolish and remove the dwelling within ninety (90) days. 
c.  That the ordinance shall be recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Edgecombe or Nash County, as appropriate in the name of the property owner in the grantor index. That failure to comply with the ordinance shall authorize the supervisor to effectuate the purpose of the ordinance. 
(4)  Historic district. Not withstanding any other provision of law, if the dwelling is located in a historic district of the city and the historic district commission determines, after a public hearing as provided by ordinance, that the dwelling is of particular significance or value toward maintaining the character of the district, and the dwelling has not been condemned as unsafe, the order may require that the dwelling be vacated and closed consistent with N.C. General Statute Section 160A-400.14(a). 
(c)  Action upon failure to comply with order. 
(1)  If the owner of a dwelling fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or to vacate and close the dwelling, the supervisor may cause the dwelling to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed. The supervisor may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling so closed, a placard with the following words: 
"This dwelling is unfit for human habitation. The use or occupation of this dwelling for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful." 
Occupation of a dwelling so posted shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(2)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the dwelling, the supervisor may cause such dwelling to be removed or demolished. 
(3)  The order of the supervisor to repair, alter, improve, vacate and close or remove and demolish shall not be exercised until the city council shall have by ordinance ordered the supervisor to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this code with respect to the particular property or properties which the supervisor shall have found to be unfit for human habitation or unsafe and which property or properties shall be described in the ordinance. No such ordinance shall be adopted to require demolition of a dwelling until the owner has first been given a reasonable opportunity to bring it into conformity with this code. Provided, however, nothing in this code shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings, or otherwise. Such ordinance shall be recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds for Edgecombe and Nash County as appropriate. 
(4)  The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the supervisor shall be a lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred, which lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be collected as the lien for special assessment provided in Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes. If the dwelling is removed or demolished by the supervisor, any article of personal property, fixtures or appurtenances found in or attached to the dwelling may be removed for safekeeping in a city warehouse. Written notice of each removal of personal property, fixtures or appurtenances found in or attached to the dwelling shall be promptly given to the owner of the articles of personal property to the extent that the identity of such persons is known or may be reasonably ascertained. 
The owner or any other person who may be entitled to possession of any such articles of personal property, fixtures, or appurtenances found in or attached to the dwelling, before obtaining possession thereof, shall pay to the city all reasonable costs incident to removal, storage and locating the owner of the property or any other person who may be entitled to possession thereof. If the owner or other person who may be entitled to possession fails or refuses to pay the costs, or if the identity or whereabouts of the owner is unknown and unascertainable after a diligent search has been made and after notice to him at his last known address, the supervisor may, after holding the property for thirty (30) days, dispose of the same by public sale after ten (10) days. Public notice shall be published in a local newspaper of general circulation, and the proceeds of the sale shall be forwarded to the finance director of the city. The finance director shall pay, from the proceeds of the sale, costs of removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and sale, and liens, in that order; and any remaining proceeds shall be deposited to the general fund of the city, subject to the following: If the ownership of the property is established satisfactorily to the finance director, the owner shall be paid by such official so much of the proceeds from the sale of the property as remains after paying the costs of removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and sale, and any liens thereon. 
(5)  If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a dwelling, the supervisor may file a civil action in the name of the city to remove such occupant. The action to vacate the dwelling shall be in the nature of summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint naming as parties-defendant any person occupying such dwelling. The Clerk of Superior Court in Edgecombe or Nash County, as appropriate shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before a magistrate at a certain time, date and place not to exceed ten (10) days from the issuance of the summons to answer the complaint. The summons and complaint shall be served as provided in North Carolina General Statute, Section 42-29. The summons shall be returned according to its tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been duly served, and if at the hearing the supervisor produces a certified copy of an ordinance adopted by the city pursuant to subsection (c)(3) of this section authorizing the supervisor to proceed to vacate the occupied dwelling, the magistrate shall enter judgment ordering that the premises be vacated and that all persons be removed. The judgment ordering that the dwelling be vacated shall be enforced in the same manner as the judgment for summary ejectment entered upon under N.C. General Statute, Section 42-30. An appeal from any judgment entered hereunder by the magistrate may be taken as provided in N.C. General Statute, Section 7A-228, and the execution of such judgment may be stayed as provided in North Carolina General Statute, Section 7A-227. An action to remove an occupant of a dwelling who is a tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of summary ejectment proceeding pursuant to this section unless such occupant has been served with notice at least thirty (30) days before the filing of the summary ejectment proceeding that the city has ordered the supervisor to proceed to exercise his duties under this section to vacate and close or remove and demolish the dwelling. 
(d)  Determination of value. The code enforcement official is hereby authorized to fix the reasonable value of any dwelling or abandoned structure for the purpose of this code at the amount set forth in the Edgecombe or Nash County property tax listing (as adjusted by the Edgecombe or Nash County Assessor, or pursuant to the assessor's instruction), not including land value. Such value shall be binding unless the owner provides for delivery of a written appraisal conducted within three hundred sixty-five (365) days of the order as to the reasonable value of the dwelling prepared by a North Carolina state certified residential appraiser within fifteen (15) days after receipt of an order from the supervisor. Such written appraisal shall be binding and conclusive for purposes of this code. 
(e)  Service of complaints and orders. Complaints and orders issued by the code enforcement official pursuant to this code shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered or certified mail. When service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy of the complaint or order may also be sent by regular mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the registered or certified mail is unclaimed or refused, and the regular mail is not returned by the post office within ten (10) days after mailing. The person mailing such complaint or order by regular mail shall certify to that fact and the date thereof, and such certificate shall be deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud. If regular mail is used, the notice of the pending proceeding shall be posted on the property affected. 
    If the identities of any owner or parties in interest or the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and cannot be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, or, if the owner or parties in interest are known but have refused to accept service by registered or certified mail, and if the code enforcement official makes an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of the complaint or order upon the owners or parties in interest may be made by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the city at least once no later than the time at which personal service would be required by this code. When service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property affected. 
(f)  Equitable enforcement. In case any dwelling is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted, maintained, or used in violation of this code or any order or decision of the supervisor or housing appeals board made pursuant to this code, the supervisor may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or use, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation and to prevent the occupancy of the dwelling. 
(g)  Criminal enforcement. A violation of any provision of this code shall constitute a misdemeanor, and the violator may be fined up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) or up to thirty (30) days imprisonment or both for each offense, in the discretion of the court. 
(h)  Civil enforcement. An owner who fails to comply with an order to repair or to improve, vacate, close, or demolish any dwelling determined unfit for human habitation pursuant to the provisions contained in this code, or who permits the occupancy or reoccupancy of an unsafe or unfit dwelling in violation of this code shall be subject to a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first day following the expiration of an order to repair or improve, vacate or close any occupied dwelling or following a determination that an unfit dwelling has been reoccupied in violation of this code. In each instance, a penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day shall be imposed for each subsequent day that such failure to comply continues. If a person fails to pay the civil penalty within ten (10) days after being notified of the amount due, the city may recover the penalty together with all costs by filing a civil action in the general court of justice in the nature of a suit to collect a debt. Upon the findings of the housing code inspector where there exists no smoke detector(s) in a dwelling or dwelling unit, or where smoke detector(s) have been improperly installed or maintained; he shall order that the smoke detector(s) shall be installed or made operable in accordance with this section within seventy-two (72) hours of proper notification to the owner or his agent. The property owner or his agent shall be notified either personally or by registered or certified mail. When service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy of the notice may also be sent by regular mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the registered or certified mail is unclaimed or refused, but the regular mail is not returned by the post office within ten (10) days after mailing. If regular mail is used, the notice of violation shall be posted on the property affected. Failure of the property owner or agent to take corrective action within seventy-two (72) hours of proper notification shall result in a civil penalty for each day the violation exist. The civil penalty amount shall be determined by the city council and shall be published in the Manual of City Policies. If a person fails to pay the civil penalty within ten (10) days after being notified of the amount due, the city may recover the penalty together with all costs by filing a civil action in the general court of justice in the nature of a suit to collect a debt. 
(i)  One-step service process. In lieu of the procedure set forth hereinbefore, the code enforcement official may proceed as set forth in this subparagraph (i) whenever it appears to the code enforcement official that any dwelling is extremely dilapidated and meets the following conditions: 
(1)  It has been determined by the code enforcement official to be either: 
a.  At least fifty (50) percent destroyed by fire or other casualty; or 
b.  Unable to be repaired, altered or established to comply with all of the standards by this code at a cost of less than seventy-five (75) percent of its value; 
(2)  It is not occupied; and 
(3)  For at least one (1) year, there has been no record of electrical service as required by section 11-10(c)(1) of this code; no record of potable water supply as required by section 11-10(a)(1) of this code; or for at least one (1) year similar conditions have existed at the property which indicate the dwelling has not been lawfully occupied. 
When the foregoing conditions are satisfied, the code enforcement official may serve the owner and parties in interest with a notice of violation of the code and set a date not less than thirty (30) days from the date of service within which the owner shall either commence rehabilitation so as to bring the dwelling into compliance with the code or commence demolition proceedings. The notice shall also inform the owner and parties in interest that if corrections or demolition proceedings are not commenced within the time period specified, the code enforcement official shall, without further notice or further request of the governing body, cause the demolition of the dwelling and place a lien against the property as set forth hereinbelow. 
If the owner or any party in interest submits written objection to the code enforcement official proceeding against the dwelling within the time period specified in the notice of violation, the code enforcement official shall cease any further efforts at compliance under this subparagraph but may proceed in accordance with other provisions of the code. If the owner or a party in interest does not submit written objection to the code enforcement official's proceeding against the dwelling within the time period specified in the notice of violation, the code enforcement official shall document that the conditions set forth in this subparagraph exist, enter an order to that effect and cause the dwelling to be demolished. The code enforcement official shall be under no further obligation to notify or serve the owner or any party in interest where there is no written objection within the time period specified in the notice of violation. The amount of the cost of the demolition by the code enforcement official shall be a lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred, which lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be collected as the lien for special assessment provided in Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes. 
Civil actions against the city for proceeding under this subparagraph must be filed within nine (9) months from the date the violation notice is served upon the aggrieved party. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-20, § 1, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-98-27, §§ 1, 2, 4-13-98; Ord. No. 0-01-57, § 1, 7-23-01; Ord. No. O-2006-41, § 1, 2-12-06; Ord. No. O-2009-14, § 1, 2-23-09) 
Sec. 11-18. - Appeal procedures. 
(a)  To supervisor. Any owner may file a written appeal to the supervisor within ten (10) days after issuance of the code enforcement official's report to the owner, with the supervisor. The supervisor is hereby given authority to rule on any dispute arising out of the interpretation of this code by the code enforcement official. The supervisor will either affirm, reverse or modify the ruling of the code enforcement official. 
(b)  Community appeals board. A community appeals board is hereby created to which appeals on the record may be taken by an owner or other party in interest from any decision or order by the supervisor or from the assessment of any civil penalty. All appeals heard by the community appeals board shall be quasi-judicial in nature. The community appeals board shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the city council and serving for three-year staggered terms. Each of the seven (7) wards located within the city shall have a representative that resides within the respective ward on the board. Four (4) members must be present in order to establish a quorum. The board shall have the power to elect its own officials, to fix the time and places for its meetings, to adopt necessary rules of procedure, and to adopt other rules and regulations for the proper discharge of its duties. The board shall keep an accurate record of all its proceedings. In addition to hearing appeals under this chapter, the community appeals board shall also be responsible for hearing appeals under certain sections of chapter 4 and chapter 10 of the City Code. 
(1)  An appeal from any decision or order of the supervisor may be taken by any person aggrieved thereby. Such appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days from the service of the order and shall be taken by filing with the supervisor and with the board a notice of appeal which shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Upon filing of any notice of appeal, the supervisor shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was made. When an appeal is from the decision of the supervisor refusing to allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any act, his decision shall remain in force until modified or reversed. When any appeal is from a decision of the supervisor requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing by the board, unless the supervisor certifies to the board, after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by, reason of the facts stated in the certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished to the petitioner) a suspension of his requirement would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property or that because the violation charged is transitory in nature a stay would seriously interfere with the enforcement of the ordinance. In that case proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order, which may be granted by the community appeals board or by a court of record on application, on notice to the official from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. To this end the community appeals board shall have all the powers of the official from whom the appeal is taken. 
(2)  Any person assessed a civil penalty in accordance with section 11-17(h), may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the supervisor and the board within thirty (30) days from the date of assessment. Failure to file a notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the civil penalty. The city manager may establish rules and procedures that govern the appeal hearing process. Such rules may include a requirement that, for specified violations, a bond equal to the amount of the civil penalty be posted at the time a notice of appeal is filed. 
(3)  The board shall affix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals, shall give due notice to all parties, and shall render its decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The board may reverse, affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify the decision or order appealed. A majority vote of the board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the supervisor. The board shall have the power also in passing upon appeals in any case where there are practical difficulties or undue hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, to adapt the application of the code, to the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
(4)  The board shall affix a reasonable time to hear a civil penalty appeal, shall give due notice to all parties, and shall render its decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The board shall determine whether the civil penalty assessed was reasonable in light of the violation and may affirm, eliminate, or reduce the civil penalty. A majority vote of the board shall be required to eliminate or reduce any civil penalty. 
(5)  Every decision of the board shall be subject to review by proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted in Edgecombe or Nash County Superior Court, as appropriate within fifteen (15) days after the written decision of the board is filed or after a copy thereof is delivered to the appealing party, whichever is later. The decision of the board may be delivered to the aggrieved party either by hand delivery or by any method authorized by the North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(c)  Injunction. Any person aggrieved by a decision rendered by the board may petition the superior court for an injunction restraining the code enforcement official from carrying out the order or decision and the court may upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the code enforcement official pending a final disposition of the cause; provided, however, that such petition shall be filed within thirty (30) days after issuance of the order or rendering of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-20, § 1, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-01-57, § 1, 7-23-01; Ord. No. O-2009-36, § 1, 5-11-09; Ord. No. O-2011-85, § 3, 9-12-11) 
Sec. 11-19. - Other unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to remove (or permit the removal of), damage or deface any complaint, notice, order or certificate posted in accordance with the provisions of this code, unless the code enforcement official consents in writing to such action. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or owner's agents of any dwelling subject to the provisions of this code to fail to furnish to the buyer(s) a copy of the inspection findings or report prior to closing or other property transfer of such dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-20, § 1, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-01-57, § 1, 7-23-01) 
Sec. 11-20. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-21. - Invalidity. 
    Notwithstanding any other evidence of intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling intent of the city council of the City of Rocky Mount that if any provision of this code or the application 
thereof to any person, firm, or corporation or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this code and the application of such provisions to persons, firms, or corporations or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 0-98-20, § 1, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 0-01-57, § 1, 7-23-01) 
Chapter 12 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; human relations commission, § 2-96 et seq. 
State Law reference- State Fair Housing Act, G.S. § 41A-1 et seq.; authority to undertake human relations programs, G.S. § 160A-492. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2010-72, § 1, adopted Aug. 9, 2010, amended art. II in its entirety as set out herein. The former art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1967, § 71/2-11-71/2-15. 

Sec. 12-26. - Title and purpose. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Fair Housing Ordinance of the City of Rocky Mount." The general purpose of this article is to secure for all individuals within the city freedom from discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin in the sale, rental or advertising of dwellings, in the provision of brokerage services, or in the availability of residential real estate-related transactions by providing rights and remedies for violation of this article substantially equivalent to the rights and remedies provided by the Federal Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. O-2010-72, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Sec. 12-27. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aggrieved person includes any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice; or believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur. 
    Charge means the statement of facts issued by the City of Rocky Mount's Human Relations Department under this article upon which the department has found reasonable cause to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur. 
    Commission means that Human Relations Commission of the City of Rocky Mount. 
    Committee means the complaint review committee. 
    Complainant means a person(s), including the department, who has filed a complaint with the department under this article. 
    Complaint means a written complaint filed with the City of Rocky Mount's Human Relations Department in accordance with the provisions of chapter 12, article II, of the Rocky Mount Code of Ordinances. 
    Conciliation means attempted resolution of issues raised by a complaint or by the investigation of the complaint, through informal negotiations involving the aggrieved person, the respondent and the department. 
    Conciliation agreement means a written statement setting forth the resolution of the issues in conciliation. 
    Covered multifamily dwellings means buildings comprising four (4) or more residential units if the building has one (1) or more elevators; and ground floor residential units in other buildings comprising four (4) or more residential units. 
    Department means the City of Rocky Mount's Human Relations Department. 
    Director means the director of the human relations department. 
    Director's designee means an employee of the Rocky Mount Human Relations Department. 
    Disabled means with respect to a person: 
(1)  A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one (1) or more of such person's major life activities; 
(2)  A record of having such an impairment; or 
(3)  Being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802). 
    Discriminatory practice means an act that is prohibited under this article. 
    Dormitory means a residential dwelling located on the premises of a college, business college, trade school or university for the purpose of housing students registered and attending such an institution. 
    Dwelling includes any improved or unimproved real property or part thereof which is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as the home or residence of one (1) or more individuals. 
    Familial status means one (1) or more persons who have not attained the age of eighteen (18) years being domiciled with a parent or another person having legal custody of the person or persons; or the designee of the parent or other person having custody, provided the designee has the written permission of the parent or other person. The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any person who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years. 
    Family includes a single individual. 
    Hearing means a proceeding conducted to receive evidence or argument on a matter before the department. 
    Persons includes one (1) or more individuals, political subdivisions of the state and instrumentalities thereof, including the city or any governmental entity or agency thereof, partnerships, associations, corporations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers or any other legal or commercial entity. 
    Real estate broker or salesman means a person, whether licensed or not, who, on behalf of others, for a fee, commission, salary, or other valuable consideration, or who with the intention of expectation of receiving or collecting the same, lists, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents or leases real property, or the improvements thereon, including options, or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate on the behalf of others such an activity, or who advertises or holds himself or herself out as engaged in such activities; or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate on behalf of others a loan secured by mortgage or other encumbrances upon real property, or who is engaged in the business of listing real property in a publication, or a person employed by or acting on behalf of any of these. 
    Real property includes buildings, structures, real estate, lands, tenements, leaseholds, cooperatives, condominiums and hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal, or any interest therein. 
    Residential real estate transaction means the sale or rental of residential dwellings or real estate. 
    Residential real estate-related transactions means the making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling; or secured by residential real estate; or the selling, brokering or appraising of residential real property. 
    Respondent means a person accused of a discriminatory housing practice in a complaint filed pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-72, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Sec. 12-28. - Discriminatory practices prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to commit or attempt to commit any act, practice, activity or procedure related directly or indirectly to the sale or rental of public or private housing, which affects or may tend to affect the availability or desirability of housing on an equal basis to all persons. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-72, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Sec. 12-29. - Discrimination in housing practices. 
(a)  It is a discriminatory housing practice for an owner or any other person engaging in a real estate transaction or residential real estate-related transaction, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin of a person or of a person residing with that person or of friends or associates of that person: 
(1)  To refuse to sell, exchange, rent or lease any real property. 
(2)  To discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of a real estate transaction or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith. 
(3)  To refuse to receive or fail to transmit a bona fide offer to engage in a real-estate transaction from a person. 
(4)  To refuse to negotiate for a real estate transaction with a person. 
(5)  To represent to a person that real property is not available for inspection, sale, rental or lease, when in fact it is so available, or to intentionally fail to bring a property listing to a person's attention, or to refuse to permit a person to inspect real property. 
(6)  To make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination. 
(7)  To offer, solicit, accept, use or retain a listing of real property or sale, rental or lease with the understanding that a person may be discriminated against in the sale, rental or lease of that real property or in the provision of facilities or services in connection therewith. 
(8)  For a person for profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any real property by representation regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, familial status or national origin or with a handicap. 
(9)  Every condition, restriction or prohibition including a right of re-entry or possibility of reverter, which limits the conveyance, lease or use or occupancy of real property on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin, is a discriminatory practice and is void, except a limitation of conveyance for use of any real property on the basis of religion, held by a religious or charitable organization operate, supervised or controlled by a religious institution or organization and used for religious or charitable purposes. 
(10)  For any person, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin, to intimidate, threaten, coerce or interfere with any other individual on account of that person having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of that person having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise and enjoyment of, any rights granted or protected by this article. 
(11)  For any person, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin, to restrict or attempt to restrict the choices of a person by word or conduct in connection with seeking, negotiating for, buying or renting a dwelling so as to perpetuate, or tend to perpetuate segregated housing patterns or to discourage or obstruct choices in a community, neighborhood or development. 
(12)  To refuse to permit, at the expense of a handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the person if the modifications are necessary to the handicapped person's full enjoyment of the premises; except that, in the case of a rental unit, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for modification on agreement by the renter to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modifications, reasonable wear and tear excepted. 
(13)  To refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services, when these accommodations may be necessary to a handicapped person's equal use and enjoyment of a dwelling. 
(14)  To fail to design and construct covered multifamily dwellings available for first occupancy after January 1, 2011, so that such construction complies with Volume 1-C of the North Carolina State Building Code and the 2003 ANSI A117.1 and all other applicable federal, state, and local regulations. 
(15)  To otherwise make unavailable or deny housing. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-72, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Sec. 12-30. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Nothing in this article II: 
(1)  Prohibits a religious organization, association or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color or national origin; 
(2)  Prohibits a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its members or from giving preference to its members; 
(3)  With respect to discrimination based on sex, prohibits the rental or leasing of housing accommodations in a single-sex dormitory property to the extent that such a dormitory is segregated based on sex only for the purpose of protecting values of personal modesty or privacy; 
(4)  Limits the applicability of any reasonable local, state or federal restrictions regarding the maximum number or occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling; 
(5)  Prohibits conduct against a person because such person has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substance Act (21 U.S.C. 802); 
(b)  Nothing in this article II, other than subsections 12-29(a)(6) and (10), applies to: 
(1)  The sale or rental of any single-family house by an owner, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  The owner does not own or have any interest in more than three (3) single-family houses at any one (1) time; 
b.  The house is sold or rented without the use of a real estate broker, agent or salesperson or the facilities of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings. If the owner selling the house does not reside in it at the time of the sale or was not the most recent occupant of the house prior to such sale, the exemption in paragraph (b)(1) of this section applies to only one (1) such sale in any twenty-four-month period. 
(2)  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one (1) of such living quarters as his or her residence. 
(c)  Nothing in article II, regarding discrimination based on familial status applies with respect to housing for older persons. As used in this section, housing for older persons means housing: 
(1)  Provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons (as defined in the state or federal program); or 
(2)  Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons sixty-two (62) or older. Housing satisfies the requirements of this section even though: 
a.  There are persons residing in such housing on January 1, 2011, who are under sixty-two (62) years of age, provided that all new occupants are persons sixty-two (62) years of age or older; 
b.  There are unoccupied units, provided that such units are reserved for occupancy by persons sixty-two (62) years of age or over; 
c.  There are units occupied by employees of the housing provider (and family members residing in the same unit) who are under sixty-two (62) years of age provided they perform substantial duties directly related to the management or maintenance of the housing. 
(3)  Or, intended and operated for occupancy by at least one (1) person fifty-five (55) years of age or older per unit. Housing qualifies as housing for older persons under this subsection as housing for older persons under this subsection if it satisfies the following requirements: 
a.  At least eighty (80) percent of the units in the housing facility are occupied by at least one (1) person fifty-five (55) years of age or older per unit except that a newly constructed housing facility for the first occupancy after January 1, 2011, need not comply with this paragraph until twenty-five (25) percent of the units are occupied; and 
b.  The publication of, and adherence to, policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for persons fifty-five (55) years of age or older. 
c.  The owner or manager complies with rules issued by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the Housing for Older Peoples Act of 1995 (24 C.F.R., Part 100, Subpart E- Housing for Older Persons) for verification of occupancy, which provides for verification by reliable surveys and affidavits; and included examples of the types of procedures relevant to the determination of compliance with subsection 12-30(c)(3)b. Such surveys and affidavits shall be admissible in administrative and judicial proceedings under this article for the purposes of such verification. 
(4)  Housing which otherwise satisfies the requirements of subsection 12-30(c)(3) shall not fail to meet the requirement of housing for older persons even though: 
a.  On January 1, 2011, under eighty (80) percent of the occupied units in the housing facility are occupied by at least one (1) person fifty-five (55) years of age or older per unit, provided that at least eighty (80) percent of the units that are occupied by new occupants after January 1, 2011, are occupied by at least one (1) person fifty-five (55) years of age or older. 
b.  There are unoccupied units, provided that at least eighty (80) percent of such units are reserved by occupancy by at least one (1) person fifty-five (55) years of age or over. 
c.  There are units occupied by employees of the housing (and family members residing in the same unit) who are under fifty-five (55) years of age and the person substantial duties directly related to the management or maintenance of the housing. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-72, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2010-72, § 1, adopted Aug. 9, 2010, numbered this section as § 12-30.1. At the discretion of the editor, it has been renumbered as § 12-30. 
Sec. 12-31. - Discrimination in financial practices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to discriminate against any person in making available such as a transaction, or in the terms of conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin. Unlawful conduct under this section includes, but is not limited, as follows: 
(1)  To discriminate against the applicant because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin. 
(2)  To use a form of application for financial assistance or to make or keep a record or inquiry in connection with applications for financial assistance which indicates, directly or indirectly, an intent to make a limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or natural origin. 
(3)  To fail or refuse to provide any person, in connection with a residential real estate-related transaction, information regarding the availability of loans or other financial assistance, application requirements, procedures or standards for the review and approval of loans or financial assistance, or provide information which is inaccurate or different from that provided others, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(4)  With respect to a person or entity engaged in the purchasing of loans or other debts or securities which support the purchase, construction, improvement, repair or maintenance of a dwelling, or which are secured by residential real estate, to refuse to purchase such loans, debts, or securities, or to impose different terms or conditions for such purchases, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(5)  With respect to a person or entity engaged in the making of loans or in the provision of other financial assistance relating to the purchase, construction, improvement, repair or maintenance of dwellings or which are secured by residential real estate to impose different terms or conditions for the availability of such loans or other financial assistance because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-72, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Sec. 12-32. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services. 
    It is a discriminatory practice for any person or other entity whose business includes engaging in the selling, brokering or appraising in the selling, brokering or appraising of residential real property to deny any person who is otherwise qualified by state law, access to, or membership or participation in, any real estate broker's organization, multiple listing service or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of engaging in real estate transactions, or to discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, making available such services, or in the performance of such services, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-72, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Sec. 12-33. - Other discriminatory practices. 
(a)  It is a discriminatory practice for any person against whom a complaint has been filed under this article to fail to preserve or to fail to make available to the department or it's duly authorized representative any evidence or possible sources of evidence with regard to that complaint. 
(b)  It is a discriminatory practice for a person, as a party to a conciliation agreement made under this article, to violate the terms of agreement. 
(c)  Conspiracy to violate this article is unlawful. It is a discriminatory practice for a person or for two (2) or more persons to conspire to: 
(1)  Retaliate or discriminate in any manner against a person because that person has opposed a practice prohibited by this article, or because that person has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this article; or 
(2)  Aid, abet, incite, compel, or coerce a person to engage in any of the acts or practices prohibited by this article; or 
(3)  Obstruct or prevent a person from complying with the provisions of this article or any order issued thereunder; or 
(4)  Resist, prevent, impede or interfere with the department or any of its members or representatives in the lawful performance of a duty under this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-72, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Sec. 12-34. - Acting for another person no defense. 
    It shall be no defense to a violation of this article by a person that the violation was requested, sought, or otherwise procured by another person. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-72, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Sec. 12-35. - Provisions for enforcement. 
(a)  Any aggrieved person or the director on behalf of the department may file a complaint with the department no later than one (1) year after an alleged discriminatory housing practice has occurred or terminated. The complaint may be filed with assistance of an authorized representative of an aggrieved person, including the organization acting on behalf of an aggrieved person. A complaint may be reasonably and fairly amended at any time. 
(b)  Each complaint must be in writing and must be signed and affirmed by the aggrieved person filing the complaint, or if the complaint is filed by the director on behalf of the department it must be signed and affirmed by the director. The signature and affirmation may be made at any time during the investigation. The affirmation shall sate: "I declare under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is true and correct." 
(c)  Each complaint shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the aggrieved person; 
(2)  The name and address of the respondent; 
(3)  A description and the address of the dwelling which is involved, if appropriate; and 
(4)  A concise statement of the facts, including pertinent dates, constituting the alleged discriminatory housing practice. 
(d)  Upon the filing of a complaint, the director or his or her designee shall serve by certified mail or personal service upon each aggrieved person on whose behalf the complaint was filed a notice acknowledging the filing and advising each aggrieved person of the time limits and choice of forum provided under the law. 
(e)  Within ten (10) days of filing a complaint, the director or his or her designee will serve a notice on each respondent by certified mail or by personal service. The director shall also serve upon respondent a notice identifying the alleged discriminatory practice and advising such respondent of procedural rights and obligations of respondents under this article, together with a copy of the original complaint. A person who is not named a respondent in a complaint but who is identified in the course of the investigation under this article, as a person who is alleged to be engaged, to have engaged, or is about to engage in a discriminatory practice upon which the complaint is based may be joined as an additional or substitute respondent by service of a notice on the person under this article within ten (10) days of the identification. Said notice shall further explain the basis for the director's belief that the person to whom the notices are addressed are properly joined as a respondent. The respondent may file an answer not later than ten (10) days after the receipt of the notice. The answer must be signed and affirmed by the respondent. The affirmation must state: "I declare under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is true and correct." 
(f)  Within thirty (30) days of the filing of a complaint, the director or his or her designee will initiate an investigation. Unless it is impracticable to do so, investigations under this article will be completed within one hundred (100) days of the filing of the complaint. If the investigation is not completed within one-hundred-day period, the aggrieved person and the respondent, shall be notified of the reasons for the delay by certified mail or personal service. At the end of each investigation under this article, a final investigation report will be prepared. The information derived from an investigation, including the final investigative report will be made available to the aggrieved person and the respondent. Following the completion of investigation, the aggrieved person and the respondent shall be notified that the final investigation report is complete and will be provided upon request. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-72, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Sec. 12-36. - Powers of the complaint review committee and/or the director of human relations or his or her designee. 
    To effectuate the purposes of this article the committee and/or the director or his or her designee shall have the power: 
(1)  To receive, initiate, investigate, seek to conciliate and conduct hearings on complaints filed under this article, make recommendations to parties named in such complaints, approve or disapprove plans to eliminate or reduce the effects of discriminatory practices and monitor compliance with such plans. 
(2)  To adopt rules and regulations for carrying out the administrative and enforcement functions of the Fair Housing Ordinance of the City of Rocky Mount. Such rules and regulations shall be approved by the human relations commission and shall be adopted, amended or rescinded after the commission holds a public hearing upon not less than fifteen (15) days following publication of notice of the public hearing. A copy of the text of the proposed rule, amendment or decision shall be available for public inspection and copying at the office of the department. 
(3)  To issue a subpoena requiring the attention and testimony of witnesses; after having first sought voluntary responses, the production of evidence, including, but not limited to, books, records, correspondence or documents, in the possession or under the control of the person subpoenaed; and access to relevant and material evidence for the purposes of examination and copying. 
(4)  The subpoena shall state the name, title, capacity and address of its issuer; the authority under which it is issued; the identity of the person or evidence subpoenaed; the name of the person to whom and the place, date and the time at which it is returnable; the nature of the evidence to be examined or copied; and the date and time when access is requested. The complaint review committee and/or the director may in accordance with this subsection, issue subpoenas and order discovery in aid of investigations and hearings under article. Such subpoenas and discovery may be ordered to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as would apply if the subpoenas or discovery were ordered or served in aid of a civil action in the general court of justice. A subpoena shall be returnable to the department. 
(5)  Any person served with a subpoena who fails to comply therewith may, within five (5) days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, a legal holidays) after the date of service of the subpoena upon him, directly petition the Nash or Edgecombe County Superior Court to revoke or modify the subpoena. For purposes of this section, service shall be made and proof thereof established pursuant to Rule 45 of the North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(6)  Upon the failure of any person to respond or comply with a lawful interrogatory, request for production of documents, or subpoena issued under this section, the director or complaint review committee, as applicable, may apply to the superior court division of the general court of justice for an order requiring such person to respond or comply with the interrogatory, request for production of documents, or subpoena. The court shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders after notice to all proper parties. 
(7)  Neither a complaint filed pursuant to this article nor the results of the director's or complaint review committee's investigation, discovery or attempts at conciliation, in whatever form prepared and preserved shall be subject to inspection, examination or copying under G.S. ch. 132. 
(8)  The provisions of G.S. ch. 143 art. 33C [G.S. § 143-318.9 et seq.] shall not be applicable to the activities of the director or complaint review committee to the extent that it is receiving a complaint or conducting an investigation, discovery or conciliation pertaining to a complaint filed pursuant to this section. 
(9)  If the director concludes at any time following the filing of a complaint that prompt judicial action is necessary to carry out the purposes of this article, director may authorize a civil action for appropriate temporary or preliminary relief pending final disposition of the complaint under this article. Upon notification of the need for prompt judicial action, the city on behalf of the complainant shall commerce and maintain such an action. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-72, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Sec. 12-37. - Conciliation procedures. 
(a)  During the period beginning with the filing of a complaint and ending with the filing of a charge or the dismissal of the complaint by the director or committee, the director or committee shall to the extent feasible, attempt to conciliate the complaint. 
(b)  In conciliating a complaint, the director or committee will attempt to achieve a just resolution of the complaint and to obtain assurances that the respondent will satisfactorily remedy any violations of the rights of the aggrieved persons, and take such action as will assure the elimination of discriminatory housing practices, or the prevention of their occurrence, in the future. 
(c)  The terms of a settlement of a complaint will be reduced to a written conciliation agreement. Any conciliation agreement arising out of conciliation efforts by the department or the committee shall be between the complainant and the respondent and shall be subject to the approval of the director. The conciliation agreement shall seek to protect the interests of the aggrieved persons, other persons similarly situated, and the public interest. Each conciliation agreement shall be made public unless the complainant and the respondent otherwise agree and the director or committee determines that disclosure is not required to further the purposes of this article. 
(d)  A conciliation agreement negotiated by the director or committee may include, but is not limited to, the: 
(1)  Sale, exchange, lease, rental, assignment, or sublease of real property to a person; 
(2)  Extension to all persons of the full and equal enjoyment of the advantages, facilities, privileges and services of the respondent; 
(3)  Reporting as to the manner of compliance; 
(4)  Posting of notices in conspicuous places in the respondent's place of business in a form prescribed by the director or the committee; and 
(5)  Payment to the complainant of actual damages, including compensation for humiliation or embarrassment, and reasonable attorney fees. 
(e)  At any time, but not later than one (1) year from the date of the conciliation agreement, the director or committee shall investigate whether the terms of the agreement are being complied with by the respondent. Upon deciding that the terms of agreement are not being complied with by the respondent, the director or committee shall take informal action to seek voluntary compliance with the agreement. If informal action does not result in compliance the director or committee, shall file a civil action for the enforcement of the terms of the conciliation agreement. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-72, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Sec. 12-38. - Reasonable cause determination and effect. 
(a)  If it is decided by the director that there is no reasonable cause to believe that the respondent has engaged in any discriminatory practice in violation of this article, the director shall issue a short and plain written statement of the facts upon which the director has based the no reasonable cause determination; dismiss the complaint, notify the aggrieved person and the respondent of the dismissal by certified mail or personal service. 
(b)  If the director determines that reasonable cause exists, the director will immediately issue a charge under this article, on behalf of the aggrieved person, and shall notify the aggrieved person and the respondent of this determination by certified mail or personal service. 
(c)  Such charge: 
(1)  Shall consist of a short and plain statement of the facts upon which the director has found reasonable cause to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur; 
(2)  Shall be based on the final investigative report; and 
(3)  Need not be limited to the facts or grounds alleged in the complaint filed under section 12-35. Provided that the director will not issue a charge based upon facts or grounds not alleged in the complaint unless the record of the investigation shows that the respondent has been given notice and an opportunity to respond to the allegation. 
(4)  May be amended once as a matter of right prior to the filing of a civil action under subsection 12-39(c), or pursuant to rules and regulations adopted for administrative enforcement under subsection 12-39(a) if an election has not been made pursuant to subsection 12-39(c); provided that the charge shall not be amended based upon facts or grounds not alleged in the compliant unless the record of investigations shows that the respondent has been given notice and an opportunity to respond to this allegation, and further provided that the director may reopen the investigation under section 12-35 to give the respondent an opportunity to respond to the allegation. 
(d)  Together with the service of this charge, the director shall provide the aggrieved person and the respondent the following: 
(1)  Information as to how to make an election under subsection 12-39(c), and the effect of such an election; 
(2)  A notice of an opportunity for a hearing under subsection 12-39(a) at a time and place specified in the notice unless that election is made. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-72, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Sec. 12-39. - Administrative and judicial enforcement. 
(a)  If an election is not made under subsection (c) with respect to a charge filed under section 12-38, the director shall provide for an opportunity for a hearing on the record with respect to said charge. The director shall delegate the conduct of the hearing to the complaint review committee of the human relations commission. The hearing shall be conducted after proper notice to the parties under rules and procedures issued by the director. 
(b)  With respect to a hearing under this section: 
(1)  Rights of parties. At a hearing under this section each party may appear in person, be represented by counsel, present evidence, cross-examine witnesses, and obtain the issuance of subpoenas under subsection 12-36(3). Any aggrieved person may intervene as a party in the proceeding. The department shall be considered a party in the proceeding without the need to intervene and shall maintain the proceeding on the behalf of the aggrieved person. 
(2)  The director shall have the authority to promulgate rules and regulations providing for expedited discovery. 
(3)  The complaint review committee shall have the authority to conduct hearings under this section, issue subpoenas under subsection 12-36(3), conciliate all matters in controversy and enter into binding conciliation agreements, make final findings of fact and conclusions of law, and enter all orders necessary to the conduct of hearings held under this section. 
(4)  If the complaint review committee finds that the respondent has engaged or is about to engage in a discriminatory housing practice, the complaint review committee shall promptly issue an order for such relief as may be appropriate, which may include actual damages suffered by the aggrieved person and injunctive or other equitable relief and a reasonable attorney's fee to an aggrieved person intervening in the proceeding pursuant to subsection 12-39(b)(1). Such order may, to vindicate the public interest, assess a civil penalty payable to the City of Rocky Mount: 
a.  In an amount not exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) if the respondent has not been adjudged to have committed any prior discrimination housing practice; 
b.  In an amount not exceeding twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) if the respondent has been adjudged to have committed one (1) other discriminatory housing practice during a five-year period ending on the date of the filing charge; and 
c.  In an amount not exceeding fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) if the respondent has been adjudged to have committed two (2) or more discriminatory housing practices during the seven-year period ending on the date of the filing of this charge; 
Except that if the acts constituting the discriminatory housing practice that is the object of the charge are committed by the same natural person who has been previously adjudged to have committed acts constituting a discriminatory housing practice, then the civil penalties set forth in subparagraphs b. and c. may be imposed without regard to the period of time within any subsequent discriminatory housing practice has occurred; and except that no such order shall effect any contract, sale, encumbrance, or lease consummated before the issuance of such order and involving bonafide purchaser, encumbracer, or tenant without actual notice of the charge filed under this article. 
(5)  The complaint review committee shall commence the hearing under this section no later than one hundred twenty (120) days following the issuance of the charge, unless it is impractical to do so. If the committee is unable to commence the hearing within one hundred twenty (120) days after the issuance of the charge, the committee shall notify the director, the aggrieved person on whose behalf the charge was filed, and the respondent, in writing of the reasons for not doing so. 
(6)  The complaint review committee shall make findings of fact and conclusions within sixty (60) days after the end of the hearing under this section, unless it is impracticable to do so. If the committee is unable to make findings of fact and conclusions of law within such period, or any succeeding sixty-day period thereafter, the committee shall notify the director, the aggrieved person on whose behalf the charge was filed, and the respondent, in writing of the reasons for not doing so. 
(7)  The director shall have the authority to review any finding, conclusion, or order issued under this section not later than thirty (30) days after the finding, conclusion or order is issued, otherwise the finding, conclusion, or order becomes final. 
(8)  The director shall cause any findings of fact and conclusion of law made with respect to any final orders for relief under this section, together with a copy of such order, to be served upon each aggrieved person and each respondent in the proceeding. 
(9)  The department shall make final administrative disposition of a complaint filed under subsection 12-35(a) within one (1) year of the date of filing of the complaint, unless it is impracticable to do so, in which case the director shall notify the complainant and respondent in writing of the reasons for not doing so. 
(c)  If a charge is issued, an aggrieved person or respondent may elect to file a civil action in the general court of justice. The election must be made no later than thirty (30) days after the receipt of the charge. The person making the election shall give notice to the director and all other complainants and respondents to whom this charges relates. The notification will be filed and served in accordance with the procedures established by the department. If a timely election is made for a civil action in lieu of the administrative hearing, the city shall commence and maintain the civil action seeking relief on behalf of the aggrieved person. If a timely election is not made in accordance with this article, the department shall provide an opportunity for an administrative hearing based on the charge. 
(d)  Venue for an action filed in the general court of justice is in the county in which alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. 
(e)  In an action brought in the general court of justice for violation of this article, the court may grant any relief, as it deems appropriate, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Award actual and punitive damages; 
(2)  Reasonable attorney's fees; 
(3)  Court costs; 
(4)  Award preventive relief, including a permanent or temporary injunction, restraining order, or other order against the person responsible for a violation of this article as necessary to assure full enjoyment of the right granted by this article; 
(5)  Punitive damages may be awarded; 
(6)  Civil actions brought in the general court of justice are for trial de novo. The parties to the action shall have the right to trial by jury as provided for by North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(7)  The above provisions do not preclude the issuance of a criminal summons in lieu of or in addition to a civil penalty. Each violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-72, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Sec. 12-40. - Judicial review and court enforcement of final decision. 
(a)  Judicial review. 
(1)  Any party aggrieved by a final order for relief under this article granting or denying in whole or in part the relief sought may obtain a review of such order under G.S. 150B-52. 
(2)  Notwithstanding such chapter, venue of the proceeding shall be in the county in which the discriminatory housing practice is alleged to have occurred, and filing of the petition for review shall be not later than thirty (30) days after the order is entered. 
(b)  Court enforcement of administrative order upon petition by the director. 
(1)  The director may petition any superior court for the county in which the discriminatory housing practice is alleged to have occurred or in which any respondent resides or transacts business for the enforcement of the order of the complaint review committee and for appropriate temporary relief or restraining order, by filing in such court a written petition praying that such order be enforced and for appropriate temporary relief or restraining order. 
(2)  The director shall file in court with the petition the record in the proceeding, a copy of such petition shall be forthwith transmitted by the director to the parties to the proceeding before the complaint review committee. 
(c)  Relief which may be granted. Upon the filing of a petition under this section, the court may: 
(1)  Grant to the petitioner, or any other party, such temporary relief, restraining order or other order as the court deems just and proper; 
(2)  Affirm, modify, or set aside, in whole or in part, the order, or remand the order for further proceedings; and 
(3)  Enforce such order to the extent that such order is affirmed or modified. 
(d)  Any party to the proceeding before the complaint review committee may intervene in the superior court. 
(e)  No objection not made before the complaint review committee shall be considered by the court, unless the failure or neglect to urge such an objection is excused because of extraordinary circumstances. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-72, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Sec. 12-41. - Civil action. 
    Any aggrieved person may file a civil action in court not later than two (2) years after the occurrence or termination of an alleged discriminatory housing practice, or the breach of a conciliation agreement entered into under this article, whichever occurs last, to obtain appropriate relief as set forth in subsection 12-39(e) of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-72, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Sec. 12-42. - Records; confidentiality. 
(a)  Every person subject to this article shall make, keep, and preserve records relevant to the determination of whether discriminatory practices have been or are being committed, such records being maintained and preserved in a manner and to the extent required under the Civil Rights Act of 1968 as amended, and any regulations promulgated thereunder. Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to require the making, keeping, and preserving of records other than and except as required under the Federal Act of 1968, 42 U.S.C.A. § 3601 et seq., and any regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(b)  In connection with a complaint filed under this article the committee or director or his or her designee, shall have access at any reasonable time to premises, records, and documents relevant to the complaint, and the right to examine, photograph and copy evidence in compliance with the North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(c)  Neither a complaint filed pursuant to this article, nor the results of the committee's investigations, discovery or attempts at conciliation, in whatever form prepared and preserved, shall be subject to inspection, examination, or copying under G.S. ch. 132. Each conciliation agreement shall be public record unless the aggrieved person and respondent otherwise agree and either the department or committee determine that disclosure is not required to further the purposes of the article. 
(d)  The provisions of G.S. ch. 143 art. 33C shall not be applicable to the activities of the committee to the extent that it is receiving a complaint or conducting an investigation, discovery, or conciliation pertaining to a complaint filed pursuant to this article. Administrative hearings pursuant to this article shall not be private but shall be public. 
(e)  Nothing that is said or done in the course of conciliation under this article may be made public or used as evidence in subsequent hearings under this article without the written consent of the persons concerned. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-72, § 1, 8-9-10) 
Chapter 13 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate trade, business, and employment, § 10(d). 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; business development authority, § 2-56 et seq.; alarm systems, Ch. 3; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; registration of contractors, § 5-66 et seq.; storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks prohibited, § 8-28; fire exit requirements, § 8-34; gas, Ch. 9; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; distribution of handbill regulations, § 10-51; sound-producing devices regulated, § 10-151; loud or disturbing noises including bicycle and vehicle noises prohibited, § 10-152; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, Ch. 19; traffic and vehicles, Ch. 20; vehicles for hire, Ch. 22; subdivisions, App. A; zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Commerce and business, G.S. Ch. 66; discrimination in business, G.S. Ch. 75B; occupational licensing boards, G.S. Ch. 93B; license taxes, G.S. §§ 105-33 et seq., 160A-211; Sunday closing ordinances, G.S. § 160A-191; Occupational Safety and Health Act of North Carolina, G.S. § 95-126 et seq.; regulation of places of amusement, G.S. § 160A-181; junkyard control act, G.S. § 136-141 et seq.; auctions and auctioneers, G.S. § 85B-1 et seq.; dealers in scrap, salvage or surplus, G.S. § 66-10; dealers in precious metals, G.S. § 66-163 et seq.; authority to regulate and license businesses, trades, etc., G.S. § 160A-194. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 13-1-13-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRIVILEGE LICENSE TAX 
DIVISION 1. - PRIVILEGE LICENSE TAX GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agent means the person having the agency for the manufacturer, producer or distributor. 
    Business means any business, trade or profession. 
    Engaged in business means as either owner or operator. 
    Fiscal year means the period beginning with the first day of July and ending the thirtieth day of June next following. 
    Quarter means any three (3) consecutive months. 
(Code 1967, § 11-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 13-27. - Application. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to business licenses and shall not apply to franchise taxes unless specifically so provided. 
(Code 1967, § 11-2) 
Sec. 13-28. - Effect of other provisions. 
    All licenses provided for by this article shall be granted subject to any other applicable provisions of this Code, state law or city ordinance. 
(Code 1967, § 11-3) 
Sec. 13-29. - Continuing authority of council. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the city council from imposing from time to time such other license taxes as are not specifically herein defined or required, or from increasing or decreasing the amount of any special license tax, or from prohibiting or regulating the businesses or acts licensed. 
(Code 1967, § 11-4) 
State Law reference- Authority to license business, G.S. § 160A-194. 
Sec. 13-30. - License prerequisite to conduct of business. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business or profession for which a license is required, without first having secured the required license and paid the license tax therefor. 
(Code 1967, § 11-5) 
State Law reference- License prerequisite to conduct of business, G.S. § 105-103; engaging in business without license, G.S. § 105-109. 
Sec. 13-31. - Levy. 
    There shall be levied and collected annually, or oftener where provided for, a privilege license tax on all businesses conducted or engaged in within the city as set out in this article. 
(Code 1967, § 11-6) 
State Law reference- Authority to levy privilege license tax, G.S. § 160A-211. 
Sec. 13-32. - When due. 
(a)  The license taxes levied by this article are levied as of June 1 for the fiscal year beginning with such day. In the case of businesses operating under a prior license, the license tax levied as of June 1 shall be due and payable not later than the thirtieth day of the same month. In the case of any business which is begun after June 1, the tax shall be due and payable before the business is begun. 
(b)  When any business is begun after December 31 of any year, the license tax for such business may be reduced by one-half (1/2) of the tax prescribed. 
(Code 1967, § 11-7) 
State Law reference- Duration, expiration date of licenses, G.S. § 105-33(b). 
Sec. 13-33. - Penalty for late payment. 
    If any person fails to pay any license tax required by this article by August 1 of any year, a penalty of five (5) percent per month of the amount of such license tax shall be added to the tax required, and no license shall be granted until the license tax plus the penalty has been paid. The addition of the five (5) percent per month on the amount of the license tax shall not exempt the delinquent from the penalties herein prescribed in case of delinquency. 
(Code 1967, § 11-8) 
Charter reference- Additional remedies for collection of privilege license taxes, § 476. 
State Law reference- Authority for penalty, G.S. § 105-109(e). 
Sec. 13-34. - Classification. 
    All licenses issued by the city shall be designated as either class A or class B, as indicated in the license fee schedule. 
(Code 1967, § 11-9) 
Sec. 13-35. - Application-Class A. 
    Every application for a class A license shall be made to the city council in writing upon a form provided by the city. The application shall be signed either by the applicant or his agent and shall furnish all the information as required on the form. 
(Code 1967, § 11-10) 
Sec. 13-36. - Same-Class B. 
    Every application for a class B license shall be made to the tax collector. 
(Code 1967, § 11-11) 
Sec. 13-37. - False statement in application; penalty. 
    Any person who willfully makes any false statement in any application for a license under any section of this article or schedule shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined and/or imprisoned in the discretion of the court. The fine shall not be less than the amount of tax specified under such section, and shall be in addition to the amount of the tax. 
(Code 1967, § 11-12) 
Sec. 13-38. - Issuance. 
(a)  The tax collector shall not issue any license when the application therefor is refused by the city council in cases where the tax approval of the council is required precedent to the issuance of such license. The tax collector shall not issue any license until the applicant therefor has complied with every provision of this article, and every applicable provision of this Code, state law and city ordinance, rule and regulation, including the execution and delivery of any bond required. 
(b)  Every license issued shall show on the face thereof the name of the licensee, the nature of the business and the location thereof (provided the business has a fixed location), the time for which issued, the amount of the tax and penalty, if any, paid, and the class of the license. 
(c)  Any license requiring the approval of the city council shall show approval on the face of the same. 
(Code 1967, § 11-13) 
Sec. 13-39. - Tax collector to keep copy. 
    The tax collector shall keep an exact copy of each license issued, including the approval of the city council, if required, endorsed on the face of the same. 
(Code 1967, § 11-14) 
Sec. 13-40. - Transfer. 
    Every license shall be a personal privilege, and shall not be transferable to any other person. The licensee may have the license transferred to a new location upon application made to the tax collector. 
(Code 1967, § 11-15) 
State Law reference- License constitutes privilege, assignment regulated, G.S. § 105-33(a), (h). 
Sec. 13-41. - Multiple businesses or locations. 
(a)  Every person engaged in more than one (1) line of business is required to secure a license for each separate line of business in which he is so engaged. 
(b)  Every person having more than one (1) place of business shall secure a license for each such place of business, unless such places are contiguous and operated as a unit. 
(Code 1967, § 11-16) 
State Law reference- Separate business to be separately licensed, G.S. § 105-105. 
Sec. 13-42. - Display. 
    Every license must be kept prominently displayed at the place of business of the licensee named therein, or if such licensee has no fixed place for doing business, the licensee shall keep the license wherever such business is being operated and in a place where it can be seen at any time by an official desiring to inspect it. 
(Code 1967, § 11-17) 
Sec. 13-43. - Duplicates. 
    Upon satisfactory evidence that any licensee has lost any license issued to him, or that the license has been destroyed, the tax collector shall issue to such licensee a duplicate license upon the payment of a fee determined by the city council and published in the Manual of City Policies. 
(Code 1967, § 11-18; Ord. No. 0-90-35, § 1(a), 6-4-90) 
Sec. 13-44. - Revocation, suspension. 
    Any license issued under this article shall be subject to revocation or suspension for a definite or indefinite time by the city council, without refund of any part of the tax paid, if the licensee or manager or person in charge of the business or employee violates any applicable provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation; or if, in the judgment of the council, the licensee does, by reason of his nature or the manner or place in which the business is conducted constitute a nuisance or is a menace to good order or to the public health, safety or morals. Upon the revocation or suspension of any such license, it shall be unlawful for the person to whom such license was granted to continue to conduct such business. 
(Code 1967, § 11-19) 
Sec. 13-45. - License tax schedule. 
    The license tax schedule for the trades, occupations, professions, agencies, businesses and other subjects shall be on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1967, § 11-20) 
Sec. 13-46. - Limitations on tax by law. 
    In all cases where cities are limited by general or special law to a smaller license tax than is imposed by this article, the license shall be issued for the sum so specified. 
(Code 1967, § 11-21) 
Sec. 13-47. - Exemptions granted to bona fide merchants. 
(a)  Any license tax imposed by the provisions of this article on a specific item of merchandise shall not be applicable to a bona fide merchant who handles the same in his general stock if the amount of the item handled by such merchant does not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the value of his total stock; provided, that a merchant who handles a variety of items, none of which constitutes twenty-five (25) percent of his total stock, shall not be completely exempted from the payment of a privilege license tax but shall be subject to a merchant's tax in an amount determined by the city council and published in the Manual of City Policies. This exemption shall not apply to any person not engaged in business as a bona fide merchant. 
(b)  The exemption set forth in this section shall not apply to the sale of beer and wine, nor to any person engaged in the business of manufacturing, installing, repairing, servicing or in the selling of some skill or service. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, a bona fide merchant is defined as one engaged as a store keeper, or shop keeper, whose business is devoted exclusively to the buying, selling and delivering of merchandise, either retail or wholesale, and who is taxed as a merchant under some specific category in this article, such as antique furniture dealers, auto equipment and supply dealers at wholesale, bookstores, building materials dealers, coal dealers, clothing stores, department stores, drugstores, feed and seed dealers, fertilizer dealers, fish and seafood dealers, fruit and vegetable dealers, fur dealers, furniture stores, grocery stores, hardware stores, jewelry stores, meat markets, musical instrument dealers, news dealers, office supplies, remnants, secondhand dealers, shoe stores, etc. 
(Code 1967, § 11-22; Ord. No. 0-90-35, § 1(b), 6-4-90) 
DIVISION 2. - PRIVILEGE LICENSE TAX ON ELECTRIC POWER 

Sec. 13-48. - Citation. 
    This division shall be known and may be cited as the City of Rocky Mount's Privilege License Tax on Electric Power. 
(Ord. No. 0-02-57, § 1, 6-24-02) 
Sec. 13-49. - Definitions. 
    In addition to the common meanings of words, the following definitions shall be applicable herein: 
    City shall mean the City of Rocky Mount. 
    City privilege license tax shall mean the privilege license tax enacted by this division. 
    State franchise tax shall mean the franchise or privilege tax imposed on an electric power company engaged in the business of furnishing electricity, electric lights, current or power as provided in N.C.G.S. Chapter 105, Article 3 entitled "Franchise Tax". 
    Revenue Act shall mean Subchapter I of Chapter 105 of the General Statutes of North Carolina. 
    Secretary of revenue shall mean the secretary of revenue of the State of North Carolina. 
    State Franchise Tax Act shall mean Article 3 of Chapter 105 of the General Statutes of North Carolina. 
    Taxpayer(s) shall mean any electric power company liable for the taxes imposed by this division. 
    Tax collector shall mean the finance department of the City of Rocky Mount or the official agency of the state designated by law and authorized by law to administer the collection of the tax herein levied. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this division, the definitions of words, terms, and phrases as set forth and/or applied in Article 3, Chapter 105, of the North Carolina General Statutes are hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof. Reference to any provision or provisions in the General Statutes shall include the same as may be from time to time amended, modified, supplemented, revised or superceded. 
(Ord. No. 0-02-57, § 1, 6-24-02) 
Sec. 13-50. - Ratification of existing permits. 
    All valid and existing permits to do business issued by the secretary of revenue pursuant to the Revenue Act are for the purposes of this division, hereby ratified, confirmed, and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. 
(Ord. No. 0-02-57, § 1, 6-24-02) 
Sec. 13-51. - Levy of tax. 
    A privilege license tax is hereby levied and imposed for the period(s) designated in section 13-52 of this division upon the electric power companies engaged in the business of furnishing electricity, electric lights, current or power within the corporate limits of the city. The tax shall be three and nine one hundredth (3.09) percent of the companies' taxable gross receipts from the business of furnishing electricity, electric lights, current or power. It is intended that taxable gross receipts hereunder shall be the same as those taxable under the State Franchise Tax Act. 
(Ord. No. 0-02-57, § 1, 6-24-02) 
Sec. 13-52. - Period for which tax due. 
    When a distribution to the city as required under the State Franchise Tax Act shall not be made, the city privilege license tax shall be levied for the periods herein described. A period for which the tax shall be due shall begin on the first day of the first calendar month following the month during which a distribution under the State Franchise Tax Act was due, but not made, to the city and shall continue from month to month until such time as a distribution as required under the State Franchise Tax Act shall be made. The city shall notify taxpayers within a reasonable time after a required distribution is or is not made by the secretary of revenue. 
(Ord. No. 0-02-57, § 1, 6-24-02) 
Sec. 13-53. - Report and payment of tax. 
    The tax shall be paid to the tax collector at the time and in the form and manner provided for the payment of sales and use taxes pursuant to and in accordance with N.C.G.S. § 105-164.16 as the same applies to a taxpayer who is consistently liable for more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) but less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) a month. As applicable to sales and use taxes, such a taxpayer must file a return and pay the taxes due on a monthly basis. The tax shall be due and payable when a return is required to be filed. 
(Ord. No. 0-02-57, § 1, 6-24-02) 
Sec. 13-54. - Refunds. 
    Upon the resumption of distributions by the secretary of revenue as required under the State Franchise Tax Act, a refund may be due to a taxpayer as specified in this section. A refund in the amount indicated herein below shall be due to a taxpayer within thirty (30) days after presentation to the city by the taxpayer of a written certification made by the secretary of revenue stating that portion of the city's percentage distribution amount of the state franchise tax that was paid by the taxpayer and allocable to the calendar quarter for which the most recent distribution was made. The amount of a refund shall equal the portion of the percentage distribution amount designated by the secretary of revenue. 
(Ord. No. 0-02-57, § 1, 6-24-02) 
Sec. 13-55. - Penalties and remedies. 
    The provisions with respect to remedies and penalties applicable to the State Franchise Tax Act as contained in Article 9, Subchapter 1, Chapter 105, of the General Statutes, shall be applicable in like manner to the tax authorized to be levied and collected under this article, to the extent that the same are not inconsistent with the provisions hereof. The city council of the city may exercise any power the secretary of revenue may exercise in collecting the state franchise tax. 
(Ord. No. 0-02-57, § 1, 6-24-02) 
Sec. 13-56. - Administration. 
    In addition to the provisions herein and to the extent that the same are not inconsistent with the provisions of this division, the levy and collection of taxes herein imposed shall be otherwise administered in the same manner as the State Franchise Tax Act as contained in Article 9, Subchapter 1, Chapter 105, of the General Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 0-02-57, § 1, 6-24-02) 
Sec. 13-57. - Confidentiality of records. 
    The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the city privilege license tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the same the provision of Chapter 105 of the North Carolina General Statutes are adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the tax levied herein as if set forth in full. 
(Ord. No. 0-02-57, § 1, 6-24-02) 
Sec. 13-58. - Division as cumulative. 
    The provisions hereof shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 0-02-57, § 1, 6-24-02) 
Sec. 13-59. - Severability. 
    The provisions hereof are hereby declared to be severable, and if any section, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this division is for any reason held invalid or inoperative by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect any other section, paragraph, sentence or clause hereof. 
(Ord. No. 0-02-57, § 1, 6-24-02) 
Sec. 13-60. - Service upon electric power companies. 
    The city shall serve a copy of this division upon the registered agent for any electric power companies affected hereby. 
(Ord. No. 0-02-57, § 1, 6-24-02) 
Secs. 13-61-13-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2010-50, §§ 2, 3, adopted June 14, 2010, amended art. III in its entirety as set out herein. The former art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1967, §§ 14-12-14-18, 14-30-14-41; Ord. No. O-90-35, §§ 1(c), (d), adopted June 4, 1990. 
Cross reference- Trucks delivering fish shall have adequate sanitary drainage, § 10-1; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, Ch. 19; traffic and vehicles, Ch. 20; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate peddlers, itinerant merchants and solicitors, G.S. § 160A-178. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-66. - Exclusions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to the sale or solicitation of fresh seafood or firewood. It additionally shall not apply to the sale or solicitation of Christmas trees, or farm or dairy products by the producer or to organizations or representatives of organizations organized and operating exclusively for educational, political, benevolent, religious, fraternal, charitable or civic purposes and not operating for profit and where such solicitation or sales are made without remuneration to the solicitor. Organizations excluded under this section, shall not be required to meet the requirements of section 13-67 in regards to location of sale. 
(b)  Yard sales. Any person conducting a yard sale that complies with City of Rocky Mount Land Development Code, table 5.1, general notes C24 and 5.2 under the table of general uses shall be exempt from this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-50, § 1, 6-14-10) 
Sec. 13-67. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Assistant. For the purpose of this article an assistant is any manager, sponsor, coordinator, driver, or other person, who is inside the city limits and directly assists any peddler or solicitor. 
    Chief of police. The chief of police or any person authorized to act in his or her behalf. 
    Itinerate merchant. For the purpose of this article an Itinerate Merchant is any person, other than a merchant at a retail store with a permanent physical address in the city limits, who transports an inventory of goods to a building, vacant lot, or other location within the city, and who, at that location, displays goods for sale at retail or offers to sell these goods at retail. 
    Peddler. For the purpose of this article a Peddler is any person or persons who go upon private residential property for the purpose of soliciting orders for or selling goods, wares, periodicals or merchandise, or for the purpose of distributing, disposing of, peddling or hawking goods, wares, periodicals or merchandise. 
    Solicitor. For the purpose of this article a solicitor is any person or persons who go upon public property for the purpose of soliciting orders for, or the sale of goods, wares, periodicals or merchandise or for the purpose of distributing, disposing of, peddling or hawking. Persons operating vehicles or carts that dispense consumable items or act as a point of sale from city streets are included in this definition. This section shall not apply to bona fide sales made pursuant to order of court, mortgages, deeds of trust, or the laws of the state or of the United States. 
    Yard sales. The temporary, occasional sale of personal tangible property, at retail, from a private residence or other permitted locations that comply with City of Rocky Mount Land Development Code Table 5.1, General Note C24 & 5.2 under the table of General Uses. A yard sale is limited to property that is: residential, religious, of a charitable organization, educational, civic, cultural or similar in nature. A yard sale may not occur for more than two (2) consecutive days and no more than four (4) times a year. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-50, § 1, 6-14-10) 
Secs. 13-68 - 13-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 13-86. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, acting as a peddler, solicitor or itinerate merchant, or any person acting as an assistant to any peddler or solicitor to go in or upon, or permit his representative to go in or upon any public area, private residence or premises in the city for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares, periodicals or merchandise, or for the purpose of distributing, disposing of, peddling, selling, or hawking the same, or act as an assistant to any peddler or solicitor, without first obtaining a permit therefore as provided in this division. 
(b)  Any itinerant merchant shall be permitted under the name of said business and if none exist, under the merchant's name. Any assistants to an itinerant merchant shall be considered included under this permit and shall not require further licensing. 
(c)  Any peddler or solicitor shall be permitted under the name of said business, and if none exist, under the peddler or solicitor's name. Any assistants to a peddler or solicitor shall be required to also be permitted. 
(d)  Solicitation in public parks. Solicitation in public parks is prohibited except by civic or nonprofit organizations provided such solicitations or sales are made without remuneration to the individual solicitor. Application must additionally be made to the director of parks and recreation as required in section 15-28. 
(e)  If a dispensing vehicle is to be used, it must be operated in a sanitary manner and must be available at reasonable hours for periodic inspection by the chief of police. Such vehicle shall be kept in a sanitary manner and its operations shall not endanger the health or safety of the citizens of the city and will not obstruct the normal flow of traffic on the streets or create a traffic hazard thereon. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any itinerate merchant to conduct business on any property without the written permission from the property owner or current property lessee. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any peddler to go upon the residential property of any person without prior invitation before 9:00 a.m. or after sundown. 
(h)  Any person required under section 13-86 to obtain a permit shall also be required to obtain any and all other city, county, or state permits or licenses required for the activity engaged in. Such person shall also be required to comply with all zoning requirements. Any person who operates under any permit required by section 13-86 who is notified they do not have any additional required permits or who are in violation of zoning restrictions must cease operation immediately and may not begin operation again under the guise of any permit required by section 13-86 until such other license or permits are properly obtained or any zoning violation is corrected. It shall be unlawful to resume operation until such permits or license have been obtained or such zoning violation is corrected after being ordered by the chief of police to cease operations under this section. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-50, § 1, 6-14-10) 
Sec. 13-87. - Application. 
    Any person or assistant eighteen (18) years of age or older desiring to engage in the business or practices set forth in section 13-86 shall file with the chief of police an application furnished by the police department for a permit to do so. The application shall be in writing, and shall show the applicant's name, age, current place of residence, the nature of employment during the preceding year, the address and nature of business of his or her employer or principal, if any, and shall specify the goods, wares, periodicals or other merchandise to be offered for sale. The application shall state whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime within the past ten (10) years and, if so, the nature of the crime and the date and place of conviction. The applicant as well as any assistant shall also submit to fingerprinting and photographing. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-50, § 1, 6-14-10) 
Sec. 13-88. - Investigation required. 
(a)  The chief of police, or designee, shall conduct an investigation of any applicant for peddlers/solicitation permit within the City of Rocky Mount. It shall be a precondition of acceptance that an applicant, upon request, shall provide fingerprints and all other personal identification including a birth certificate, social security number and driver's license, if available, so that the chief of police may cause a thorough search to be made of local and state criminal records to determine if the applicant has a history of criminal convictions by the use of the division of criminal information (DCI). The chief of police shall have ten (10) days to complete any required background investigation under this division unless the city manager certifies in writing that additional time is needed for the chief of police to complete the investigation. 
(b)  The Rocky Mount Police Department shall provide the findings from the use of the DCI to the city manager or designee; provided that all necessary agreements with the State Bureau of Investigations Division of Criminal Information have been executed. 
(c)  An evaluation of any crime for the purposes of issuance of a peddlers/solicitation permit will take into account the nature of the offense, time frame of the offense, and the time for the offense as it relates to the permit application. 
(d)  Prior to denial or termination of permit based upon criminal history record information (CHRI), the Rocky Mount Police Department shall verify the existence of a record by either obtaining a certified public record or by submitting a fingerprint card of the individual to the criminal information and identification section for verification that the CHRI record belongs to the individual. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-50, § 1, 6-14-10; Ord. No. O-2012-61, § 1, 6-25-12) 
Sec. 13-89. - Issuance. 
    The chief of police shall issue the requested permit if all requirements for the same have been met unless he or she finds in writing, and so advises the applicant, that: 
(1)  The correct permit fee has not been tendered to the city, and, in the case of a check, or bank draft, not honored with payment upon presentation; or 
(2)  That the operation of the commercial or professional enterprise as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all laws, including, but not limited to, the city's zoning and health regulations; or 
(3)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders holding more than ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation, any of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, or the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, have been convicted or any of the following offenses: 
a.  A robbery, burglary, or any other offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another within the past ten (10) years; 
b.  An offense involving sexual misconduct, trespass, destruction of property, theft, fraud, embezzlement, within the past five (5) years; 
c.  An offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs or dangerous weapons; or 
(4)  The applicant is a registered sex offender; or 
(5)  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the permit application or in any document required by the city in conjunction therewith; or 
(6)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, is not over the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-50, § 1, 6-14-10) 
DIVISION 3. - DENIALS, APPEALS, AND CONDITIONS 

Sec. 13-90. - Appeals from denial. 
    Upon the refusal of the chief of police to grant a permit under the provisions of this article, the applicant may appeal to the city council within thirty (30) days of the receipt of written notice that the permit will not be issued. If the city council determines that the applicant and the business as proposed in the application meet the requirements herein set forth it shall direct the chief of police to issue the permit; otherwise, the same shall be refused. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-50, § 1, 6-14-10) 
Sec. 13-91. - Duration; renewal. 
(a)  The period for which such initial permit shall be approved and granted shall be ninety (90) days. 
(b)  Upon the expiration of the permit, the chief of police may, upon application filed in the form and giving the information required in the original application, renew and extend such permit for additional periods not to exceed six (6) months for peddlers and itinerate merchants and one (1) year for solicitors, so long as the permitee or business has operated a lawful commercial or professional enterprise during the preceding permit period. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-50, § 1, 6-14-10) 
Sec. 13-92. - Transfer. 
    No permit issued under the provisions of this division shall be transferable. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-50, § 1, 6-14-10) 
Sec. 13-93. - Display. 
    Each permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be carried at all times by the permitee when he or she is engaged in business allowed under the permit. It shall be unlawful for such permitee to fail or refuse to exhibit such permit when requested to do so by a police officer. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-50, § 1, 6-14-10) 
Sec. 13-94. - Revocation. 
    If it appears that the facts set forth in any permittee's application for a permit under the provisions of this article are untrue in any material respect; or if a permitee is convicted of any felony or of any misdemeanor involving trespass, destruction of property, theft, fraud, assault, embezzlement, controlled substance possession, or sexual assault, or if the permitee is convicted of the violation of any applicable law relating to the business for which the permit was obtained, the permit shall be subject to revocation by the chief of police as hereinafter provided. If the permitee is violating any of the rules or regulations of the county board of health regulating sales on the streets of the city or that the dispensing vehicle, if one is used, is operated in such a way or manner as may endanger the health or safety of the citizens of the city or creates a traffic hazard, then the chief of police shall call the violation or conditions to the attention of the holder of the permit in writing. If the violation or condition is not corrected, or the allegation shown to be untrue, within five (5) days after the notice is given, the permit shall be revoked by chief of police. The permitee may, if he or she desires, appeal from the revocation in writing to the city council within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice of revocation. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-50, § 1, 6-14-10) 
Sec. 13-95. - Reserved. 
Sec. 13-96. - Falsification of information. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to falsify any required information for permits in this article. It shall also be illegal for any person or persons to pass inventory from one (1) person to another or from one (1) company to another for the purpose of avoiding time and location restraints as set out in the City of Rocky Mount Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-50, § 1, 6-14-10) 
Secs. 13-97-13-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PENALTIES AND FEES 

Sec. 13-126. - Penalties and fees. 
    The fees set forth by the city council for all permits and permit renewals shall be set forth in the City Administrative Policy Manual in Section X.6.8. 
    Criminal misdemeanor. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article may be charged with misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted by such person(s), and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-50, § 2, 6-14-10) 
Secs. 13-127-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate places of amusement, G.S. § 160A-181. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-136. - Tent shows. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, operate or exhibit within the corporate limits of the city any circus, carnival or show of like kind, vaudeville show under canvas, menagerie, merry-go-round, Ferris wheel, or other similar riding device operated for profit, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  A circus shall be allowed to operate not more than one (1) time a year on the campus of a college that offers four-year baccalaureate degrees so long as the campus contains at least one hundred (100) acres of land; and 
(2)  Carnival rides shall be allowed to operate for events sponsored by the City of Rocky Mount. 
(Code 1967, § 15-7; Ord. No. O-2010-111, § 1, 12-13-10; Ord. No. O-2012-85, § 1, 8-27-12) 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate tent shows, § 10(2). 
Secs. 13-137-13-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POOLROOMS, BILLIARD HALLS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of town to regulate pool and billiard halls, G.S. § 160A-181. 

Sec. 13-151. - Definition. 
    The term "billiard room or poolroom" shall mean any place of business where pool or billiard tables of any kind or description are operated for profit and in which the amount of gross floor space available for playing pool or billiards occupies more than fifty (50) percent of the total floor space of the place of business. 
(Code 1967, § 15-38; Ord. No. 0-98-89, § 1, 12-14-98) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 13-152. - Application for license. 
    All applications for the issuance of a license under the provisions of this article for a billiard room or poolroom shall be in writing. 
(Code 1967, § 15-39) 
Sec. 13-153. - Hours of operation. 
    No billiard room or poolroom shall be operated or kept open between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.; provided, however, that any billiard or poolroom may remain open after the aforesaid hours for the conduct of business which is then otherwise lawful, but only if all pool or billiard tables are not used or available for use. 
(Code 1967, § 15-40) 
Sec. 13-154. - Location near churches. 
    It is hereby declared a nuisance and a misdemeanor for any person to establish or maintain within two hundred (200) feet of any church building any poolroom or billiard room or any business where standard or miniature pool or billiard tables are operated, whether operated as a pool or billiard table or as vending machines wherein the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages is allowed. This section shall apply only to establishments in which alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed on the premises. 
(Code 1967, § 15-41) 
Sec. 13-155. - Patronage by minors. 
    No person operating a billiard room or poolroom who also sells or permits the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises shall permit any minor under the age of twenty-one (21) years to enter his premises where games of billiards or pool are played or to allow such minor to play such games. 
(Code 1967, § 15-42; Ord. No. 0-98-89, § 2, 12-14-98) 
Secs. 13-156-13-159. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRESENCE OF MINORS IN NIGHTCLUBS 

Sec. 13-160. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this division, the following terms, phrases, and words shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number the plural number. 
    Guardian means any person other than a parent, who has legal guardianship of a minor. 
    Minor means any person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age. 
    Nightclub means any "retail business" or "private club" as defined in G.S. § 18B-1000 which has been issued (1) an on-premises malt beverage permit, (2) an on-premises unfortified wine per mit, (3) an on-premises fortified wine permit, (iv) a brown-bagging permit, or (5) a mixed beverage permit by the North Carolina Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission, but not including a special occasion permit issued by said commission, and which provides or has available for its patrons or members as its principal amusement or entertainment live or recorded music, a dance floor or dancing facilities, or pinball or video machines. Neither a "sports club" as defined in G.S. § 18B-1000(8) nor a "congressionally chartered veterans organization" as defined in G.S. § 18B-1000(9) is a nightclub. 
    Parent means a natural or adoptive parent of a minor. 
(Ord. No. 0-93-75, § 1, 12-13-93) 
Sec. 13-161. - Minors in nightclubs restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any minor to enter or be present in a nightclub between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 0-93-75, § 1, 12-13-93) 
Sec. 13-162. - Responsibilities of owners, operators or employees. 
    It shall be unlawful for an owner, operator or employee of a nightclub to permit or suffer the presence of a minor within a nightclub between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 0-93-75, § 1, 12-13-93) 
Sec. 13-163. - Exception. 
    This division shall not apply to a minor in the custody or control of a parent or guardian who is an owner, operator or employee of a nightclub during the parent or guardian's hours of employment inside the nightclub. 
(Ord. No. 0-93-75, § 1, 12-13-93) 
Secs. 13-164-13-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SECONDHAND GOODS DEALERS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Pawnbrokers, G.S. 91A-1 et seq.. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 13-176-13-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PAWNBROKERS 

Sec. 13-191. - Criminal history check. 
    In order to protect the citizens of the City of Rocky Mount and their properties, the procedures, herein are established to provide for fingerprinting and criminal history checks on all applications for a pawnbrokers license and said license may be denied for those persons convicted of any crime against a person, or crimes against property where intent is an element or any drug or gambling related offense. 
(1)  The city manager or designee, may conduct an investigation of any applicant for a pawnbrokers license within the City of Rocky Mount and it shall be a precondition of acceptance that an applicant, upon request, provide fingerprints and all other personal identification including a birth certificate, social security number and driver's license, if available, so that the city manager or designee may cause a thorough search to be made of local and state criminal records to determine if the applicant has a history of criminal convictions for the crimes enumerated above by the use of the Division of Criminal Information (DCI). 
(2)  The Rocky Mount Police Department shall provide the findings from the use of the DCI to the city manager or designee; provided that all necessary agreements with the State Bureau of Investigations Division of Criminal Information have been executed. 
(3)  An evaluation of any crime for the purposes of a pawnbrokers license will take into account the nature of the offense, time frame of the offense, and the time for the offense as it relates to the license application. 
(4)  Prior to denial or termination of license based upon criminal history record information (CHRI) received the Rocky Mount Police Department shall verify the existence of a record by either obtaining a certified public record or by submitting a fingerprint card of the individual to the criminal information and identification section for verification that the CHRI record belongs to the individual. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-21, § 1, 4-13-15) 
Secs. 13-192-13-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of precious metals business, G.S. § 66-163 et seq. 

Sec. 13-206. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dealer means a person who engages in the business of purchasing precious metals from the public in the form of jewelry, flatware, silver services or other forms and holds himself out to the public by signs, advertising or other methods as engaging in such purchases including any independent contractor purchasing precious metals under any arrangement in any department store; provided, however, that permanently located retail merchants shall be exempted insofar as they make purchases directly from manufacturers or wholesalers of precious metals for their inventories. A permanently located retail merchant who is primarily engaged in the business of purchasing or acquiring jewelry, secondhand furniture, antique furniture, objects of art, artifacts, nonprecious metal collector items, antiquities and other used household furnishings or fixtures for resale to the public, and who purchases precious metals, articles or items from the public only incidentally to his main business, may be exempted from obtaining a permit as provided in section 12-213 if his total purchases or acquisitions of precious metals from the public constituted ten (10) percent or less in dollar volume of the total purchases or acquisitions in dollar volume made by such merchant for all such secondhand items or articles in the twelve-month period next preceding the date of application for an exemption under section 12-213. Pawnbrokers as defined in G.S. § 91A-3 shall be exempted from obtaining a permit insofar as they accept pawns or pledges of items made of precious metals under the provisions of G.S. ch. 91A. 
    Gold means any item or article containing ten (10) karat of gold or more which may be in combination or alloy with any other metal. 
    Platinum means any item or article containing nine hundred (900) parts per thousand or more of platinum which may be in combination or alloy with any metal. 
    Precious metal means gold, silver or platinum, but include coins, medals, medallions, tokens, numismatic items, art ingots or art bars. 
    Silver means any item or article containing nine hundred twenty-five (925) parts per thousand of silver which may be in combination or alloy with any nonprecious metal or which is marked "sterling." 
(Code 1967, § 12-16.1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 13-207. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by regulating the trade in precious metals within the city. 
(Code 1967, § 12-16.1(a)) 
Sec. 13-208. - License and permit required. 
    No person shall operate a precious metal dealership unless such person has applied for and received the privilege license provided by this division and permit from the police department. 
(Code 1967, § 12-16.1(c)(1)) 
Sec. 13-209. - License application; fee. 
(a)  Every application for the privilege license prescribed in section 13-208 shall be upon a form approved by the city manager and shall be filed with the revenue collector. Every such application shall be made under oath and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  If the applicant is a person, the name, fingerprints, photograph and address of such person. If the applicant is a partnership, corporation or association, the name, fingerprints and photograph and address and residence of all persons having any legal or beneficial interest in such applicant; 
(2)  The address of the premises where the precious metal dealership shall be located; 
(3)  A complete statement of all convictions of any person whose name is required to be given in paragraph (1) above, for any felony; 
(4)  A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant; 
(5)  A list of the names, addresses, home telephone numbers and other places of employment of all employees of the establishment; the list shall be updated whenever new employees are hired; and 
(6)  A photographic copy of a receipt (form WM-63) from the North Carolina Department of Agriculture, Consumer Standards Division showing that all scales and weights to be used by the precious metals dealer in the establishment are approved. 
(b)  The revenue collector shall transmit a copy of the application to the police department for an investigative report; to the inspections services division to determine compliance with all zoning and building regulations and ordinances; and the fire department to determine compliance with fire prevention codes. 
(c)  An application in proper form, accompanied by all reports required by this section, shall be approved if it is determined that: 
(1)  The application contains no misstatement of fact; 
(2)  The applicant, or any person having any legal or beneficial ownership interest in the applicant, has not been convicted of a felony within three (3) years next preceding the date of his application; 
(3)  The business premises conforms to all requirements of applicable zoning, building and fire prevention codes; and 
(4)  The business, by reason of the manner or place in which it is to be conducted, will not constitute a nuisance or in any other manner amount to a menace to good order, the public health, safety or morals. 
(d)  The fee for such license shall be determined by the city council and published in the Manual of City Policies. 
(Code 1967, § 12-16.1(c)(2)-(5); Ord. No. 0-90-35, § 1(e), 6-4-90) 
Sec. 13-210. - Permit. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 13-212, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage as a dealer in the business of purchasing precious metals either as a separate business or in connection with other business operations without first obtaining a permit for the business from the police department. The form of the permit and application shall be as approved by the state department of crime control and public safety. The application shall be given under oath and shall be notarized. A thirty-day waiting period from the date of filing of the application is required prior to initial issuance of a permit. A separate permit shall be issued for each location, place or premises within the jurisdiction of the police department which is used for the conduction of a precious metals business, and each permit shall designate the location, place or premises to which it applies. Such business shall not be conducted in any other place than that designated in the permit, and no business shall be conducted in a mobile home, trailer, camper or other vehicle or structure not permanently affixed to the ground or in any room customarily used for lodging in any hotel, motel, tourist court or tourist home as referred to in G.S. § 160A-211. The permit shall be posted in a prominent place on the designated premises. Permits shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months from the date issued and may be renewed without a waiting period upon filing of an application and payment of the annual fee. An annual fee for each dealer's permit shall be charged to provide for the administrative costs of the police department including the purchase of required forms. The fee shall not be refundable even if the permits are denied or later suspended or revoked. The amount of the fee shall be determined by the city council and published in the Manual of City Policies. 
(b)  Such permits shall be in addition to and not in lieu of other business licenses and are not transferable. Any dealer applying to the police department for a permit shall furnish the police department with the following information: 
(1)  His full name, and any other names used by the applicant during the preceding five (5) years. In the case of a partnership, association or corporation, the applicant shall list any partnership, association or corporate names used during the preceding five (5) years; 
(2)  Current address, and all addresses used by the applicant during the preceding five (5) years; 
(3)  Physical description; 
(4)  Age; 
(5)  Driver's license number, if any, and state of issuance; 
(6)  Recent photograph; 
(7)  Record of felony convictions; and 
(8)  Record of other convictions during the preceding five (5) years. 
(c)  If the applicant for a dealer's permit is a partnership or association, all persons owning a ten-percent or more interest in the partnership or association shall comply with the provisions of this section. Any such permits shall be issued in the name of the partnership or association. If the applicant for a dealer's permit is a corporation, each officer, director and stockholder owning ten (10) percent or more of the corporation's stock, of any class, shall comply with the provisions of this section. Any such permits shall be issued in the name of the corporation. 
(d)  No permit shall be issued to an applicant who, within five (5) years prior to the date of application, has been convicted of a felony involving a crime of moral turpitude or larceny or receiving stolen goods or of similar charges in any federal court or a court of this or any other state. In the case of a partnership, association or corporation, no permit shall be issued to any applicant with an officer, partner or director who has within five (5) years prior to the date of application been convicted of a felony involving a crime of moral turpitude or larceny or receiving stolen goods or of similar charges in any federal court or a court of this or any other state. 
(Ord. No. 0-90-35, § 1(f), 6-4-90) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 66-165(a). 
Sec. 13-211. - Employee registration. 
    Every employee engaged in the precious metals business shall, within two (2) days of being so engaged, register his name and address with the police department and have his photograph taken. The police department shall issue to him a certificate of compliance with this section upon the applicant's payment of the sum of three dollars ($3.00) to the police department. The permit shall be posted in the work area of the permit holder. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 165(b). 
Sec. 13-212. - Special occasion permit. 
(a)  A special occasion permit authorizes the permittee to purchase precious metals as a dealer participating in any trade shows, antique shows and crafts shows conducted within the state. A special occasion permit shall be issued by the police department. A permittee under section 13-210 shall apply for a special occasion permit with the police department which issued such dealer's permit. An application for a permit shall be on a form as approved by the state department of crime control and public safety and shall be given under oath and notarized. A thirty-day waiting period from the date of filing of the application is required prior to initial issuance of a permit. Any dealer applying to a local law enforcement agency for a special occasion permit shall furnish the local law enforcement agency with the information required in an application for a dealer's permit as set forth in section 13-210. 
(b)  If the applicant for a special occasion permit is a partnership or association, all persons owning a ten-percent or more interest in the partnership or association shall comply with the provisions of this section. Any such permits shall be issued in the name of the partnership or association. If the applicant for a special occasion permit is a corporation, each officer, director and stockholder owning ten (10) percent or more of the corporation's stock, of any class, shall comply with the provisions of this section. Any such permits shall be issued in the name of the corporation. 
(c)  No permit shall be issued to an applicant who, within five (5) years prior to the date of application, has been convicted of a felony involving a crime of moral turpitude or larceny or receiving stolen goods or of similar charges in any federal court or a court of this or any other state. In the case of a partnership, association or corporation, no permit shall be issued to any applicant with an officer, partner or director who has within five (5) years prior to the date of application, been convicted of a felony involving a crime of moral turpitude or larceny or receiving stolen goods or of similar charges in any federal court or a court of this or any other state. 
(d)  A fee for an application for a special occasion permit shall be charged to provide for the administrative cost of the police department including purchase of required forms. The fee shall not be refundable even if the permit is denied or is later suspended or revoked. This fee shall be determined by the city council and published in the Manual of City Policies. 
(e)  Such permits shall be in addition to and not in lieu of other business licenses and are not transferable. A special occasion permit shall be valid for twelve (12) months from the date issued, unless earlier surrendered, suspended or revoked. Application for renewal of a permit for an additional twelve (12) months shall be on a form as approved by the department of crime control and public safety and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in an amount determined by the city council and published in the Manual of City Policies. A renewal fee shall not be refundable. Each special occasion permit shall be posted in a prominent place on the premises of any show at which the permittee purchases precious metals. 
(Ord. No. 0-90-35, § 1(g), 6-4-90) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 66-165(c). 
Sec. 13-213. - Exemption from permits. 
(a)  Any merchant claiming an exemption from the requirements of sections 13-210 through 13-212, 13-214 and 13-216 due to the percentage of his total business which constitutes precious metals purchases shall file an application therefor with the police department at the same time as applications for dealers' permits are required to be filed under the provisions of this division. The application shall be upon a form approved by the state department of crime control and public safety and shall contain as a minimum the name, home address and business address of the applicant; the name and location of the business at its permanent address; the primary nature of the business both as to purchases and sales; the total dollar volume of purchases of precious metals during the twelve-month period next preceding the date of application; the total dollar volume of all secondhand goods purchased during the same period by the business; the percentage of precious metals purchases or acquisitions to total purchases or acquisitions of secondhand goods; and the date when the merchant commenced the business under which the exemption is claimed. Such application shall be filed under the same oath as is required for a precious metals dealer permit, shall be notarized and shall be accompanied by a fee payment which shall be retained by the police department as cost for administering claims for exemptions. This fee shall be determined by the city council and published in the Manual of City Policies. 
(b)  The application for exemption, if granted, shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months. Thereafter, if the applicant seeks an exemption for the ensuing year he shall file an application for exemption thirty (30) days before the expiration of the prior exemption. If in any calendar month the percentage of precious metals purchased by an exempted merchant exceeds ten (10) percent of his total purchases, he shall file notice thereof with the police department. 
(Ord. No. 0-90-35, § 1(h), 6-4-90) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 66-166. 
Sec. 13-214. - Bond or trust account. 
    Before any permit shall be issued to a dealer pursuant to sections 13-210 through 13-212 the dealer shall execute a satisfactory cash or surety bond or establish a trust account with a licensed and insured bank or savings institution located in the state in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The bond or trust account shall be in favor of the state. A surety bond is to be executed by the dealer and by two (2) responsible sureties or a surety company licensed to do business in the state and shall be on a form approved by the state department of crime control and public safety. Any bond shall be kept in full force and effect and shall be delivered to the police department which first issued a current permit to the dealer. A bond or trust account shall be for the faithful performance of the requirements and obligations of the dealer's business in conformity with this division. The police department shall have full power and authority to revoke the permit and sue for forfeiture of the bond or trust account upon a breach thereof. Any person who has suffered any loss or damage by any act of the permittee that constitutes a violation of this division shall have the right to institute an action to recover against such permittee and the surety or trust account. Upon termination of the bond or trust account the permit shall become void. 
(Code 1967, § 12-16.1(c)(5)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 66-168. 
Sec. 13-215. - Records. 
(a)  Every dealer to whom a permit has been issued pursuant to sections 13-210 through 13-212 shall maintain a tightly bound book, not looseleaf, with pages numbered in sequence, in which shall be recorded, at the time of any purchase of precious metal, a serially numbered account and description of the specific items purchased, including, if applicable, the manufacturer's name, the model, the model number, the serial number, and any engraved numbers or initials found on the items, the date of the transaction, and the name, sex, race, residence, telephone number and driver's license number, if any, of the person selling the items purchased. Both the dealer and the seller shall sign the record entry. If the seller cannot furnish his driver's license, passport or military identification card bearing his photograph, the dealer shall require two (2) forms of positive identification. 
(b)  The record book shall be open at all reasonable times to inspection on the premises by law enforcement agencies and shall not be destroyed until two (2) years following the last transaction which the record book reflects. A copy of each record book entry shall be filed within forty-eight (48) hours of the transaction in the office of the police department. Mailing the required copy to the police department within forty-eight (48) hours shall constitute compliance with this section. 
(c)  The files of the police department which contain such copies of record book entries shall not be subject to inspection and examination as authorized by G.S. § 132-6. Any public official or employee who shall knowingly and willfully permit any person to have access to or custody or possession of any portion of such files, unless the person is one specifically authorized by the police department to have access thereto for purposes of law enforcement investigation or civil or criminal proceedings, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in the discretion of the court but not in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(d)  Every merchant to whom an exemption has been issued pursuant to section 13-213 shall maintain a book in which shall be recorded, at the time of any purchase of precious metal, a description of the specific items purchased and the date of the transaction. This book shall be open at all reasonable times to inspection on the premises by law enforcement agencies and shall not be destroyed until two (2) years following the last transaction which the record book reflects. 
(Code 1967, § 12-16.1(d)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 66-169. 
Sec. 13-216. - Items may not be modified; waiting period prior to disposal. 
    No item included in a dealer purchase shall be sold, traded or otherwise disposed of, melted, cut or otherwise changed in form nor shall any such item be removed from the licensed premises for a period of five (5) days from the date the purchase was made. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 66-170. 
Sec. 13-217. - Purchase of precious metals. 
    Prior to the purchase of precious metals, the dealer shall require the seller to present one (1) form of government-issued identification, such as a driver's license, containing a photographic likeness of the seller, the age and address of the seller. Dealers shall make no purchase from a person who is less than eighteen (18) years old. No dealer shall transfer possession of any purchased precious metal or materially alter the appearance or form of the metal to make identification by a prior owner substantially more difficult until at least five (5) days, excluding Saturday, Sunday and holidays, have elapsed from the date of purchase. Precious metal dealers shall conspicuously post in their places of business the following conversion table: 
One ounce = .91954 troy ounce One troy ounce = 1.097 ounce One troy ounce = 20 pennyweight  
(Code 1967, § 12-16.1(e)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 66-171. 
Sec. 13-218. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  A license issued pursuant to section 13-208 may be revoked without refund of any part of the tax paid if: 
(1)  The licensee has been convicted of or has violated any provision of this division; 
(2)  The licensee has been convicted of or has violated any zoning, building or fire prevention ordinance; or 
(3)  The licensed business is conducted or allowed to be conducted in a manner constituting a public nuisance. 
(b)  A license issued pursuant to section 13-208 is void if the licensee moves or ceases operating a precious metal dealership at the location required to be stated in the application for license. 
(Code 1967, § 12-16.1) 
Sec. 13-219. - Portable smelters. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or operate a smelter in any mobile home, trailer, camper or other vehicle or structure not permanently affixed to the ground, for the purpose of refining precious metals. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 66-173. 
Secs. 13-220-13-239. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MASSAGE PARLORS 

Sec. 13-240. - Purpose and objective. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, welfare and morals of the citizens of the City of Rocky Mount. In order to accomplish this purpose the following license provisions and regulations are ordained for the privilege of carrying on the business, trade, or profession of massage and for the operation or carrying on of the business, trade, or profession commonly known as a massage wherein massage or physical manipulation of the human body is carried on or practiced. The objective is to permit only the business or profession of massage as authorized under this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 1, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-241. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section. 
(a)  Chief of police means the chief of police of the city or one (1) or more assistants designated by him. 
(b)  City manager means the city manager of the city or one (1) or more assistants designated by him. 
(c)  Employee means any person over eighteen (18) years of age, other than a massagist, who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage business and receives compensation from the operator of the business or from patrons. 
(d)  Licensee means any person to whom a license has been issued to own or operate a massage establishment as defined herein. 
(e)  Massage means any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical electrical apparatus or appliances with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointment or other such similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage, under such circumstances that it is reasonably excepted that the person to whom the treatment is provided or some third person on his or her behalf will pay money or give any other consideration or gratuity therefor. 
(f)  Massage establishment means any establishment having a source of income or compensation derived from the practice of massage as defined in subsection (e) above, and which has a fixed place of business where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in or carries on any of the activities as defined in such subsection (e). 
(g)  Massagist, masseur or masseuse means any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage as defined in subsection (e) above. 
(h)  Outcall massage service means any business, the function of which is to engage in or carry on massages at a location designated by the customer or client rather than at a massage establishment as defined in subsection (c). 
(i)  Patron means any person over eighteen (18) years of age who receives a massage under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay money or give any other consideration therefor. 
(j)  Permittee means any person to whom a permit has been issued to act in the capacity of a massagist (masseur or masseuse) as herein defined. 
(k)  Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form or character. 
(l)  Recognized school means any school or educational institution licensed to do business as a school or educational institution in the state in which it is located, or any school recognized by, approved by, or affiliated with the American Massage and Therapy Association, Inc. and which has as one (1) of its purposes the teaching of the theory, method, profession, or work of massage, and which school requires a resident course of study not less than seventy (70) hours before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school or institution of learning following the successful completion of such course of study or learning. 
(m)  Sexual or genital area shall mean genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 2, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-242. - License or permit required. 
(a)  Massage business license required. No person shall engage in or carry out the business of massage unless such person has a valid business license issued by the city pursuant to the provisions of this article for each location that the business of massage is conducted by such person. 
(b)  Massagist's permit required. No person shall practice massage as a massagist, employee or otherwise, unless such person has a valid massagist's permit issued to him or her by the city pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 3, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-243. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply to the following individuals while engaged in the personal performance of the duties of their respective professions: 
(a)  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, physical therapists, or podiatrists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the State of North Carolina. 
(b)  Nurses who are registered or licensed under the laws of the State of North Carolina. 
(c)  Athletic trainers who are employed by a recognized educational institution or professional sports team, and whose work is limited to athletic team members. 
(d)  Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the state, except that this exemption shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face, scalp and hair of the head of the customer or client for cosmetic or beautifying purposes. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 4, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-244. - Application for massage establishment license. 
    Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate or conduct a massage establishment shall file an application under oath on a form provided by the city with the chief of police and pay a nonrefundable annual license fee, which shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year or any part thereof. The application, once accepted, shall be investigated by the police department. Copies of the application shall within five (5) days be referred to the Inspection Services Division of the Department of Community Development and the fire department. These departments shall within thirty (30) days of receipt of a copy of the application inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a massage establishment and make written verification to the chief of police concerning compliance with the codes of the city that they administer. 
    Each application shall contain the following information: 
(a)  A definition of the service to be provided. 
(b)  The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers of the premises where the business is to be conducted. 
(c)  The name and residence address of each applicant. All provisions which refer to applicant include an applicant which may be a corporation or partnership. 
(1)  If the applicant is a corporation, the names and the residence addresses of each of the officers and directors of said corporation and of each stockholder owning more than ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation, and the address of the corporation itself, if different from the address of the massage establishment. 
(2)  If the applicant is a partnership, the names and residence addresses of each of the partners including limited partners, and the address of the partnership itself, if different from the address of the massage establishment. 
(3)  If any of the foregoing persons have resided at an address for less than (2) years prior to date of filing the application then such person shall provide each address at which he or she resided during the previous two (2) years. 
(d)  Proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(e)  Individual or partnership applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and sex. 
(f)  Copy of identification such as driver's license and social security card. 
(g)  One (1) portrait photograph of the applicant at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches and a complete set of applicant's fingerprints which shall be taken by the chief of police or his agent. If the applicant is a corporation, one (1) portrait photograph at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches of all officers and managing agents of said corporation and a complete set of the same officers' and agents' fingerprints which shall be taken by the chief of police or his agent. If the applicant is a partnership, open front-face portrait photograph at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches in size of each partner, including a limited partner in said partnership, and a complete set of each partner or limited partner's fingerprints which shall be taken by the chief of police or his agents. 
(h)  The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(i)  The massage or similar business license history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another city or state has had a business license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(j)  All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations, including the dates of convictions, nature of the crimes and place convicted. 
(k)  The name and address of each massagist who is or will be employed in said establishment. 
(l)  Applicant must furnish a diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school or other institution of learning wherein the method, profession and work of massage is taught; provided, however, that if the applicant will not personally engage in the practice of massage as defined herein, he need not possess such diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school or other institution of learning wherein the method, profession and work of massage is taught. 
(m)  The name and address of any business or other establishment wherein the business or profession of massage is carried on that is owned or operated by any person whose name is required to be given in subsection (c) above. 
(n)  A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant. 
(o)  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit. 
(p)  The names, current addresses and written statements of at least three (3) bona fide permanent residents of the United States that the applicant is of good moral character. If the applicant is able, the statement must first be furnished from residents of the city, then from Nash or Edgecombe Counties, then from the State of North Carolina, and lastly from the remainder of the United States. These references must be persons other than relatives and business associates. 
(q)  Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application. 
(r)  Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, said declaration being duly dated and signed in the city. 
Upon the completion of the above provided form and the furnishing of all foregoing information the police department shall accept the application for the necessary investigations. The holder of a massage establishment license shall notify the chief of police of each change in any of the data required to be furnished by this section within ten (10) days after such change occurs. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 5, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-245. - Application for massagist's permits. 
    Application for a massagist's business permit shall be made on a form provided by the city to the chief of police in the same manner as provided above for massage establishment licenses, accompanied by the annual nonrefundable massagist's permit fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per year or part thereof. The application shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The business address and all telephone numbers where the massage is to be practiced. 
(b)  Name and current residence address, and all names, nicknames and aliases by which the applicant has been known. If the applicant has lived at his or her current address for less than two (2) years then the applicant shall list each address he or she resided during the previous two (2) years. 
(c)  Social Security number, driver's license number and date of birth. 
(d)  Applicant's weight, height, color of hair and eyes and sex. 
(e)  Written evidence that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(f)  A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant for any felony or misdemeanor or violation of a local ordinance except misdemeanor traffic violations. 
(g)  Fingerprints of the applicant taken by the police department. 
(h)  Two (2) front-face portrait photographs taken within thirty (30) days of the date of application and at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches in size. 
(i)  The name and address of the recognized school attended, the dates attended and a copy of the diploma or certificate of graduation awarded the applicant showing the applicant has completed not less than seventy (70) hours of instruction. For persons employed on the date of adoption of this article as a masseur or masseuse in the city, this article shall not apply until ninety (90) days after adoption as provided in section 13-267. Present employment shall be established by sworn affidavit from the employer. Ninety (90) days after the date of adoption of this article such person must be actively enrolled and participating in a course of study designed to fulfill the requirements of this article and such enrollment and participation shall be certified to by an official of the recognized school. The burden of establishing such active engagement, enrollment or participation shall be upon the person seeking a permit herein. For persons not so employed on the date of adoption of the article of this section shall be effective upon passage. In no event shall any person engage in the business of massage in the city without having satisfied the training requirement of the first sentence of this subsection after June 30, 1992. 
(j)  The massage or similar business history and experience for three (3) years prior to the date of application, including but not limited to whether or not such person in previously operating in this or another city or state under a license or permit has had such license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended and the reasons therefor, and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or revocation. 
(k)  A medical certificate signed by a physician, licensed to practice in the state, within seven (7) days of the date of the application. The certificate shall state that the applicant was examined by the certifying physician and that the applicant is free of communicable disease. The additional information required by this subsection shall be provided at the applicant's expense. 
(l)  Such other information, identification and physical examination of the person deemed necessary by the police chief in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore required to be set forth in the application. 
(m)  The names, current addresses and written statements of at least three (3) bona fide permanent residents of the United States that the applicant is of good moral character. If the applicant is able, the statement must first be furnished from residents of the city, then from Nash or Edgecombe Counties, then from the State of North Carolina, and lastly from the remainder of the United States. These references must be persons other than relatives and business associates. 
(n)  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit. 
(o)  Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, said declaration being duly dated and signed in the city. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 6, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-246. - Issuance of license or permit for a massage establishment. 
    The chief of police shall issue a license for a massage establishment or a permit for a masseur or masseuse, if all requirements for a massage establishment or massage permit described in this section are met unless he finds in writing that: 
(a)  The correct permit or license fee has not been tendered to the city, and, in the case of a check, or bank draft, not honored with payment upon presentation; or 
(b)  The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city's building, zoning and health regulations; or 
(c)  The application, if an individual; or any of the stockholders holding more than ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation, any of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; or the holder of any lien of any nature, upon the business and/or the equipment used therein; or the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, have been convicted of any of the following offenses: 
(1)  An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another that amounts to a felony. 
(2)  An offense involving sexual misconduct. 
(3)  An offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs or dangerous weapons that amounts to a felony. The chief of police may issue a license or permit to any person convicted of any of the crimes described in subsections (1), (2) or (3) of this subsection if he finds that such conviction occurred at least five (5) years prior to date of the application and the person has had no subsequent felony convictions for crimes mentioned in this section; 
(d)  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application or in any document required by the city in conjunction therewith; or 
(e)  The applicant has had a massage business, masseur, or other similar permit or license revoked by a municipality or any other state or local agency within five (5) years prior to the date of the application; or 
(f)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, is not over the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 7, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-247. - Approval or denial; application. 
    The chief of police shall act or approve or deny an application for a license or permit under this article within a reasonable period of time and in any event shall approve or deny said license or permit sixty (60) days from the date that said application was accepted. Any applicant whose application for a license or permit is denied shall have the right to appeal such denial by giving written notice to the chief of police within seven (7) days from the date of denial. In the case of an appeal due process shall be accorded the applicant pursuant to section 13-253 of this article and such applicant shall have all of the rights of a person whose license or permit has been revoked or suspended, except that the applicant shall have no right to operate as a licensee or permittee under this article pending the appeal. Every license or permit issued pursuant to this article will terminate at the expiration of one (1) year from the date of its issuance unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 8, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-248. - Waiver of application requirements. 
    The City of Rocky Mount shall waive the requirements of sections 13-244(1) and 13-245(i) of this article if the applicant furnishes satisfactory evidence that: (i) he or she attended not less than seventy (70) hours of instruction in a school within or without this state or in any foreign country that provides education substantially equal to or in excess of the educational requirements of this article; or, (ii) he or she has served a training apprenticeship of not less than five (5) years under a person who, at that time of such apprenticeship, met the requirements of section 13-245(i) of this article and further, that he or she has been actively engaged in the business, trade or profession of massage for not less than ten (10) yards including the apprenticeship period. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 9, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-249. - Multiple massage establishments. 
    Should any massage business have more than one (1) location where the business of massage is pursued, then a license, stating both the address of the principal place of business, and of the other location(s) shall be issued by the chief of police upon the tender of a license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per location. Licenses issued for other locations shall terminate on the same date as that of the principal place of business, regardless of the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 10, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-250. - Posting of license or permit. 
(a)  Every massagist shall post the permit required by this article in his work area. 
(b)  Every person, corporation, partnership or association licensed under this article shall display such license in a prominent place. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 11, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-251. - Register of employees. 
    The licensee or person designated by the licensee of a massage establishment shall maintain a register of all persons employed at any time as masseurs or masseuses. Such register shall be available at the massage establishment to representatives of the city during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 12, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-252. - Revocation or suspension of license. 
    Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or suspended after notice and a hearing, for good cause, where it appears that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article, or where any employee of the licensee, including a masseur or masseuse, is engaged in any conduct at the licensee's place of business which violates ordinances and of which the licensee has actual or constructive knowledge, or in the exercise of reasonable diligence should have had actual or constructive knowledge. Such permit may also be revoked or suspended by the city after notice and hearing for good cause, upon the recommendations of the Nash County Health Department or the Edgecombe County Health Department upon a finding that such business is being managed, conducted or maintained without regard to proper sanitation and hygiene. Such revocation proceedings shall be as prescribed in section 13-254 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 13, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-253. - Revocation of masseur or masseuse permit. 
    A masseur or masseuse permit issued by the chief of police may be revoked or suspended after notice and hearing, for good cause, where it appears that the masseur or masseuse has been convicted of any offense which would be cause for denial of a permit upon an original application, has made a false statement on an application for a permit, or has committed an act in violation of this article. Such revocation proceedings shall be as prescribed in section 13-254 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 14, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-254. - Revocation or suspension proceedings. 
    Upon the determination of a violation of this article or the existence of any other condition which is grounds for revocation or suspension of a license or permit pursuant to section 13-252 or section 13-253 of this article, the chief of police shall serve written notice upon the person whose license or permit has been determined to be subject to revocation or suspension. The notice shall state (a) the specific grounds which make the license or permit subject to revocation or suspension, (b) the date, time and place of the hearing, which shall not be earlier than ten (10) days following service of the notice, and (c) that the hearing will be held before the city manager. The city manager shall conduct the hearing and within three (3) days shall render his decision in writing either revoking the license or permit, suspending the license or permit for a period of time not to exceed ninety (90) days, or finding that insufficient grounds for revocation or suspension exist and that the person should retain his or her license or permit. In the case of a revocation or suspension the decision shall state the reasons for the action taken. 
    A person whose license or permit has been revoked or suspended by the city manager following a hearing shall have a right of appeal to the city council. Notice of appeal must be given to the city manager within seven (7) days from the date of service of the decision. The appellant shall be given written notice of the date, time and place that the city council will hear the appeal at least seven (7) days before the appeal is to be heard. The license or permit shall remain valid until the city council decides the appeal, but such stay of the revocation or suspension shall stay or prevent the city from instituting criminal proceedings or any other action against the person for any violation of this article or the law, regardless of whether such criminal or other action is based on the same or similar grounds as those upon which the revocation or suspension proceedings is based. 
    The city council shall hear any appeal taken from the city manager as soon as practicable. The person whose license or permit has been revoked or suspended shall have the right to appear before the city council in person or through counsel and present evidence concerning the revocation or suspension. The city council may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may reduce the length of suspension or reduce a revocation to a suspension not to exceed ninety (90) days, if in the judgment of the city council there is good cause for such action based upon reasonable grounds and the evidence presented at the hearing. Written notice of the decision of the city council shall be served upon the appellant within three (3) days following such decision. 
    Service of all notices and decisions shall be by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, and in the case of service by mail such service shall be complete upon the mailing of the notice or decision. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 15, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-255. - Facilities necessary. 
    No license to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless an inspection by the city reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(a)  Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths and showers shall be installed in accordance with the North Carolina Building Code. All plumbing fixtures shall be installed in accordance with the North Carolina State Plumbing Code. 
(1)  Steam rooms and shower compartments shall have waterproof floors, walls and ceilings. 
(2)  Floors of wet and dry heat rooms shall be adequately pitched to one (1) or more floor drains properly connected to the sewer, except that dry heat rooms with wooden floors need not be provided with pitched floors and floor drains. 
(3)  A source of hot water must be available within the immediate vicinity of dry and wet heat rooms to facilitate cleaning. 
(b)  The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing nondisposable instruments and materials used in administering massages. Such nondisposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected after use on each patron. 
(c)  Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean linen, towel and other materials used in connection with administering massages. All soiled linens, towels and other materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets, which containers or cabinets shall be kept separate from the clean storage areas. 
(d)  Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. If employees and/or patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the same time separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex. A single water closet per sex shall be provided for each twenty (20) or more employees or patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time. 
(e)  Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running water shall be installed in either the toilet room or in close proximity thereto. Lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary towels. 
(f)  All electrical equipment shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the North Carolina Electrical Code. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 16, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-256. - Operating requirements. 
(a)  Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition. 
(b)  Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective customers. 
(c)  All employees, including masseurs and masseuses, shall be clean and wear clean, nontransparent outer garments, fully covering the body (except for the arms and hands) from a point not to exceed four (4) inches above the center of the kneecap to the base of the neck. A separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises with individual lockers for each employee. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing. 
(d)  All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner. 
(e)  No massage establishment granted a license under the provisions of this article shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertisement, picture, or statement which is known, or through the exercise of reasonable care should be known, to be false, deceptive or misleading in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize any professional massage services. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 17, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-257. - Persons under age 18 prohibited on premises. 
    No person shall permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to come or remain on the premises of any massage business establishment, as masseur, employee or patron, unless such person is on the premises on lawful business. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 18, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-258. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
    No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep, or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any massage business. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 19, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-259. - Hours. 
    No massage business shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 20, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-260. - Employment of massagist. 
    No person shall employ as a massagist any person unless said employee has obtained and has in effect a permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 21, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-261. - Inspections. 
    The chief of police or his authorized representatives shall be authorized to make inspections of each massage business establishment for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this article are fully complied with. If in the opinion of the chief of police or his authorized representative there is probable cause to enter a massage establishment for the purpose of making inspections and examinations pursuant to this article, he shall request the owner or occupant thereof to grant permission for such entry, and if refused, he shall make application for a search warrant showing why such warrant should be issued for the purposes set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 22, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-262. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  Treatment of persons of opposite sex restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person holding a permit under this article to treat a person of the opposite sex, except upon the signed order of a licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or registered physical therapist, which order shall be dated and shall specifically state the number of treatments, not to exceed ten (10). The date and hour or each treatment given the name of the operator shall be entered on such order by the establishment where such treatments are given and shall be open to inspection by the police pursuant to section 13-261. Any disclosure or use of such information for purposes other than the enforcement of this article shall be unlawful. The requirements of this subsection shall not apply to treatments given in the residence of a patient, the office of a licensed physician, osteopath or registered physical therapist, chiropractor, or in a regularly established and licensed hospital or sanitarium. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, in a massage parlor, to place his or her hand or hands upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in any manner, a sexual or genital part of any other person. Sexual or genital parts shall include the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, in a massage parlor, to expose his or her sexual or genital parts, or any portions thereof, to any other person. It shall also be unlawful for any person, in a massage parlor, to expose the sexual or genital parts, or any portions thereof, of any other person. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person while in the presence of any other person in a massage parlor, to fail to conceal with a fully opaque covering, the sexual or genital parts of his or her body. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a massage parlor, knowingly to cause, allow or permit in or about such massage parlor, any agent, employee, or any other person under his control or supervision to perform such acts prohibited in subsection (a), (b), (c) or (d) of this section. 
(f)  It shall be further unlawful for any permittee under this article to administer a massage on an outcall basis as defined in section 13-241(h). Such person shall administer massage solely within an establishment licensed to carry on such business under this article. Any violation of these provisions shall be deemed grounds for revocation of the permit granted hereunder. The restriction on outcall massage shall not apply to a permittee who performs outcall massage as defined herein upon a customer upon a customer or client who, because of reasons of physical defects or incapacities or due to illness is physically unable to travel to the massage establishment. If any outcall massage is performed under this exception, a record of the date and hour of each treatment, and the name and address of the customer or client, and the name of the employee administering such treatment and the type of treatment administered, as well as the nature of the physical defect, incapacity or illness of said client or customer shall be kept by the licensee or person or employee designated by the licensee. Such records shall be open to inspection by the police pursuant to section 13-261. The information furnished or secured as a result of any such inspection shall be confidential. Any disclosure or use of such information for purposes other than the enforcement to this article shall be unlawful. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any massage service to be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth, or any area within a massage establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to eliminate other requirements concerning the maintenance of premises, nor to preclude authorized inspection thereof, whenever such inspection is deemed necessary by the police or other authorities. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 23, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-263. - Sale or transfer or change of location. 
    Upon the sale, transfer or relocation of a massage establishment, the license therefor shall be null and void unless a transfer of the license is approved by the chief of police as provided in section 13-265 of this article; provided, however, that upon the death or incapacity of the licensee or any co-licensee of the massage establishment, any heir or devisee of a deceased licensee, may continue the business of the massage establishment for a reasonable period of time not to exceed sixty (60) days to allow for an orderly transfer of the license. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 24, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-264. - Name and place of business. 
    No person granted a license pursuant to this article shall operate the massage establishment under a name not specified in his license, nor shall he or she conduct business in any designation or location not specified in his license. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 25, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-265. - Transfer of license or permit. 
    No license or permit shall be transferable unless and until an application for transfer has been submitted to and approved by the chief of police. An application for such transfer shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by fees prescribed in sections 13-244 and 13-245. The written application for such transfer shall contain the same information as requested herein for initial application for the license or permit and shall be issued to the chief of police pursuant to the provision of section 13-246 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 26, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-266. - Violation and penalty. 
(a)  Any person, except those persons who are specifically exempted by this article whether acting as an individual owner, employee of the owner, operator or employee of the operator, or whether acting as a mere agent or independent contractor for the owner, employee or operator, or acting as a participant or worker, in any way, directly or indirectly, who gives massages or operates a massage establishment or provides any of the services defined in this article without first obtaining a license or permit and paying a fee to do so to the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any provision, section or subsection of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 27, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-267. - Separability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 28, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-268. - Effective date. 
    This article shall be in full force and effect from and after April 1, 1992; provided, however, that any person, partnership, corporation or association engaged in the operation of a massage business and every person engaged in the business or profession of massage at the time of the enactment of this article shall have ninety (90) days in which to comply with the licensing provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-11, § 29, 2-24-92) 
Sec. 13-269. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

Sec. 13-270. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article shall be to set forth the regulatory licensing requirements for sexually oriented businesses located within the city. Sexually oriented businesses, because of their very nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics. Studies and experiences in other municipalities have shown that lower property values and increased crime rates tend to accompany and are brought about by sexually oriented businesses. The city council finds that regulation of these uses is necessary to insure that these adverse secondary effects do not contribute to the blighting of surrounding neighborhoods and to regulate acts, omissions or conditions detrimental to the health, safety or welfare and the peace and dignity of the city. Regulation to achieve these purposes can best be accomplished by the licensing procedures set forth hereinafter. The authority for this regulation is North Carolina General Statutes §§ 160A-174, 160A-181.1, and 160A-194. 
(b)  The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative activities. Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of this article to restrict or deny access to communicative activities protected by the United States Constitution or the Constitution of the State of North Carolina. This article represents a balancing of the legitimate ends of the community by imposing an incidental, content neutral time, place and manner regulation of sexually oriented businesses, without limiting alternative avenues of communication, and at the same time, requiring the business to carry its share of financing the administrative and enforcement activities. 
(Ord. No. 0-00-35, § 1, 5-8-00) 
Sec. 13-271. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning described to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult bookstore means a commercial establishment which, as one (1) of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, movies, video tapes, or photographs or other visual representations, offered in photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital, or other imaging medium, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical area. 
(b)  Any of the following shall be indicia that an establishment has as one (1) of its principal business purposes the sale and rental of publications, movies, or other visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section: 
(1)  The business advertises the sale and rental of adult publications and/or sexually oriented devices; 
(2)  Access by persons under eighteen (18) years of age to the business establishment or portions of the business establishment is restricted; 
(3)  Signs or notices are posted outside and/or inside the business establishment indicating that the material offered for sale or rental might be offensive; 
(4)  The building or portion of the building containing the business establishment does not have windows or has windows that are screened or otherwise obstructed or are situated in a manner that restricts visual access from outside the building to materials displayed within for sale or rental. 
(c)  Such indicia shall be considered along with all other factors and available information. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a general circulation video store that does not offer for sale any sexually oriented devices shall not constitute an "adult bookstore" even though it offers for sale and/or rental video tapes which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, as defined in this section, so long as: 
(1)  Such described video tapes are stocked and displayed in a room separate from the area of the business establishment where general circulation video tapes are stocked and displayed; 
(2)  Access by persons under eighteen (18) years of age to the room where such described videotapes are stocked and displayed is restricted; 
(3)  The square footage of the separate room where such described video tapes are stocked and displayed is no more than twenty (20) percent of the square footage of the area where general circulation video tapes are stocked and displayed; and 
(4)  The general circulation video tape portion of the business establishment offers a quantity and selection of new release general circulation video tapes that is typical of a general circulation video store and offers a quantity and selection of other general circulation video tapes that are organized and displayed in a manner that is typical of a general circulation video store. 
(e)  A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve offering the sale or rental of material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult bookstore. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore so long as one (1) of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult cabaret means any retail business or private club as defined in North Carolina General Statutes § 18B-1000 which: (a) serves food or beverages, or permits the consumption of food or beverages; and (b) regularly provides or has available for viewing by its patrons or members adult live entertainment. 
    Adult entertainer means any person who requests or accepts payment, tips, or other compensation to provide entertainment by dancing, posing, or otherwise appearing within an adult cabaret with: (a) a less than fully opaque covering over any part of the genitals, pubic region, buttocks or any part of the areola of the female breast, or (b) the covered male organ in a visibly turgid state. 
    Adult live entertainment means any performance of or involving the actual presence of real people which exhibits specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this article. 
    Adult mini motion picture theatre means any enclosed building with viewing booths designed to hold patrons which, for any form of consideration, regularly presents still or motion pictures, films, slides, or similar photographic reproductions, a preponderance of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this article, for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult motion picture theatre means any enclosed building or premises where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown, a preponderance of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing, specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this article for observation by patrons therein. "Adult motion picture theatre" does not include any adult mini motion picture theatre as defined in this ordinance. 
    Chief of police means the Chief of Police of the City of Rocky Mount, or his or her designee. 
    City manager means the City Manager of the City of Rocky Mount, or his or her designee. 
    Clothing modeling studio means any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, a person agrees or offers to privately model clothing, including, but not limited to lingerie, for an individual patron. 
    Operator means and includes any person who is both present on and in charge of any sexually oriented business premises. 
    Owner means the legal owner of a sexually oriented business and includes the following: 
(1)  The owner of a sole proprietorship; or 
(2)  Each member of a firm, association, limited liability company, or general partnership; or 
(3)  Each general partner in a limited partnership; or 
(4)  Each officer, director, and owner of fifty (50) percent or more of the stock of a corporation. 
    Patron means any person who is: (a) allowed to enter a sexually oriented business in return for the payment of an admission fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity; or (b) enters a sexually oriented business and purchases, rents or otherwise partakes of any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered therein; or (c) is a member of and on the premises of a sexually oriented business operating as a private club. 
    Persons means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, association or other legal activity. 
    Sexually oriented business means any adult bookstore, adult motion picture theatre, adult mini motion picture theatre, adult cabaret, or clothing modeling studio as defined in this article. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: (i) human genitals and pubic region, (ii) buttock, or (iii) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or (2) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts; or 
(3)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or stimulated, including intercourse, oral sex, masturbation, or sodomy; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsection (1), (2), or (3) above. 
    Straddle means the straddling of the legs of one (1) person over any part of the body of any other person, regardless of whether there is a touch or touching. 
    Touch means to touch with a portion of the human body or with any object. 
(Ord. No. 0-00-35, § 1, 5-8-00) 
State Law reference- Authority to define terms, G.S. 160A-181.1. 
Sec. 13-272. - Application for licenses. 
(a)  Sexually oriented business license. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a sexually oriented business in the city unless the owner or operator thereof has obtained a sexually oriented business license from the city. It shall also be unlawful for any person to operate such business after such license has been revoked or suspended by the city or after such license has expired. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly perform any work, service or entertainment directly related to the operation of an unlicensed sexually oriented business within the city. 
(3)  It shall be prima facie evidence that any sexually oriented business that fails to have a sexually oriented business license posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment has not obtained such a license. In addition, it shall be prima facie evidence that any person who performs as an adult entertainer in an adult cabaret in which a sexually oriented business license is not posted had knowledge that such business was not licensed. 
(4)  All persons operating or maintaining a sexually oriented business on the effective date of this article [May 8, 2000] shall have ninety (90) days to secure a sexually oriented business license. It shall be unlawful for such person to operate or maintain a sexually oriented business without the required license after the expiration of the ninety (90) day period. 
(b)  Adult entertainer license. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to work as an adult entertainer at a sexually oriented business without first obtaining a license to do so from the city or to work as an adult entertainer at a sexually oriented business after such person's license to do so has been revoked or suspended by the city or after such license has expired. 
(2)  Any person regularly working as an adult entertainer at a sexually oriented business on the effective date of this article [May 8, 2000] shall have ninety (90) days from such effective date to obtain a license. It shall be unlawful for such person to work as an adult entertainer without the required license after the expiration of the ninety (90) day period. 
(c)  License classification and fees. 
(1)  The term of all licenses required under this article shall be for a period of twelve (12) months, commencing on the date of issuance of the license. The application for a license shall be accompanied by payment in full of the fees referred to in this article. 
(2)  All licenses shall be issued for a specific location and/or person and shall be nonrefundable and nontransferable; however, entertainers may obtain a permit, without paying an additional fee, to transfer to another sexually oriented business. 
(3)  The license fees shall be as set by the city council in this article. 
(d)  Expiration of license. 
(1)  Each license shall expire twelve (12) months from the date of issuance and may be renewed by making application, as provided in section 13-273, and paying the license fee, as required in section 13-278. Application for renewal shall be made in a timely manner prior to the expiration date. The chief of police shall act to approve or deny a complete application for renewal within fifteen (15) business days from receipt. 
(2)  When the chief of police denies renewal of the license, the applicant shall not be issued a license under this article for twelve (12) months from the date of denial, but shall have the right of appeal provided by section 13-273. In addition, if, subsequent to the denial, the chief of police determines that the basis for the denial has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a license. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business when such person knows or should know that the business has a license which has expired. 
(Ord. No. 0-00-35, § 1, 5-8-00) 
Sec. 13-273. - Application procedures. 
(a)  Sexually oriented business license. All persons desiring to secure a license to conduct, operate or maintain a sexually oriented business under the provisions of this article shall make a verified application to the chief of police. All applications shall be submitted in the name of the person proposing to conduct, operate or maintain the sexually oriented business. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the chief of police and shall require the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's full name and any aliases or other names by which the applicant is known or which the applicant has used at any time, and the residence addresses for the past two (2) years, the business and home telephone numbers, occupation, date and place of birth and social security number of the applicant. 
(2)  The name of the sexually oriented business, the type of the sexually oriented business, the name of the owner of the premises where the sexually oriented business will be located, and the business or street address thereof. 
(3)  The names, residence addresses for the past two (2) years, social security numbers and dates of births of all partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and if the applicant is a corporation, the same information for all corporate officers and directors. 
(4)  A statement from the applicant, or from each partner, or from each corporate officer and director, indicating whether such person has been convicted of, released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted from prosecution on: 
a.  A felony criminal act within five (5) years immediately preceding the application, or 
b.  A misdemeanor criminal act involving moral turpitude within two (2) years immediately preceding the application, 
c.  Whether such felony or misdemeanor criminal act involved sexual offenses, prostitution, promotion of prostitution, sexual abuse of a child, pornography or related offenses as defined in the laws of North Carolina or any other comparable violation of the laws of this state or the laws of any other state. 
(5)  If the applicant is a corporation or a limited liability company, a current certificate of existence issued by the North Carolina Secretary of State. 
(6)  A statement signed under oath that the applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct and that the applicant has read the provisions of this article regulating sexually oriented businesses. 
(7)  A statement signed under oath that the applicant consents to investigation of his/her background by the city. 
(8)  A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the sexually oriented business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The requirements of this paragraph shall not apply for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a sketch or diagram that was previously submitted for the license sought to be renewed and if the licensee certifies that the licensed premises has not been altered since the immediately preceding issuance of the license and that the previous sketch or diagram continues to accurately depict the layout of the licensed premises. 
Failure to provide the information and documentation required by this subsection shall constitute an incomplete application and it shall not be processed until complete. In addition, an applicant for a license shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by this section in the event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. The applicant shall supplement the application on file with the police department within thirty (30) days from the date of such change. 
(b)  Adult entertainer license. All persons desiring to secure a license under the provisions of this article to be an adult entertainer shall make a verified application to the chief of police. All applications shall be submitted in the name of the person proposing to be an entertainer. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the chief of police and shall require the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's full name and any aliases or other names by which the applicant is known or which the applicant has used at any time, and the residence addresses for the past two (2) years, the home telephone number, date and place of birth, social security number, and any stage names or nicknames used in entertaining. 
(2)  The name and address of each sexually oriented business where the applicant intends to work as an entertainer. 
(3)  A statement from the applicant indicating whether or not the applicant has been convicted of, released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted from prosecution on: 
a.  A felony criminal act within five (5) years immediately preceding the application, or 
b.  A misdemeanor criminal act including moral turpitude within two (2) years immediately preceding the application, 
c.  Where such felony or misdemeanor criminal act involving sexual offenses, prostitution, promotion of prostitution, sexual abuse of a child, pornography or related offenses as defined in the State of North Carolina or any other comparable violation of the laws of this state or the laws of any other state. 
(4)  Photographs shall be taken of the applicant by the police department and retained by the city. 
(5)  The applicant shall present to the chief of police for copying documentation that the applicant has attained the age of eighteen (18) years at the time the application is submitted. Any of the following shall be accepted as documentation of age: 
a.  A motor vehicle operator's license issued by any state, bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth; 
b.  A state-issued identification card bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth; 
c.  An official and valid passport issued by the United States of America; 
d.  An immigration card issued by the United States of America; 
e.  Any other form of picture identification issued by a governmental entity that is deemed reliable by the chief of police; or 
f.  Any other form of identification deemed reliable by the chief of police. 
(6)  A statement signed under oath that the applicant consents to investigation of his/her background by the city. 
Failure to provide the information required by this subsection shall constitute an incomplete application and it shall not be processed until complete. 
(c)  Application processing. Upon receipt of a complete application for a sexually oriented business license the chief of police shall immediately commence his investigation of the application. Upon receipt of a complete application for an adult entertainer license the chief of police shall issue a temporary license, valid until his investigation of the application is completed and the application is approved or denied. 
(d)  Issuance of sexually oriented business license or entertainer license. The chief of police shall issue a license for a sexually oriented business or an adult entertainer if all requirements for such license described in this article are met unless he finds in writing that: 
(1)  The correct permit or license fee has not been tendered to the city, and, in the case of a check, or bank draft, not honored with payment upon presentation; or 
(2)  If a sexually oriented business, that the operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city's building, zoning, and health regulations; or 
(3)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders holding more than ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation, any of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, or the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, have been convicted of any of the following offenses: 
a.  An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another that amounts to a felony. 
b.  An offense involving sexual misconduct. 
c.  An offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs or dangerous weapons that amounts to a felony. 
(4)  The chief of police may issue a license to any person convicted of any of the crimes described in subsections a., b. or c., above if he finds that such conviction occurred five (5) or more years prior to the date of the application and the person has had no subsequent felony convictions for crime mentioned in this section; or 
(5)  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the licenses application or in any document required by the city in conjunction therewith; or 
(6)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, is not over the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(e)  Approval or denial of application. The chief of police shall act to approve or deny a complete application for a license under this article as soon as reasonably possible and in any event shall approve or deny said license fifteen (15) business days from the date that said application was accepted. Upon the expiration of the fifteenth (15th), unless the applicant consents to an extension of time, the applicant shall be permitted to begin operating the sexually oriented business for which the license is sought, unless and until the chief of police notifies the applicant of a denial and states the reason(s) for denial. Any applicant, including an applicant for a renewal license, whose application for a license is denied shall have the right to appeal such denial by giving written notice to the chief of police within fifteen (15) days from the date of denial. In the case of an appeal due process shall be accorded the applicant pursuant to section 13-276 of this article and such applicant shall have all of the rights of a person whose license has been revoked or suspended, except that an applicant who has not previously been granted a license shall have no right to operate or entertain as a licensee under this article pending the appeal, except as provided in section 13-277 of this article. The appeal hearing before the city manager provided by section 13-276 shall be held within seven (7) days of the date notice of appeal is received by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 0-00-35, § 1, 5-8-00) 
Sec. 13-274. - Revocation or suspension of sexually oriented business license. 
    Any license issued for a sexually oriented business may be revoked or suspended after notice and a hearing, where it appears that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article, or where any employee of the licensee, including an adult entertainer, is engaged in any conduct at the licensee's place of business which violates any law or ordinance relating to the operation of the sexually oriented business and of which the licensee has actual or constructive knowledge, or in the exercise of reasonable diligence should have had actual or constructive knowledge. 
(Ord. No. 0-00-35, § 1, 5-8-00) 
Sec. 13-275. - Revocation of adult entertainer license. 
    An adult entertainers license issued by the chief of police may be revoked or suspended after notice and a hearing, where it appears that the holder of the license has been convicted of any offense which would be cause for denial of such license upon an original application, has made a false statement of a material fact on an application for a license, or has committed an act in violation of this article. Such revocation proceedings shall be as prescribed in section 13-276 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-00-35, § 1, 5-8-00) 
Sec. 13-276. - Revocation or suspension proceedings. 
(a)  Upon the determination of a violation of this article or the existence of any other condition which is grounds for revocation or suspension of a license pursuant to section 13-274 or section 13-275 of this article, the chief of police shall serve written notice upon the person whose license has been determined to be subject to revocation or suspension. The notice shall state: (a) the specific grounds which make the license subject to revocation or suspension, (b) the date, time, and place of the hearing, which shall not be earlier than seven (7) days nor later than fifteen (15) days following service of the notice, and (c) that the hearing will be held before the city manager. The city manager or his designee shall conduct the hearing and within seven (7) days shall render his decision in writing either revoking the license, suspending the license for a period of time not to exceed ninety (90) days, or finding that insufficient grounds for revocation or suspension exist and that the person should retain his or her license. In the case of a revocation or suspension the decision shall state the reasons for the action taken. 
(b)  The decision of the city manager should be subject to review in the Superior Court of Nash or Edgecombe County by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. Any petition for writ of certiorari for review shall be filed with the clerk of superior court within thirty (30) days after notice of the decision has been received by the licensee. A denial of an application for renewal of the license or a suspension or revocation of the license of any sexually oriented business or any adult entertainer shall be stayed until a decision is rendered by the superior court or the time to petition the superior court for a writ of certiorari has expired. In addition, the denial of an initial application for a sexually oriented business license by any sexually oriented business existing prior to the effective date of this article [May 8, 2000] shall be stayed until a decision is rendered by the superior court or the time to petition the superior court for a writ of certiorari has expired. The following provisions shall apply to any appeal to superior court from a decision of the city manager: 
(1)  Unless good cause exists to contest a petition for a writ of certiorari, the city shall stipulate to certiorari no later than five (5) business days after the petitioner requests such a stipulation. 
(2)  The city shall transmit the record to the court no later than five (5) business days after receiving the order allowing certiorari. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the provisions of any local rule of the reviewing court which allows for a longer time period, the city shall file its brief within fifteen (15) days after it is served with the petitioner's brief. If the local rule is subsequently amended to provide for a shorter time period for the filing of any brief, then the shorter time period shall control. 
(c)  An appeal by an applicant or licensee from the superior court shall be governed by the North Carolina Rules of Appellate Procedure but, unless a court of competent jurisdiction otherwise provides, said appeal shall not stay any action taken with regard to the license. 
(Ord. No. 0-00-35, § 1, 5-8-00) 
Sec. 13-277. - Prompt judicial review. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any applicant whose application for an initial license is denied by the chief of police, or any person whose license has been revoked, suspended, or not renewed, shall have the right of prompt judicial review. Such person, at his or her election, provided he or she has not previously utilized the appeal procedure provided for in section 13-276 of this article, and provided further that the time provided for taking such appeal in section 13-273 for an initial or renewal license or section 13-276 for a revoked or suspended license has not expired, may institute an action against the city in any court of competent jurisdiction seeking review before a judge, without a jury, of the city's action. The city shall respond when served with process, and agrees that the hearing on the matter shall be held as soon as reasonably possible. Provided the hearing has not been postponed or delayed by the applicant or licensee, if a judicial decision has not been rendered within thirty (30) days following the date of service of process upon the city, such applicant or licensee shall be granted a temporary license pending a ruling by the trial court judge. 
(Ord. No. 0-00-35, § 1, 5-8-00) 
State Law reference- Fees, G.S. § 160A-181.1. 
Sec. 13-278. - Regulatory license fee schedule. 
    It has been determined, based on estimates from the chief of police and the finance director as well as the experience of other cities, that the cost and expense incurred by the city in implementing the licensing procedures regarding sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainer will be at least one hundred dollars ($100.00) per sexually oriented business license and fifty dollars ($50.00) per adult entertainer license. Accordingly the following fees are established: Sexually oriented business license-One hundred dollars ($100.00); adult entertainer license -Fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 0-00-35, § 1, 5-8-00) 
Sec. 13-279. - Persons under eighteen prohibited on premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to come or remain on the premises of any sexually oriented business, as adult entertainer, employee, or patron, unless such person is on the premises on lawful business. 
(Ord. No. 0-00-35, § 1, 5-8-00) 
Sec. 13-280. - Regulations pertaining to adult cabarets. 
(a)  Purpose. The private or semi-private performance of adult live entertainment in areas commonly known as "VIP rooms, VIP booths, or VIP areas" presents opportunities for illegal activity such as, but not limited to, indecent exposure and solicitation for prostitution. The purpose of this section is to eliminate VIP adult live entertainment and to require all adult live entertainment to occur in a manner and location that freely permits management and a broad number of patrons to visually observe the entertainment so as to minimize the opportunities for adult live entertainment to lead to illegal activity. The provisions of this section shall be interpreted and applied in light of this purpose. 
(b)  An adult cabaret, regardless of whether or not a license has been issued for said business under this article, shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  An application for a sexually oriented business license for an adult cabaret shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises specifying areas where adult live entertainment may occur. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The chief of police may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises and the areas where adult live entertainment may occur required to be designated in the diagram have not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  Areas where adult live entertainment may occur must: 
a.  Be at least seven hundred fifty (750) square feet in area. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an adult cabaret that, as of the effective date of this article [May 8, 2000], has as its only area where adult live entertainment occurs an area of less than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet may continue to offer adult live entertainment in that area so long as: (i) the square footage of the area is not reduced; (ii) adult live entertainment does not occur in any other area of the business establishment; and (iii) the business complies with all other provisions of this article; and 
b.  Contain one (1) or more stages which shall be raised at least two (2) feet above the level of the floor and shall be separated at least six (6) feet from any patron. 
c.  Be accessible to all patrons without payment of any charge other than the charge, if any, for entry into the premises, such as a cover charge or membership fee; and 
d.  Not contain any areas visually screened, obstructed, or separated from the majority of the patrons located in that area, which patrons are present in that area without payment of any charge other than the charge, if any, for entry into the premises, such as a cover charge or membership fee. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration of the areas where adult live entertainment may occur designated in the diagram required by subsection (b)(1), above, may be made without first attaining an amendment to the license by submitting and receiving approval of a new diagram. 
(4)  Adult live entertainment may occur only: 
a.  In the presence of and visually observable by an employee who is not an adult entertainer; and 
b.  In the presence of and visually observable by more than one (1) patron; and 
c.  In an area and on a stage that is shown on an approved diagram as an area where adult live entertainment may occur; and 
d.  In an area that is not visually screened, obstructed, or separated from the majority of the patrons located in that area, which patrons are present without payment of any charge other than the charge, if any, for entry into the premises, such as a cover charge or membership fee; and 
e.  In an area that is accessible to all patrons without payment of any charge other than the charge, if any, for entry into the premises, such as a cover charge or membership fee. 
f.  Subsections (b)(4)d. and e., above, do not prohibit or limit charges to patrons by adult entertainers, or payment to, or the tipping of, such persons by the patrons; provided such payment or tipping is not made directly or personally to an adult entertainer. Any such payment or tips made to an adult entertainer shall be placed in a receptacle for such payment or tips provided by the owner or operator. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the operator and any owner who is present on the premises to ensure that adult live entertainment is not performed in the presence of patrons in violation of subsection (b)(4), above. It shall be unlawful for any such operator or owner to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for an adult entertainer to engage in or perform adult live entertainment in violation of subsection (b)(4), above. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for an adult entertainer to touch a patron or the clothing of a patron at an adult cabaret. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for a patron at an adult cabaret to touch an adult entertainer. 
(Ord. No. 0-00-35, § 1, 5-8-00) 
Sec. 13-282. - Regulations pertaining to adult mini motion picture theaters. 
(a)  An adult mini motion picture theater, regardless of whether or not a license has been issued for said business under this article, shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  An application for sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one (1) or more manager's stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures, and designating any potion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The chief of police may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without prior approval of the chief of police. 
(3)  At least one (1) employee must be on duty and situated at each manager's station at all times that any patron is present in or on the premises. 
(4)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms, from at least one (1) of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(5)  The entrance to each adult mini motion picture booth shall be free of any obstruction such as a door, curtain, wall, partial wall, panel, board, merchandise, display rack, or other material. 
(6)  There shall be no openings of glass of any kind between booths, and booths shall not be designed, constructed, or configured in such a manner that the interior of any booth may be visible or made to be visible from any other booth. 
(7)  The interior of each booth shall be sufficiently illuminated so that the inside of the booth is visible from the manager's station(s), as set forth in subsection (a)(4), above. 
(8)  No booth shall be occupied by more than one (1) patron at any time. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the operator and any owner or employees who are present on the premises to ensure compliance with subsections (a)(3) through (8), above. It shall be unlawful for any person having such a duty to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 0-00-35, § 1, 5-8-00) 
Sec. 13-283. - Regulations pertaining to clothing modeling studios. 
(a)  A clothing modeling studio, regardless of whether or not a license has been issued for said business under this article, shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  A model shall not encourage or permit a patron to expose or display his or her (the patron's) specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  A model shall not suggest or imply that a customer should or is permitted to expose or display his or her (the patron's) specified anatomical areas. 
(3)  A model shall not expose or display his or her (the model's) specified anatomical areas at anytime the model is in the presence of a patron. 
(4)  A model shall not straddle a patron. 
(5)  A model shall not offer to agree to straddle a patron. 
(6)  A model shall not intentionally touch the clothed or unclothed body of a patron at any point below the waist and above the knee of the patron. 
(7)  A model shall not encourage or permit a patron to touch the clothed or unclothed body of the model at any point below the waist and above the knee of the model. 
(8)  A model shall not encourage or permit a patron to touch the clothed or unclothed breast of the model. 
(9)  All fees and charges, including tips and gratuities, paid by the patron of a clothing modeling studio shall be paid to the model or the studio before the modeling session begins. A model shall not solicit or accept any tip, gratuity, or compensation from a patron in violation of the foregoing. 
(10)  All modeling for a patron must occur in the presence of and be visually observable by an employee who is not a model. 
(11)  The entrance to each room in which modeling for a patron is being performed shall be free of any obstruction such as a door, curtain, wall, partial wall, panel, board, or other device, and the entire interior of each room shall be visible from the aisle, walkway, or hallway leading to the room. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the operator and any owner who is present on the premises to ensure that clothing modeling is not performed in the presence of a patron in violation of subsection (a), above. It shall be unlawful for any such operator or owner to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a model to violate any of the provisions of subsection (a), above. 
(Ord. No. 0-00-35, § 1, 5-8-00) 
Sec. 13-284. - Criminal penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as provided in North Carolina General Statute § 14-4 and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a maximum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment, or both. Each violation shall be considered a separate and distinct offense, and each day of continued violation shall be considered as a separate offense. The issuance of a notice of violation or a suspension or revocation of a sexually oriented business license or an adult entertainer license shall not prohibit the imposition of a criminal penalty and the imposition of a criminal penalty shall not prevent the issuance of a notice of violation or a suspension or revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 0-00-35, § 1, 5-8-00) 
Sec. 13-285. - Civil injunction. 
    In addition to the issuance of a notice of violation, the suspension or revocation of a sexually oriented business license, an adult entertainer license, or a prosecution for criminal violations, any person who violates this article may be subject to all civil and equitable remedies stated in North Carolina General Statute § 160A-175. 
(Ord. No. 0-00-35, § 1, 5-8-00) 
Sec. 13-286. - Severability. 
    In the event that any provision of this article, or any part thereof, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction on its face or as applied, such holding shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of any of the remaining provisions of this article, or any part thereof, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance or of said provision as applied to any other person or circumstance. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the city council that this article would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective provisions not been included herein. 
(Ord. No. 0-00-35, § 1, 5-8-00) 
Secs. 13-287-13-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BARS, TAVERNS, AND NIGHTCLUBS 

Sec. 13-300. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to set forth the regulatory and licensing requirements for bars, taverns, and nightclubs located within the City of Rocky Mount. Bars, taverns, and nightclubs in Rocky Mount have demonstrated that they can create serious public safety issues and have objectionable operational characteristics. The city council finds that regulation of these uses is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and the peace and dignity of the City of Rocky Mount. Regulation to achieve these purposes can best be accomplished by the licensing procedures and other regulations set forth hereinafter. The authority for these regulations is G.S. §§ 160A-174, 160A-194, and 160A-181. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-21, 3-14-11) 
Sec. 13-301. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bar, tavern, or nightclub means any establishment that has been issued a permit to sell or possess any alcoholic beverages by the North Carolina Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission and which has available for its patrons amusements or entertainment such as, by way of illustration and not limitation, live or recorded music, dancing, table games, pinball or video machines, or television and which has gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages that exceed its gross receipts from the sale of food. An establishment regulated as a sexually oriented business under article VII of chapter 13 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Rocky Mount is not a bar, tavern, or nightclub and is not regulated under this article VIII. Any establishment located on real property excluded from the tax base under G.S. §§ 105-275(17), (18), or (19) and used for one (1) or more of the purposes specified in such subsections of G.S. § 105-275 is not a bar, tavern, or nightclub and is not regulated under this article VIII. 
    Bars, taverns, and nightclubs nuisance and violence reduction program means a set of guidelines prepared and published by the Rocky Mount Police Department for the safe operation of bars, taverns, and nightclubs, including guidance for appropriate response to criminal activity, violence, or disruptive behavior observed in a bar, tavern, or nightclub, and including appropriate training for bar, tavern, or nightclub owners, operators, managers, and employees. 
    Chief of police means Chief of Police of the City of Rocky Mount, or his or her designee. 
    City means the City of Rocky Mount, North Carolina. 
    City manager means the City Manager of the City of Rocky Mount, or his or her designee. 
    On-site manager means the person principally in charge of the bar, tavern, or nightclub when the licensee of the establishment is not on site and who is listed with and approved by the city as an on-site manager of the bar, tavern, or nightclub. 
    Owner means the legal owner of a bar, tavern, or nightclub and includes the following: 
(1)  The owner of a sole proprietorship; or 
(2)  Each member of a firm, association, limited liability company, or general partnership; or 
(3)  Each general partner in an limited partnership; or 
(4)  Each officer, director, and owner of twenty-five (25) percent or more of the stock of a corporation. 
    Patron means any person who is (a) allowed to enter a bar, tavern, or nightclub business in return for the payment of an admission fee or any other form or consideration or gratuity; or (b) enters a bar, tavern, or nightclub and purchases an alcoholic beverage, otherwise partakes of an alcoholic beverage, or partakes of any other drink, food, merchandise, goods, entertainment, or other services offered therein; or (c) is a member of or guest of a member and on the premises of a bar, tavern, or nightclub operating as a private club. 
    Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, association or other legal entity. 
    Police department means the Police Department of the City of Rocky Mount. 
    Serious public safety incident means one (1) or more acts of violence resulting in serious physical injury or one (1) or more arrests for illegal drug activity within a bar, tavern, or nightclub, outside such establishment on property or parking areas owned, leased, or operated by such establishment, or on a street immediately adjacent thereto. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-21, 3-14-11) 
Sec. 13-302. - Application for license. 
(a)  Bars, taverns, and nightclubs license. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a bar, tavern, or nightclub in the City of Rocky Mount unless the owner or operator thereof has obtained a bar, tavern, or nightclub license from the city. It shall also be unlawful for any person to operate such business after such license has been revoked or suspended by the city or after such license has expired. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a bar, tavern, or nightclub in the City of Rocky Mount unless the person holding the license for such establishment is physically present on the premises or an on-site manager designated by the licensee and approved by the city is physically present on the premises. 
(3)  It shall be prima facie evidence that any bar, tavern, or nightclub that fails to have a bar, tavern, or nightclub license issued by the city posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment has not obtained such license. 
(4)  All persons lawfully operating or maintaining a bar, tavern, or nightclub and possessing ABC permits and privilege licenses for the same on the effective date of this article shall have until June 30, 2011, to secure a bar, tavern, and nightclub license. It shall be unlawful for such person to operate or maintain a bar, tavern, and nightclub business without the required license after June 30, 2011. 
(b)  License classification and fees. 
(1)  All licenses shall be issued for a specific location, establishment name, and person, and shall be nontransferable. 
(2)  The license fees shall be as set by the city council in this article. 
(c)  Expiration of license. 
(1)  Each license shall expire June 30 of each year and may be renewed by making application, as provided in section 13-303, and paying the license fees, as required in section 13-309. Application for renewal shall be made in a timely manner prior to the expiration date. The chief of police shall act to approve or deny a complete application for renewal within thirty (30) business days from receipt. 
(2)  When the chief of police denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license under this article for twelve (12) months from the date of denial, but the applicant shall have the right of appeal provided by section 13-307. In addition, if, subsequent to the denial, the chief of police determines that the basis of the denial has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a license. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-21, 3-14-11) 
Sec. 13-303. - Application procedures. 
(a)  Bars, taverns, and nightclubs license. All persons desiring to secure a license to operate or maintain a bar, tavern, or nightclub under the provisions of this article shall submit a verified application to the chief of police along with a receipt or other notation from the city showing payment of the required license fee. All applications shall be submitted in the name of the person proposing to operate or maintain the bar, tavern, or nightclub on a form supplied by the chief of police and shall provide the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's full name and any aliases or other names by which the applicant is known or which the applicant has used at any time, the residence addresses for the past five (5) years, the business and home telephone numbers, places of employment for the last five (5) years, date and place of birth, driver's license number, fingerprints, and Social Security Number of the applicant. 
(2)  The name of the bar, tavern, or nightclub, the name and address of the owner of the premises and rental agent where the bar, tavern, or nightclub is or will be located, and the street address thereof. 
(3)  The full names and any aliases or other names by which the applicants are known or which the applicants have used at any time, the residence addresses for the past five (5) years, the business and home telephone numbers, places of employment for the last five (5) years, dates and places of birth, drivers' license numbers, fingerprints, and Social Security Numbers of all partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and if the applicant is a corporation, the same information for all corporate officers and directors. 
(4)  For each on-site manager, the person's full name and any aliases or other names by which such person is known or which he or she has used at any time, the residence addresses for the past five (5) years, the business and home telephone numbers, places of employment for the last five (5) years, date and place of birth, driver's license number, fingerprints and Social Security Number. 
(5)  A statement from the applicant, each on-site manager, and from each partner, or from each corporate officer and director, indicating whether such person has been arrested for, convicted of, released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted from prosecution on: 
a.  A felony criminal act within five (5) years immediately preceding the application, or 
b.  A misdemeanor criminal act involving moral turpitude within two (2) years immediately preceding the application, 
c.  An alcoholic beverage offense within two (2) years, or 
d.  A misdemeanor controlled substance offense within two (2) years, or 
e.  Whether such felony or misdemeanor criminal act involved alcohol or the operation of a bar, tavern, or nightclub under the laws of North Carolina or any other comparable violation of the laws of this state or the laws of any other state, municipality or county related thereto. 
(6)  If the application is a corporation or a limited liability company, a current certificate of existence issued by the North Carolina Secretary of State. 
(7)  A statement signed under oath and penalty of perjury that the applicant or other person providing information has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct and that the applicant has read the provisions of this article regulating bars, taverns, and nightclubs. 
(8)  A statement signed that the applicant consents to investigation of his/her background by the city. 
(9)  The proposed days and hours of operation of the bar, tavern, or nightclub. 
(10)  A security plan indicating whether the applicant will employ security personnel, how many, and how they will be utilized. The security plan shall set forth how the applicant will handle: control and clearance of the parking lot during hours of operation and at closing time, unruly patrons, patrons who are intoxicated, patrons presenting false identification, control and supervision of underage patrons, the circumstances under which the police department will be called, and how physical disturbances including fights will be handled. 
(11)  A noise control plan stating how the applicant intends to meet the requirement of the city noise ordinance (section 10-151 et seq. of the City Code). 
(12)  A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises where the bar, tavern, or nightclub is or will be located, including a site plan drawn in not less than one-eighth-inch scale showing lot size and dimensions, all structures with building dimensions, building exit locations, existing parking spaces, and location and height of walls or fences; and a floor plan drawn in not less than one-eighth-inch scale showing dimensions, square footage, and use of all rooms; occupant loads for egress, plumbing fixtures, location and type of exit signs and illumination, seating plan for food service areas, type of locking device on all exit doors, and direction of swing on exit doors. 
(13)  A certificate of occupancy showing the maximum occupancy allowed and the minimum number of plumbing fixtures required by the North Carolina State Building Code. 
(14)  For any renewal, the licensee and any on-site managers shall submit a certified statement from the chief of police verifying compliance with the bars, taverns, and nightclubs nuisance and violence reduction program. 
(15)  A certificate from the zoning inspector certifying that the proposed place of business is located in an appropriate zoning district. 
(16)  A copy of a valid ABC permit for the bar, tavern, or nightclub. 
Failure to provide the information and documentation required by this subsection shall constitute an incomplete application and it shall not be processed until complete. In addition, a licensee or an applicant for a license shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by this section in the event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. The licensee or applicant shall supplement the application on file with the police department within fifteen (15) days from the date of such change. 
(b)  Issuance of bar, tavern, and nightclub license. The chief of police shall issue a license for a bar, tavern and nightclub if all requirements for such license described in this article are met unless he finds in writing that: 
(1)  The correct permit or license fee has not been tendered to the city, and, in the case of a check, or bank draft, not honored with payment upon presentation; or 
(2)  That the operation of the bar, tavern, or nightclub as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city's building, zoning, and health regulations; or 
(3)  Any applicant has failed to answer or falsely answered a question(s) or request for information on the application form provided. 
(4)  Any applicant, including any proposed on-site manager, has been convicted of a crime: 
a.  Involving: 
1.  Any felony; 
2.  A misdemeanor offense of assault, battery, bribery, obstructing justice, carrying a deadly weapon, hand gun violations, controlled dangerous substances, gaming violations, nudity/sexual display/obscene matter violations, pandering, sexual offenses, theft; or 
3.  A violation of any ordinance regulating bars, taverns, or nightclubs of any city, county, or state; and 
b.  For which: 
1.  Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any two-year period. 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers and directors, if the application is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; or the on-site manager is not over the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(6)  The security plan will more likely than not be insufficient to prevent injury to patrons of this bar, tavern, or nightclub, including a statement of the reasons for this finding. 
(7)  It is more likely than not that the plan for control of noise emanating from the building or parking lot will not be sufficient to prevent a violation of the noise ordinance, including a statement of the reasons for this finding. 
(c)  Approval or denial of application. The chief of police shall act to approve or deny a complete application for a license under this article as soon as reasonably possible and in any event shall approve or deny said license thirty (30) days from the date that said application was accepted. Upon the expiration of the thirty (30) days, unless the applicant consents to an extension of time, the applicant shall be permitted to begin operating the bar, tavern, or nightclub for which the license is sought, unless and until the chief of police notifies the applicant of a denial and states the reason(s) for denial. Any applicant, including an applicant for a renewal license, whose application for a license is denied shall have the right to appeal such denial by giving written notice to the city manager within fifteen (15) days from the date of denial. In the case of an appeal, due process shall be accorded the applicant pursuant to section 13-307 of this article and such applicant shall have all of the rights of a person whose license has been revoked or suspended. The appeal hearing before the city manager provided by section 13-307 shall be held within ten (10) days of the date notice of appeal is received. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-21, 3-14-11) 
Sec. 13-304. - On-site manager. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to act or serve as on-site manager of a bar, tavern, or nightclub unless the licensee has submitted the information required by section 13-303 to the chief of police and the chief of police has approved the person as an on-site manager. The chief of police shall have fifteen (15) days after submission to approve the on-site manager. 
    The applicant or licensee shall submit the information required by section 13-303 for at least two (2) on-site managers so that one (1) will be available at all times to manage and supervise the establishment. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-21, 3-14-11) 
Sec. 13-305. - Control of premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee to relinquish control of a bar, tavern, or nightclub to any other person except an on-site manager. The licensee or an on-site manager must remain on and in control of the premises during all events, including private parties. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-21, 3-14-11) 
Sec. 13-306. - Revocation or suspension of bars, taverns, and nightclubs license. 
    Any license issued for a bar, tavern, or nightclub may be revoked or suspended after notice and a hearing, where it appears that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article, or where the on-site manager or any employee of the licensee, has engaged in any conduct at the bar, tavern, or nightclub which violates any law or ordinance relating to the operation of the business and of which the licensee has actual or constructive knowledge, or in the exercise of reasonable diligence should have had actual or constructive knowledge, or the occurrence of two (2) or more serious public safety incidents within any twelve-month period unless reasonable measures have been take to prevent a re-occurrence. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-21, 3-14-11) 
Sec. 13-307. - Revocation or suspension proceedings. 
    Upon the determination of a violation of this article or the existence of any other condition which is grounds for revocation or suspension of a license pursuant to section 13-306 of this article, the chief of police shall serve written notice upon the person whose license has been determined to be subject to revocation or suspension. The notice shall state (a) the specific grounds which make the license subject to revocation or suspension, and (b) the opportunity for a hearing before the city manager, provided written notice requesting a hearing is received by the city manager within fifteen (15) days of service of the notice of revocation or suspension. The city manager or his designee shall conduct the hearing and within ten (10) days shall render his decision in writing either revoking the license, suspending the license for a period of time not to exceed ninety (90) days, or finding that insufficient grounds for revocation or suspension exist and that the person should retain his or her license. In the case of a revocation or suspension, the decision shall state the reasons for the action taken. 
    The decision of the city manager shall be subject to review in the Superior Court of Nash or Edgecombe County by proceedings in the nature of certiorari, but, unless a court of competent jurisdiction otherwise provides, said appeal shall not stay any action taken with regard to the license. Any petition for writ of certiorari for review shall be filed with the clerk of superior court within thirty (30) days after notice of the decision has been received by the licensee. 
(1)  Unless good cause exists to contest a petition for a writ of certiorari, the city shall stipulate to certiorari no later than ten (10) business days after the petitioner requests such a stipulation. 
(2)  The city shall transmit the record to the court no later than five (5) business days after receiving the order allowing certiorari. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the provisions of any local rule of the reviewing court which allows for a longer time period, the city shall file its brief within fifteen (15) days after it is served with the petitioner's brief. 
    An appeal by an applicant or licensee from the superior court shall be governed by the North Carolina Rules of Appellate Procedure, but, unless a court of competent jurisdiction otherwise provides, said appeal shall not stay any action taken with regard to the license. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-21, 3-14-11) 
Sec. 13-308. - Bars, taverns, and nightclubs nuisance and violence reduction program. 
    Licensees and on-site managers of bars, taverns, and nightclubs must attend the police department's bars, taverns, and nightclubs nuisance and violence reduction program at least once each calendar year. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-21, 3-14-11) 
Sec. 13-309. - License fee schedule. 
    It has been determined, based on estimates from the chief of police and the finance director as well as the experience of other cities, that the cost and expense incurred by the city in implementing the licensing procedures regarding bars, taverns, and nightclubs will be at least two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per license. Accordingly, the fee for a bar, tavern, and nightclub license is established at two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). The license fee shall be paid when the application is submitted and shall be nonrefundable. There shall be no prorating of the license fee, except that in the case of an original application made after December 31, one-half of the license fee shall be due. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-21, 3-14-11) 
Sec. 13-310. - Criminal penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor as provided in G.S. § 14-4 and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a maximum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment, or both. Each violation shall be considered a separate and distinct offense, and each day of continued violation shall be considered as a separate offense. The issuance of a notice of violation or a suspension or revocation of a bar, tavern, or nightclub license shall not prohibit the imposition of a criminal penalty and the imposition of a criminal penalty shall not prevent the issuance of a notice of violation or a suspension or revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-21, 3-14-11) 
Sec. 13-311. - Civil injunction. 
    In addition to the issuance of a notice of violation, the suspension or revocation of a bar, tavern, or nightclub license, or a prosecution for criminal violations, any person who violates this article may be subject to all civil and equitable remedies set out in G.S. § 160A-175. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-21, 3-14-11) 
Sec. 13-312. - Severability. 
    In the event that any provision of this article, or any part thereof, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction on its face, or as applied, such holding shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of any of the remaining provisions of this article, or any part thereof, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance or of said provision as applied to any other person or circumstance. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the city council that this article would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective provisions not been included herein. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-21, 3-14-11) 
Chapter 14 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- City prohibited from enacting inconsistent ordinance on crimes the elements of which are identical to state law, G.S. § 160A-174(b)(6); criminal law, G.S. Ch. 14; punishment for violation of ordinance, violation of ordinance constitutes infraction or class 3 misdemeanor, G.S. § 14-4. 

Sec. 14-1. - Defacing, removal of signs. 
    It shall be unlawful to tear, deface, mutilate, take down or in any manner destroy any advertisement or legal, public or private notice posted for public view within the corporate limits, except that the owner of the property upon which such advertisement or notice has been posted without his permission may remove the same. 
(Code 1967, § 3-3) 
State Law reference- Unlawful posting of advertisements, G.S. § 14-145. 
Sec. 14-2. - Attaching signs, posters, etc., on trees, utility poles. 
    No person shall post any bills, posters, signs or advertisements on any trees or telegraph, telephone, electric light or other pole along any of the streets of the city. This section shall not be construed to include street signs, placed on the poles by the city for designating names of streets. Each sign, poster, bill or advertisement posted in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1967, § 3-4) 
State Law reference- Unlawful posting of advertisements, G.S. § 14-145. 
Sec. 14-3. - Possession of dangerous weapons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to display or willfully or intentionally possess or have immediate access to any bowie knife, dirk, dagger, slingshot, loaded cane, brass iron or metallic knuckles, razor, pistol, shotgun, rifle or other deadly weapon of like kind upon or in any city park, city transit bus, or city building or portion thereof, owned, leased as lessee, operated, occupied, managed, or controlled by the city, as well as the appurtenant premises to any such city building. It shall also be unlawful for any person to possess such dangerous or deadly weapons while under the influence of intoxicating drink, or at the premises of a church, polling place, or other place of public assembly. The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Persons authorized by state or federal law to carry dangerous or deadly weapons in the performance of their duties; or 
(2)  Persons participating in city sponsored events, programs, displays, or activities involving dangerous or deadly weapons provided such persons have been expressly authorized by the chief of police to display or have in their possession or control the dangerous or deadly weapon they possess or control. 
(Code 1967, § 12-4; Ord. No. 0-95-37, § 1, 7-10-95; Ord. No. 0-95-66, § 1, 12-11-95) 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate explosives, § 10(c). 
State Law reference- Concealed weapons, G.S. § 14-269; selling weapons to minors, G.S. § 14-315; permitting children to use firearms, G.S. § 14-316; sale of certain weapons without permit forbidden, G.S. § 14-402. 
Sec. 14-4. - Discharge of firearms, fireworks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or project any stone, rock, shot or other hard substance by means of a slingshot, bean shooter, air rifle, pop gun, bow or other similar contrivance; or to fire any pistol, gun or other firearm; or to discharge any fireworks within the city; except on archery ranges, firing ranges or in legally established shooting galleries or ranges, or in the discharge of duty by law enforcement officers. The use of firearms in the destruction of rodents, pigeons, squirrels or similar animals or birds or reptiles that are considered a menace to public health or property may be permitted by special permission of the chief of police. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the use of fireworks for exhibition or entertainment purposes by persons to whom permits have been granted by the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 12-5) 
Sec. 14-5. - Planting of certain trees prohibited. 
    No cottonwood or elm trees shall be planted within the city limits. This shall not prohibit or be applicable to the planting of Chinese Elm trees. 
(Code 1967, § 12-25) 
Sec. 14-6. - Blocking or obstructing storm drainage pipes and ditches. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, dump, roll or in any manner place or cause to be placed any objects or materials in a drainage pipe, box culvert, drainage ditch or any other storm- water carrier receiving street runoff which may cause a blockage or reduction in flow capacity. These objects and materials include but are not limited to leaves, pine straw, grass clippings, tree limbs, lumber, construction and landscaping debris, bulky items or any other type of solid waste capable of causing an obstruction. 
(b)  The director of public works or his representative may grant temporary authority to block or obstruct a drainage system for construction, repair or maintenance activity. This temporary authority is for limited duration and does not relieve the grantee of responsibility for any damages caused by such blockage or obstruction. 
(c)  The superintendent of streets is hereby directed, authorized and empowered to notify in writing the owner of any lot, place or area within the city limits on which any of the conditions set forth in (a) above exist that such condition must be abated by removing and/or remedying such condition on or before a specified date which date shall not be less than seven (7) days from issuance of the notice. 
(d)  If the owner upon whom a notice to abate the blockage or obstructing condition fails, neglects or refuses to remedy the condition within the time specified in the notice, the superintendent of streets shall forthwith cause such condition to be removed, abated or remedied. The cost of such action shall be paid by the owner or other person responsible for the condition, and if not paid shall be a lien upon the real estate or premises upon which the condition arose and shall be collected as unpaid taxes. 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, Ch. 19. 
Sec. 14-7. - Spilling, dumping, leaking, etc., of hazardous chemicals or waste into or on the city's storm drains, sanitary sewers or drainage ditches, streets, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to spill, dump, leak or in any manner allow or cause hazardous chemicals or wastes to gain access into the city's storm drains, sanitary sewers or drainage ditches, streets, etc. If such a condition happens or is found to exist the person or owner responsible for the condition shall take immediate steps to abate the condition as directed by local, state or federal officials. All costs associated with the abatement and cleanup of the condition are the responsibility of the person causing the condition. The city shall be reimbursed for any material and labor provided to assist in such abatement or cleanup. 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, Ch. 19; sanitary sewers, § 21-26 et seq. 
Sec. 14-8. - Notice of towing required; contents of notice. 
(a)  Any firm, or corporation which tows or removes a motor vehicle (or any other machine intended to travel over land by self-propulsion or while attached to a self-propelled vehicle) by any means from private property without the knowledge of the owner of such vehicle, shall, within forty-eight (48) hours of such towing, furnish notice of the towing to the chief of police. Each twenty-four (24) hour period which elapses thereafter without the chief of police being notified shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The written notice of towing required to be furnished to the chief of police under section 14-8(a) shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the registered owner or other person entitled to possession of the vehicle if such can be reasonably ascertained; 
(2)  A description of the vehicle; 
(3)  The license plate number and the state which issued such license plate if the vehicle has a license plate; 
(4)  The location from which the vehicle was towed; 
(5)  The person authorizing the towing; and 
(6)  The location where the vehicle is stored and the name of the person having custody thereof. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-82, § 1(12-34, 12-35), 9-25-89) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 0-89-82, § 1 adopted Sept. 25, 1989, amended Ch. 12 of the 1967 Code by the addition of §§ 12-34 and 12-35 and at the discretion of the editor and provisions have been included herein as § 14-8. 
Cross reference- Abandoned vehicles, § 10-176 et seq.; towing provisions regarding abandoned vehicles, § 10-186 et seq. 
Sec. 14-9. - Loitering for the purpose of engaging in drug related activity. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section "public place" means any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley or alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot, or transportation facility, or the doorways and entrance ways to any building which fronts on any of the foregoing places, or a motor vehicle in or on any of those places, or any property owned by the City of Rocky Mount. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remain or wander about in a public place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of violating any subdivision of the North Carolina Controlled Substances Act, North Carolina General Statutes 90, Article 5. Such circumstances shall include: 
(1)  Repeatedly beckoning to, stopping, or attempting to stop passers-by, or repeatedly attempting to engage passers-by in conversation, whether such passers-by are on foot or in a motor vehicle, for the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting, or procuring another to illegally possess, transfer, or buy any controlled substance; or 
(2)  Behaving in such a manner as to appear that he or she is about to engage in or is engaged in an unlawful drug related activity; or 
(3)  Repeatedly passing to or receiving from passers-by, whether on foot or in a motor vehicle, money, objects, or written material, for the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting, or procuring another to illegally possess, transfer, or buy any controlled substance. 
(c)  In order to be a violation of subsection (b), the person's affirmative language or conduct must be such as to demonstrate by its express or implied content or appearance a specific intent to induce, entice, solicit or procure another to illegally possess, transfer, or buy a controlled substance. 
(d)  No arrest shall be made for a violation of subsection (b) unless the arresting officer first affords the person an opportunity to explain his or her conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating subsection (b) if it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed no intent to violate any subdivision of the North Carolina Controlled Substances Act. 
(e)  The violation of any provisions of this section shall be a misdemeanor as provided by North Carolina General Statutes 14-4. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-91, § 1(12-36), 11-13-89) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 0-89-91, § 1, adopted Nov. 13, 1989, amended Ch. 12 of the 1967 by the addition of § 12-36 and at the discretion of the editor said provisions have been included herein as § 14-9. 
Sec. 14-10. - Smoking in municipal buildings and vehicles. 
(a)  Definition. "Smoking" shall mean the inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, or other combustible tobacco product. 
(b)  Smoking prohibited in city administrative office building. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in the city administrative office building located at 331 South Franklin Street. 
(c)  Smoking regulated in other municipal buildings. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any building or facility or portion of a building or facility now or hereafter owned, leased, operated, occupied, managed, or controlled by the city, except, that smoking shall be permitted in specifically designated areas in buildings other than the city administrative office building. The city manager shall have the authority to designate smoking areas within each such city building or facility. An area within any such building or facility may be designated as a smoking area only if in the judgment of the city manager the ventilation of such area is sufficient, any adverse impact on municipal employees and members of the public is minimal, and no fire or other safety hazard will be created by smoking in such area. 
(d)  Smoking regulated in municipal vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any vehicle now or hereafter owned or leased by the city unless it has been designated for smoking by the city manager. 
(e)  Exemptions. This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Dwelling units under the supervision and direction of the Rocky Mount Housing Authority. 
(2)  Buildings owned by the city that are leased to others where the occupancy and activity within the building is not controlled by the city. 
(f)  Penalty. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with G.S. 14-4. 
(Ord. No. 0-93-58, §1, 9-27-93; Ord. No. O-08-17, § 1, 3-10-08) 
Sec. 14-11. - Carrying of concealed handguns on city property. 
(a)  City buildings and parks to be posted. The city manager or his designee is hereby authorized and instructed to post conspicuous signs on or within each park and each building or portion of a building owned, leased as lessee, operated, occupied, managed, or controlled by the city, as well as the appurtenant premises to such buildings, indicating that carrying a concealed handgun therein or thereon is prohibited. 
(b)  City buses to be posted. The city manager or his designee is hereby authorized and instructed to post conspicuous signs in or on each city transit bus owned, leased as lessee, or operated by or for the city indicating that carrying a concealed handgun therein or thereon is prohibited. 
(c)  Location of signs. Signs on buildings shall be visibly posted on the exterior of each entrance by which any member of the general public can enter the building. The signs posted in city parks, appurtenant premises to city buildings, and city transit buses shall be placed in an appropriate location to clearly indicate that the carrying of concealed handguns in such park, appurtenant premises, or bus is prohibited. 
(d)  Unlawful to carry concealed handguns. It shall be unlawful for any person not a law enforcement officer to carry a concealed handgun or city property or in a city vehicle which has been posted pursuant to this section. The violation of this section shall constitute a violation of article 54 of chapter 14 of the North Carolina General Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 0-95-53, § 1, 10-23-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 14-415.11(c). 
Sec. 14-12. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2004-57, § 1b, adopted July 12, 2004, repealed § 14-12 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to installation of electric fences as enacted by Ord. No. 0-97-14, § 1, adopted March, 24 1997. 
Sec. 14-13. - Regulation of panhandling. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this subsection. 
(1)  Aggressive manner shall mean: 
a.  Approaching or speaking to a person, or following a person before, during, or after panhandling if that conduct is intended or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm, damage to or loss of property, or to otherwise be intimidated into giving money or any other thing of value; 
b.  Approaching within three (3) feet of a person being panhandled unless that person has indicated that he or she wishes to make a donation; 
c.  Continuing to panhandle from a person after such person has given a negative response to such panhandling; 
d.  Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person without that person's consent in the course of panhandling; 
e.  Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact; 
f.  Using violent or threatening language or gestures toward a person being panhandled; 
g.  Following a person being panhandled with the intention of asking that person for money or other things of value; 
h.  Panhandling from anyone who is waiting in line for entry to a building or for any other purpose; or 
i.  Panhandling in a group of two (2) or more. 
(2)  Automated teller machine shall mean a device, linked to a financial institution's account records, which is able to carry out transactions, including, but not limited to, account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries, and mortgage and loan payments. 
(3)  Automated teller machine facility shall mean an area comprised of one (1) or more automatic teller machines and any adjacent space made available to customers of financial institutions. 
(4)  Check-cashing business shall mean any person or entity engaged in the check-cashing business as defined in Article 22 of Chapter 53 of the General Statues of North Carolina. 
(5)  Financial institution shall mean any corporation, credit union, or savings and loan association, receiving, soliciting, or accepting money or its equivalent on deposit as a business. 
(6)  Panhandle shall mean making a solicitation in person requesting an immediate donation of money. Purchase of an item for an amount of money far exceeding its value, under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is in substance a donation, is a donation for the purpose of this section. Panhandling does not include passively standing or sitting with a sign or other indication that one is seeking donations, without addressing any solicitation to any specific person other than in response to an inquiry by that person. 
(7)  Public place shall mean a place that a governmental entity has title to or a place to which the public or a substantial group of persons has free access, including, without limitation, any street, highway, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park, or playground. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful to: 
(1)  Panhandle in an aggressive manner in any public place. 
(2)  Panhandle on private or residential property without carrying written permission to engage in such conduct from the owner or other person lawfully in possession of such property. 
(3)  Panhandle within twenty (20) feet of any entrance or exit of any financial institution, check-cashing business, or automated teller machine without the consent of the owner of such facilities or other person legally in possession thereof; provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility the twenty-foot distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the facility. 
(4)  Panhandle an operator or other occupant of a motor vehicle for the purpose of performing or offering to perform a service in connection with such vehicle or otherwise soliciting the sale of goods or services. This subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the operator or passenger of such vehicle. 
(5)  Panhandle an operator or occupant of a motor vehicle on a public street in exchange for blocking, occupying, or reserving a public parking space, or directing the operator or occupant to a public parking space. 
(6)  Panhandle while under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance. 
(7)  Panhandle by stating that funds are needed to meet a specific need, when the solicitor has the funds to meet that need, does not intend to use funds to meet that need, or does not have that need. 
(8)  Panhandle in any public transportation vehicle; or at any bus, train, or taxi station or stop, or within twenty (20) feet of the entrance or exit of any bus, train, or taxi station or stop. 
(9)  Panhandle after sunset or before sunrise. 
(10)  Panhandle while standing or sitting on the roadway, shoulder, or median of any street or highway. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as provided by North Carolina General Statutes § 14-4, and, upon the first conviction, shall be subject to a maximum fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed seven (7) days, or both, and upon the second or subsequent conviction shall be subject to a maximum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 0-02-6, § 1, 1-28-02) 
Sec. 14-14. - Helmets, elbow pads and kneepads required at city skateboard parks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use a skateboard, inline skates, or bicycle, or to participate or engage in skateboarding, inline skating, or freestyle bicycling at any city skateboard park without wearing a helmet, elbow pads and kneepads. 
(b)  Signs shall be posted at all city skateboard parks providing notice that any person engaging in skateboarding, inline skating, or freestyle bicycling must wear a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads and that any person failing to do so will be subject to citation under this section. 
(Ord. No. 0-2003-72, § 1, 8-25-03) 
Sec. 14-15. - Graffiti. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Chalk means any device in solid form of chalk, paint, wax, epoxy or similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by applying pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eight ( 1/8 ) of an inch in width. 
(2)  Chief of police means the chief of police of the city or his or her authorized designee. 
(3)  Graffiti means any inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn painted or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property, natural or man-made, by a graffiti implement or chalk, without the prior written consent of the property owner delivered to the person placing the graffiti on the property. Graffiti does not include temporary, easily removable chalk or other water-soluble makings on public or private sidewalks, streets, natural surfaces, or other paved or cemented surfaces which are used in connection with traditional children's activities such as drawings of bases for stickball, kickball, handball, hopscotch or similar activities, nor shall it include similar easily removable markings used in connection with any lawful business activity or public purpose. 
(4)  Graffiti implement means any aerosol paint container, broad tipped marker, stick on label, paint stick, paint, etching equipment, brush or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or man-made surface. 
(5)  Property owner(s) shall mean and include the owner of the property, such property owner's manager or agent, or any other person in lawful control or possession of the property. 
(b)  Graffiti declared a nuisance. 
(1)  The existence of graffiti on public or private property in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and dangerous to the public safety and welfare, and is therefore subject to the removal and abatement provisions specified in this section. 
(2)  It is the duty of the property owner to which the graffiti has been applied to remove such graffiti. 
(c)  Violation of section a misdemeanor. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden by this section or to fail to do or perform any act required by this section. Any violation of this section shall be punished as specified herein. 
(d)  Graffiti unlawful. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place graffiti upon any public or private property. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) to possess any graffiti implement upon any school ground, public place, bridge, culvert, or any residential property of which they are not a resident or guest, or at any private business, unless such person can establish to the reasonable satisfaction of the police that the possession of such implement was part of a school project, home project, or some other lawful activity. 
(e)  Removal of graffiti. 
(1)  Removal by the perpetrator. 
a.  Any person applying graffiti on public or private property shall remove such graffiti or cause such graffiti to be removed within seventy-two (72) hours after notice from the city or the owner of the property involved. If the graffiti is applied by a person under the age of eighteen (18), the parents or legal guardians of such minor shall be responsible for such removal. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for any person who has applied graffiti to fail to remove such graffiti within seventy-two (72) hours after receipt of notice to remove the graffiti. 
(2)  Removal by the city. 
a.  Whenever the city becomes aware of the existence of graffiti on private property, the city is authorized to remove the graffiti as set forth in this subsection after first giving notice to the property owner to remove or effectively obscure such graffiti as provided in this subsection. The notice shall be given by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service, and shall contain the following: 
(i)  The street address or other description of the property sufficient for identification of the property. 
(ii)  A statement that the property is a public nuisance due to the existence of the graffiti. 
(iii)  A statement that the graffiti must be removed or effectively obscured within seven (7) days after receipt of the notice and that if the public nuisance created by the graffiti is not abated within that time the city will abate the public nuisance at the cost of the property owner as set forth in this subsection. 
(iv)  Information identifying any graffiti removal assistance available through the city and private graffiti removal contractors. 
b.  If the property owner fails to remove or effectively obscure the graffiti within the prescribed seven (7) days after receipt of notice described above, the city may cause the graffiti to be removed or effectively obscured at the expense of the property owner. If the cost of removing or obscuring the graffiti is not paid by the property owner within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a statement for the cost of such removal or obscuring, the expenses thereof shall be lien on the property where the graffiti was abated and shall have the same priority and be collected as unpaid ad valorem taxes. 
c.  Appeal. Any property owner who receives a notice to remove or obscure graffiti may appeal to the city manager within seven (7) days of receipt of the notice. The appeal notice shall state the reasons for the appeal. The city manager or his designee shall set a hearing within seven (7) business days after receipt of the notice of appeal. If, on appeal, the city manager or his designee determines that the graffiti is a public nuisance and must be removed, the city manager or his designee shall establish a new date for removing or obscuring the graffiti. The city shall not remove or obscure graffiti until a decision has been rendered by the city manager or his designee. 
d.  Emergency removal. If the city determines that any graffiti is an imminent danger to the safety or welfare of the public it shall prepare a notice as described in subsection (e)(2)a., which shall serve as an emergency notice, including a specific allegation of how the safety or welfare of the public is in jeopardy and why the graffiti constitutes an imminent danger. If the city is unable to provide personal service of this emergency notice after two (2) attempts to do so, then the city may remove the graffiti at its own expense after posting such property with said notice. If a property owner receives notice that emergency removal has been deemed necessary by the city the property owner shall: 
(i)  Cause the immediate removal of the graffiti or cause the graffiti to be obscured or; 
(ii)  Give permission to the city to obscure or remove the graffiti at the city's cost or; 
(iii)  Immediately obtain appropriate relief from a court of competent jurisdiction directing the city to stop any attempt to obscure or remove any graffiti. 
e.  Repairs/restoration. In no case shall the city paint or repair any area defaced by graffiti more extensively than where the graffiti itself is located. The city shall not be required to restore the obscured area to its original condition (i.e. exact color, texture etc.) 
(f)  Penalties. 
(1)  The following penalties shall apply for violations of this section. 
a.  Violations of subsection (d)(1), the placement of graffiti, or subsection (e)(1) failure to remove such graffiti by perpetrator, shall be punishable by: 
(i)  First violation- A fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. 
(ii)  Second violation- A fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each offense. 
(iii)  Each subsequent violation- A fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(2)  Violations of subsection (d)(2), possession of graffiti implements: 
a.  First violation- A fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. 
b.  Second violation- A fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each offense. 
c.  Each subsequent violation- A fine not to exceed five hundred dollars $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 0-06-88, § 1, 11-27-06) 
Chapter 15 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, Ch. 4; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; public grounds peddling and soliciting permit, § 13-111 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, Ch. 19; traffic and vehicles, Ch. 20; subdivisions, App. A; zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Parks and recreation, G.S. § 160A-350 et seq.; use of property tax funds for parks and recreation, G.S. § 160A-209(c)(24). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Vehicles on public grounds. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or to park any vehicle on any part of any park, athletic field, school ground or other public lands within the city except upon the driveways therein or in the areas designated as parking spaces. 
(Code 1967, § 13-2) 
Sec. 15-2. - Activities at city lake. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to swim in, wade in, ice skate or walk upon or in any manner encroach upon or place any boat or vehicle upon or in the city lake on Sunset Avenue in the city. Nothing herein shall prohibit feeding the ducks or fishing from the banks of the lake or other activity for which a permit has been secured from the city recreation department. Remote-controlled boats are allowed provided a written permit is secured from the director of recreation. 
(Code 1967, § 13-1) 
Secs. 15-3-15-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS 

Sec. 15-26. - Hours generally; extinguishment of light; exception. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remain in or enter any park owned by the city between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. All lights utilized to illuminate park recreation areas shall be extinguished at 12:00 midnight except upon order of the director of the city recreation department. This section shall not apply to any person or group of persons using any park on an overnight basis after having obtained a permit for such use from the director of the city recreation department so long as such use is consistent with the permit. 
(Code 1967, § 13-4) 
Sec. 15-27. - Specific parks; activities regulated. 
(a)  Battle Park. It shall be unlawful to park or remain in parked cars in Battle Park in areas that have been designated closed between sunset and 7:00 a.m. 
(b)  Frank's Field (Taylor Park). Frank's Field or Taylor Park, located in Nash County and bounded by Wildwood Avenue, Evergreen Road and Shady Circle Drive, shall be closed between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. It shall be unlawful for any person, during these hours to enter, remain in or leave a motor vehicle parked upon the city park. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-8, § 1, 1-13-92) 
Sec. 15-28. - Group activity; signs. 
(a)  Group activity. Whenever any group, association or organization desires to use park facilities for a particular purpose, a representative of the group, association or organization shall first obtain a permit from the director of recreation for such purposes. The director of recreation will grant the permit if it appears that the group, association or organization will not interfere with the general use of the parks and the proposed activity of the group will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, safety and recreation. 
(b)  Signs declaring park use regulations. Signs shall be erected at the entrances to parks setting forth the hours of opening and closing the parks. Other signs regulating the use of the park areas by the public may be established throughout the parks when such regulation has been established in this section. All signs are to be observed by the public and it shall be unlawful for anyone to violate any such posted regulation. 
(Code 1967, § 13-6) 
Sec. 15-29. - Wildlife protected. 
    The shooting or trapping of birds, squirrels or other game in any park within the city is prohibited. 
(Code 1967, § 13-3) 
Cross reference- Bird sanctuary declared, § 4-2. 
Sec. 15-30. - Picnic shelters. 
(a)  Picnic shelters in all city parks are available to churches, clubs, families and other local groups at a fee which shall be set by the city council and published in the Manual of City Policies and may be reserved by calling the office of the director of parks and recreation. This subsection shall apply only when picnic shelters are to be used for social purposes and no fund-raising activity is involved. 
(b)  Picnic shelters in Sunset Park and Tom Stith Park shall be available to local groups for fund-raising purposes upon payment of a deposit to the city and upon receipt of a permit from the director of parks and recreation. 
(c)  Picnic shelters shall be available for fund-raising activities to local groups whose membership is at least partially composed of Rocky Mount citizens and whose purpose in renting a picnic shelter for fund raising is nonprofit. Shelters shall not be available for rent to groups from neighboring towns unless their membership and purpose is countywide in scope. The city reserves the right to decide whether a group qualifies for use of a picnic shelter for fund-raising purposes. 
(d)  The only fund-raising activity permitted in the picnic shelters shall be the sale of food and drink products except that the sale or use of alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited. Permission to sell food and drink products is contingent upon approval by the appropriate county health department, and it is the responsibility of the applicant group to obtain health department approval. 
(e)  Permission to use picnic shelters for fund-raising purposes is contingent upon certification by the chief of police that the applicant has arranged for traffic control. If the chief of police determines that increased traffic-control measures are necessary, the applicant shall be required to employ the number of off-duty police officers specified by the chief at the applicant's expense. 
(f)  An advance deposit for damage, one cleanup, utilities and other expenses to be determined by the director of parks and recreation shall be paid. The unused portion of this deposit (as determined by the director of parks and recreation), if any, will be returned provided the shelter and surrounding grounds are cleaned up by 9:00 a.m. the following day to the satisfaction of the recreation department representative. If cleanup is provided by the city, the charge shall be actual payroll plus twenty-seven (27) percent and actual equipment charges. The amount of the deposit shall be determined by the city council and published in the Manual of City Policies. 
(g)  If the group desires to rent the shelter for longer than two (2) hours, health regulations relative to restroom facilities must be followed. 
(h)  If an application for a permit under this section is denied, the applicant may appeal to the city manager. 
(i)  Permits for the use of picnic shelters for fund-raising purposes are nontransferable. 
(Code 1967, § 14-13; Ord. No. 0-90-36, § 1, 6-4-90) 
Secs. 15-31-15-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAR RIVER WATER SUPPLY RESERVOIR AND RECREATION AREA 

Sec. 15-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned vehicle means any vehicle left unattended on the reservoir bed. 
    Fixed blind means a structure erected at a fixed location either on the shore or in water for the purpose of hunting and shooting waterfowl. A stationary blind shall be: 
(1)  Of such size and strength that it can be occupied by and conceal one or more hunters, or 
(2)  Large enough to accommodate and conceal a boat or skiff from which one or more hunters can hunt or shoot waterfowl. 
    Floating blind means a floating device, whether in motion or anchored, that can be occupied by and conceal one or more hunters, uses a means of concealment other than the device's paint or coloration, and is used in the water for the purpose of hunting and shooting waterfowl. 
    Parks and recreation waterfowl blind means a waterfowl blind owned by the city for the exclusive purpose of waterfowl hunting. 
    Permitted blind means a blind in which the owner has received a permit from the city for construction and or use. 
    Reservoir means the Tar River Reservoir as shown on map entitled "City of Rocky Mount, N. C. Water Use Map" marked "Exhibit A" (hereinafter referred to as the "Reservoir Map") incorporated herein by reference and on file in the city clerk's office. 
    Reservoir bed means any land area at the reservoir, including the bank, below the high water property line of the city. 
    Reservoir watershed means the land area from which stormwater drains into the reservoir. 
    Vehicle means and includes any wheel, track, or other vehicle designed or intended to travel over land by self propulsion or while attached to any self propelled vehicle. 
    Warden means the employee of the city duly authorized to enforce the requirements of this article and to protect the public in its use of the reservoir. 
    Zone means a specific water area of the reservoir as indicated on the reservoir map. The boundary lines between zones shall be marked by buoys in the Tar River Reservoir as indicated on the reservoir map. Permitted activities in each zone are set forth in this article. 
(Code 1967, § 171/2-1; Ord. No. O-2007-111, § 1a., 10-22-07; Ord. No. O-2007-124, § 1a., 11-26-07) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 15-52. - Violations; penalty. 
    Violations of any provision of this article or the failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as follows: 
(1)  First offense: Twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(2)  Second offense: One hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(3)  Third and each subsequent offense: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Code 1967, § 171/2-2; O-2007-111, § 1d., 10-22-07) 
Sec. 15-53. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The warden or his duly authorized agent shall have the power and authority to deny admission to the reservoir to any person known to have violated the rules and regulations or ordinances governing the reservoir, or to any person having alcoholic beverages in his possession or who shows evidence of being under the influence of alcohol. 
(b)  The warden or his duly authorized agent shall also have the power and authority to remove from the reservoir any person who violates any of these requirements. 
(c)  The warden or his duly authorized agent shall have the duty to swear out warrants against any person for violating or failing to comply with this article. 
(Code 1967, § 171/2-3) 
Sec. 15-54. - Boating. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  All boats shall enter and leave the reservoir water only at public landing ramps provided by the city. An owner of property adjoining zones B, C, D or E may secure only his own boat to his pier, dock, float or slip on the reservoir. 
(2)  Private boats shall normally be permitted on the reservoir at any hour unless specific hours are determined by the city or the warden and posted at entrances to the reservoir. If specific hours are determined in the interest of public safety, the warden may, in his discretion, issue such after hours permits to fishermen or persons wishing to tie up or dock their boat overnight at a location away from the public dock and launching ramps. In no case shall an after hours permit be issued for power boating, water skiing, sailing or any activity other than fishing from or docking the boat. 
(3)  Each boat entering the reservoir shall contain a life vest meeting the approval of the United States Coast Guard, cushion and such other equipment as necessary to meet any applicable state or federal regulations. 
(4)  Boats shall at all times be operated in a manner that will not endanger it or the lives or property of others. 
(5)  Any person under sixteen (16) years of age shall not operate a power boat unless accompanied by a person sixteen (16) years of age or older. 
(6)  Piers, docks, floats or slips for tying up boats may be constructed in zones B, C, D and E provided a permit therefor has been issued by the warden. The warden will approve in advance the location and construction of each pier, dock, float or slip, verifying that each will meet minimum standards set by the city engineer, and that the proposed location will not disrupt boat traffic on the reservoir. In no case shall the warden permit the installation of a pier, dock or float at any point where the reservoir is less than one hundred (100) feet in width. Permits shall not be transferrable. 
(7)  The warden shall inspect at least annually each pier, dock, float and slip, and shall notify the owner of any deterioration or damage. Owners shall maintain any pier, dock, float or slip in good condition at all times. 
(8)  The warden shall cause to be removed any such structures from city property at any time the age, conditions or use of the structure becomes hazardous in his opinion. 
(9)  Boats having marine waste disposal systems shall not be permitted on the reservoir unless the system has been sealed by having the through-the-hull discharge fitting or seacock securely capped or plugged or both, and the connection between the device and the discharge fitting or seacock removed. 
(10)  Houseboats shall not be permitted on the reservoir. 
(11)  It shall be unlawful to move, damage or in any way alter buoys that have been placed on the reservoir. 
(b)  Power boating. 
(1)  Power boating shall be permitted in all zones except zone A. 
(2)  Power boats within one hundred (100) feet of the shore or one hundred (100) feet of the docks or ramps shall not proceed at a rate of speed that will cause an excessive wake. Power boats passing under the Bend of the River Bridge (S.R. 1745) shall proceed at a rate of speed that will cause no wake. 
(3)  Power boats in zone D shall not proceed at a speed that will disrupt fishing or sailing activities. 
(c)  Water skiing. 
(1)  Water skiing shall be prohibited in zones A and D and only permitted in zones B, C and E. 
(2)  Boats pulling water skiers shall have at least two (2) responsible persons in the boat, unless the boat is equipped with an approved wide angle rear view mirror. 
(3)  Each water skier shall wear a vest-type life preserver approved by the United States Coast Guard at all times. 
(4)  Boats returning for a downed skier shall do so with caution. 
(5)  Skiing from or into public ramps or docks is prohibited. 
(d)  Sailing. 
(1)  Sailing shall be permitted in zones B, C, D and E. 
(2)  Sailing craft shall have the navigation rights over power craft. 
(Code 1967, § 171/2-4; Ord. No. 0-90-57, § 2, 8-13-90) 
Sec. 15-55. - Fishing. 
(a)  Only boat fishing is permitted in zone D of the reservoir. Water skiing, swimming and similar activities disruptive to fishing are prohibited in this zone. 
(b)  Boat fishing is permitted in zones B, C and E but not exclusively. Other permitted activities in these zones at times may disrupt fishing. 
(c)  Bank fishing in zone D or E shall be permitted at any location, provided reasonable care is taken to avoid littering the shore or polluting the water. 
(Code 1967, § 171/2-6) 
Sec. 15-56. - Hunting. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person except the warden or authorized law enforcement personnel to carry, possess, discharge, fire or shoot any pistol, rifle, shotgun, or other firearm over, across, upon, or from the reservoir except as permitted in this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or project by means of a sling shot, bean shooter, air rifle, pellet gun, pop gun, bow, or any similar means or contrivance, any stone, rock, shot, or other hard substance over, across, into, upon, or from the reservoir. 
(c)  It shall be lawful to hunt migratory waterfowl in zone E, those parts of zone D (Sapony Creek) North of State Road 1717, or within a permitted parks and recreation waterfowl blind during waterfowl season provided a general permit for such hunting has been issued by the warden. No shotgun larger than twelve (12) gauge shall be used. General permit and float blind hunters must remain more than five hundred (500) yards from any residence, fixed blind, highway, state road, other hunter or restricted area. 
(d)  Upon the issuance of a permit by the chief of police, it shall be lawful to use the type of firearm specified in such permit for the destruction of rodents, pigeons, squirrels, or similar animals, birds, or reptiles that are a menace to public health, safety or property. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use, discharge, or cause to be discharged, any fireworks or pyrotechnics over, across, into, upon, or from the reservoir unless a permit for such use or discharge has been issued by the city council. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a blind or other method of concealment on the regulated section of the reservoir without an annual permit from the reservoir warden. Permitted blinds are for the exclusive use of the permit holder. All other hunters must remain five hundred (500) yards from permitted blinds. Guests must have written permission. No fee may be charged by permit holder to hunt permitted blinds. Permitted blinds must be hunted a minimum of once per season and the permits must be permanently displayed on the blind. Failure to comply with any part of this article may result in removal of the blind by the city. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface a permitted blind. 
(Code 1967, § 171/2-7; Ord. No. 0-90-57, § 1, 8-13-90; Ord. No. O-2007-124, § 1b.-d., 11-26-07) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2007-124, § 1b., adopted November 26, 2007, changed the title of § 15-56 from "Use of firearms" to "Hunting." 
Cross reference- City declared bird sanctuary, § 4-2; possession of dangerous weapons, § 14-3; discharge of firearms and fireworks, § 14-4; wildlife within parks protected, § 15-29. 
Sec. 15-57. - Swimming. 
(a)  Swimming shall not be permitted in zone A or B of the reservoir. 
(b)  In zone C, swimming shall be permitted in locations designated by the warden having toilets, facilities and services for swimming safety. 
(c)  Swimming in zone C incidental to water skiing is permitted at any location. 
(d)  Swimming shall be permitted in zones D and E at locations designated by the warden having toilet facilities nearby. 
(Code 1967, § 171/2-8) 
Sec. 15-58. - Miscellaneous regulations. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages. The consumption of alcoholic beverages on the reservoir shall be prohibited. Persons using alcoholic beverages or found to be under the influence of alcohol shall be denied the use of the reservoir and adjoining city property. 
(b)  Littering. No trash or refuse shall be deposited in the reservoir or on the shore except in the containers provided. 
(c)  Watering, etc., animals. The watering, washing or wallowing of any horses, mules, cattle or other domestic animals shall not be permitted in or along the shore of the reservoir. 
(d)  Animal carcasses. In no case shall dead animals be placed in the reservoir or on the reservoir watershed. 
(e)  Proximity of burial grounds. No burial ground shall be established on the watershed within fifteen hundred (1500) feet of the water supply intake, or at any location within three hundred (300) feet of the high water mark of the reservoir. 
(f)  Residences, businesses, etc. Any residence, place of business or place of public assembly adjoining the reservoir shall be located in conformity with any applicable zoning law, and shall be provided with an approved means of sewage disposal. 
(g)  Disposal of deleterious substance. No person shall dispose of any substance on the reservoir watershed that may have a deleterious effect on the quality of the water. 
(h)  Reserved. 
(i)  Parking in ramp area. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle, boat or trailer in the ramp area at the Bend of the River Ramp for any purpose other than immediate loading or launching of boats. 
(j)  Blocking egress from parking area. It shall be unlawful to double park or park a vehicle in such a manner as to block egress from the parking lot for any other vehicle at the Bend of the River Boat Ramp. 
(k)  Removal of barricades. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to remove or tamper with any barricades or other devices intended to close or limit the use of any ramp, driveway, or other grounds at the reservoir belonging to the city. 
(l)  Trespass upon the reservoir bed. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to drive, cause to be driven, or permit any vehicle to be driven, operated, or left upon the reservoir bed. 
(Code 1967, § 171/2-9; Ord. No. 0-90-57, § 2, 8-13-90; Ord. No. O-2007-111, § 1b., 10-22-07) 
Sec. 15-59. - Permits. 
    Permits shall be required for certain activities at the Tar River Water Supply Reservoir, including, but not limited to camping, hunting, piers, fixed blinds, float blinds and parks and recreation waterfowl blinds. Fees shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the city council and published in the city's manual of city policies. 
(Code 1967, § 171/2-10; Ord. No. 0-89-43, § 1, 6-26-89; Ord. No. O-2007-124, § 1e., 11-26-07) 
Sec. 15-60. - Seaplanes. 
    Seaplanes or other amphibious aircraft or any other aircraft, except kites as set forth in section 15-62, capable of landing or taking off on the water are prohibited on the reservoir. 
(Code 1967, § 171/2-11) 
Sec. 15-61. - Water-skiing kites. 
    Water skiers using a kite apparatus to take off or land on the water are permitted on the reservoir in Zone E. 
(Code 1967, § 171/2-12) 
Sec. 15-62. - Abandoned vehicles. 
(a)  Any abandoned vehicle is deemed an environmental hazard and inimicable to the public welfare and shall be removed from the reservoir bed as soon as possible by the chief of police or his designee. 
(b)  Any abandoned vehicle removed from the reservoir bed shall be impounded until such time, but no longer than seventy-two (72) hours, as the full cost of the said removal may be calculated. 
(c)  The owner of any abandoned vehicle removed from the reservoir bed by the city shall pay in full the cost of said removal and present proof of such payment and ownership of the vehicle before said vehicle is released to the owner or responsible party for the vehicle. 
(d)  Appeals for the cost of removal of any abandoned vehicle under this article shall be as provided in the G.S. § 20-219.11(c) through (f); 20-219.12; 20-219.13; and 20-219.14. 
(e)  Failure to pay the cost of the removal and storage of any vehicle removed under this article shall be handled as provided in G.S. § 44A-4(b) through (g). The proceeds of any such sale shall be disbursed as provided in G.S. § 44A-5. 
(Ord. No. O-2007-11, § 1c., 10-22-07) 
Secs. 15-63-15-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DOWN EAST FESTIVAL OF THE ARTS AND OTHER SPECIALLY DESIGNATED CITY SPONSORED EVENTS 

Sec. 15-76. - Activities prohibited. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to protect and promote the public health, safety, welfare, and enjoyment of participants at the Down East Festival, and other special designated city sponsored events, by regulating certain activities as enumerated herein. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall apply to that city sponsored festival known as the Down East Festival of the Arts and may be made to apply to any other city sponsored festival or event if so designated by action of the City Council of the City of Rocky Mount. 
(c)  Hours and areas regulated. At the Down East Festival of the Arts, this article shall apply from 6:00 a.m. through 7:00 p.m. on the scheduled day of the event, or the rain date, if necessary, to all of that area bounded by Franklin Street, Hammond Street, Arlington Street and Goldleaf Street that is public in nature such as streets, sidewalks, parking lots and any other publicly owned property. 
    At other events designated by the city council, this article shall be applicable at such locations, dates and times as designated. 
(d)  Unlawful to operate bicycle or other wheeled vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle, tricycle, unicycle, moped, skateboard or any other wheeled vehicle, roller skates or roller blades (all hereafter referred to as "wheeled vehicle") on or within the boundaries of the Down East Festival or any other city sponsored event to which these provisions have been made to apply. For purposes of this article, "operate" shall mean the use, putting into action, or causing to function of a wheeled vehicle by a person mounted thereon. This article shall not apply to wheelchairs, baby strollers or baby carriages. 
(e)  Unlawful to throw balls, etc. It shall be unlawful for nay person to toss or throw a ball, Frisbee, model airplane or similar object on or within the boundaries of the Down East Festival or any other city sponsored event to which these provisions have been made to apply. 
(f)  Exception. Subsection (d) and (e) shall not apply to the operation of any wheeled vehicle or the throwing or tossing of any ball, Frisbee, or other object if the otherwise prohibited activity is part of an authorized exhibit or display. The director of the city parks and recreation department or his designee shall have the authority to specify the conditions under which wheeled vehicles may be operated and balls, Frisbees or objects may be thrown or tosses. 
(g)  Animals at the Down East Festival. Animals, whether on leashes or not, are prohibited at the Down East Festival and other special designated events sponsored by the city. 
    The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to dogs who accompany visually or hearing impaired persons. 
(h)  Unlawful to conduct outside sales. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit, display, offer for sale or to sell any merchandise or other item, any service, food or beverage (hereafter referred to as "outside sales") on public property within the boundaries of the Down East Festival unless such person has been issued a permit for such outside sales by the city parks and recreation department. Any person conducting outside sales shall display the permit issued by the parks and recreation department in a conspicuous place at the location of the outside sales. 
    Such permit shall be presented upon the request of a law enforcement officer or any city employee who desires to inspect it for purposes of ensuring compliance with this article. 
(i)  Merchants. Operators of businesses located within the boundaries of the area described in subsection (c) herein, or within such other designated area, are exempt from the permitting requirements of subsection (h) provided that the items offered for sale during the date of the festival, or other event, are offered for sale on a regular and continuing basis. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-068, § 1, 8-24-92) 
Chapter 16 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- City manager, § 81 et seq.; city attorney, § 90 et seq.; city clerk, § 100 et seq.; city treasurer, § 110 et seq.; director of finance, § 120 et seq.; police department, § 140 et seq.; fire department, § 150 et seq.; auxiliary police officers, § 160 et seq.; auxiliary firefighters authorized, § 160 et seq.; municipal rescue squad, authority to create, § 170 et seq.; collector of revenues, § 472; bonds required for city manager, director of finance and collector of revenue and any other persons handling money, § 473; city manager signs checks, § 481; personnel, §§ 490-492. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Municipal personnel, G.S. 160A-162 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1-16-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERSONNEL PLAN OF THE CITY OF ROCKY MOUNT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Personnel, § 490 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-26. - Merit principle and equal opportunity in employment; affirmative action officer. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Applicability. This article shall apply to all segments of the city government. 
(2)  Purpose. The purpose of this article shall be to establish the city's policy regarding equal employment opportunity. 
(3)  Policy. It shall be the continuing policy of the city that they shall be no discrimination in the treatment of minority group job applicants or employees in the application of any city policy, practice, rule or regulation. Efforts to achieve and maintain a city work force that is appropriately balanced by race and sex shall be limited only by the vacancies that occur as a result of turnover and expansion, and by the availability of minorities and women with required skills. All applicants and employees, regardless of race, creed, national origin, sex, age, disability, religion or political affiliation, shall be treated on the same basis with respect to employment, performance evaluation, performance pay consideration, promotion, training opportunities and all other city activities. Sexual harassment, a form of sex discrimination, is prohibited and will not be tolerated. 
(b)  Affirmative action defined. For the purpose of this article, "affirmative action" shall be defined as a set of program objectives designed to increase the utilization of under-utilized minorities and women at all levels and segments of the city's work force. 
(c)  Affirmative action officer. Coordinator for the city in matters pertaining to equal employment opportunity shall be the city manager or his designee. His duties will be to coordinate the efforts of all segments of the city government. He shall regularly report to the city council concerning the state of progress, with recommendations where appropriate. Administration of this program shall be the responsibility of the city manager, or his designee, as the city's affirmative action officer. He has the support of the city council. He and the staff are responsible for the following: 
(1)  Implementing policy, affirmative action programs, and internal and external communication techniques; 
(2)  Assisting department heads in arriving at solutions to problems; 
(3)  Periodically auditing hiring and promotion patterns to ensure that goals and objectives are met and reported to the city council; 
(4)  Assisting in the identification of problem areas; 
(5)  All external recruitment sources shall be informed verbally and confirmed in writing of the city's policy, stipulating that such sources actively recruit and refer minorities for all positions listed. The city will include appropriate equal opportunity clauses in all external documents such as purchase orders, leases and contracts. The city will endeavor to publicize its program in various news media and will include the phrase "equal opportunity employer" on application forms and in advertisements for employment; 
(6)  Supervisors shall be directed to contact the equal employment opportunity coordinator for advice and counsel to ensure that all employees are given proper consideration for promotions, upgradings, transfers and other personnel actions. 
(Code 1967, § 2-13; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91; Ord. No. 0-94-66, § 1, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 16-27. - Responsibility of city manager. 
    The city manager shall be responsible for the administration of the personnel policies and rules which shall apply to all appointed employees except those specifically exempt. 
(Code 1967, § 2-14; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-28. - Human resources director. 
    Upon city council approval, the city manager may establish the position of human resources director. This individual shall assist in the preparation and maintenance of the position classification plan and the pay plan, and perform such other duties in connection with a modern personnel program as the manager shall require. If a human resources director is appointed, all matters dealing with personnel shall be routed through the human resources director who shall maintain a complete system of personnel files and records. 
(Code 1967, § 2-15; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-29. - Reciprocal agreements. 
(a)  The city is authorized and empowered to enter into reciprocal agreements, upon such terms as may be agreed upon, for the use of equipment, materials, facilities and services with any public agency or body for purposes deemed of benefit to the personnel system. 
(b)  The human resources director, acting in behalf of the city manager, may cooperate with other governmental agencies charged with public personnel administration, in conducting personnel tests, recruiting personnel, training personnel, establishing lists from which eligibles shall be certified for appointment and for the interchange of personnel and their benefits. 
(Code 1967, § 2-16; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-30. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all employees except as provided below: 
(1)  Elected officials shall be exempt from the provisions of this article except section 16-157. 
(2)  Part-time officials appointed by the city council to advisory or special boards and commissions shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Those employee appointments made by the city council pursuant to the Charter or state law shall be exempt from division 2 of this article only. 
(Code 1967, § 2-17; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Secs. 16-31-16-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CLASSIFICATION PLAN 

Sec. 16-46. - Coverage. 
    The most recently adopted Position Classification Plan of the City of Rocky Mount shall be the classification plan of the city which is on file in the city clerk's office. This classification plan shall include all regular classes of positions in the service of the city except as provided in section 16-30. 
(Code 1967, § 2-19; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-47. - Allocation of positions. 
    Authority to allocate positions to classes on the basis of the nature of duties and responsibilities is vested in the city manager. The city manager shall report allocations to existing classes to the city council for its information at the city council's first meeting following the effective date of the allocation. 
(Code 1967, § 2-20; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-48. - Establishment of classifications. 
    Authority to establish new classifications of positions is vested in the city council. The city council will consider recommendations of the city manager in determining the need for a new classification of positions. 
(Code 1967, § 2-21; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-49. - Maintenance of plan. 
(a)  The human resources department shall be responsible to the city manager for the administration and maintenance of the position classification plan. Department heads shall be responsible for bringing to the attention of the human resources department the need for new positions and material changes in the nature of duties, responsibilities, working conditions or other factors affecting the classification to which any existing or proposed position is allocated. The human resources department shall make appropriate studies and report its findings and recommendations to the city manager. 
(b)  When the human resources department determines that a substantial change has occurred in the nature or level of duties and responsibilities of an existing position or that a new position is required, it shall recommend to the city manager that he: 
(1)  Revise the existing position description in conjunction with the department head, or prepare a new position description; 
(2)  Allocate or reallocate the position to the appropriate class within the existing classification plan; or 
(3)  Recommend to the city council that it amend the position classification plan to establish a new class to which the position may be allocated. 
(Code 1967, § 2-22; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Secs. 16-50-16-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PAY PLAN 

Sec. 16-66. - Coverage. 
    The most recently adopted schedule of pay ranges and classes grouped by pay ranges shall be the pay plan for the city and is on file in the city clerk's office. The plan includes all regular classes of positions included in the classification plan. The provisions of the pay plan and this division apply to all regular, full-time employees except those exempted in section 16-30 or as otherwise specifically provided. 
(Code 1967, § 2-25; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-67. - Maintenance of plan. 
    The human resources department shall be responsible to the city manager for the administration and maintenance of the pay plan. Each year prior to the preparation of the annual budget the human resources department shall review the pay and fringe benefit programs of comparable governmental and private institutions in the area during the fiscal year. Based on the studies and recommendations of the human resources department and the general financial condition of the city, the city manager shall recommend to the city council such changes to the pay plan as necessary to maintain the fairness and adequacy of the pay plan. 
(Code 1967, § 2-26; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-68. - Transition to new plan. 
    The following four (4) principles shall govern the transition to a new or amended pay plan: 
(1)  No employee shall receive a pay reduction as a result of the transition to a new pay plan; provided, that this provision shall not apply to a general pay plan reduction. 
(2)  Any employee, except those classified as trainees, being paid at a rate lower than the minimum rate established for his respective pay classification shall have his pay raised to the new minimum for the class. 
(3)  Any employee classified as a trainee shall receive a pay increase sufficient so that the pay relationship to the minimum of the appropriate class for that range does not change. 
(4)  Any employee being paid at a rate above the maximum rate established for his respected class shall remain at his present pay as long as the maximum is below the employee's present pay, except as may be specifically authorized by action of the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-27; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-69. - Payment within range. 
    All employees covered by the pay plan shall be compensated at either the minimum or maximum of the range or at a rate between the minimum rate and the maximum rate for the pay range established for their respective job classification except employees whose salaries are above the established maximum rate following transition to a new plan. 
(Code 1967, § 2-28; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-70. - Entrance at minimum. 
    Each new employee shall be appointed at the minimum pay which has been established for the classification in which he is employed, except: 
(1)  If the new employee does not meet the minimum requirements of the position and qualified applicants for the position are not available, the city manager may designate the employee as a trainee to be appointed at a salary below the minimum. 
(2)  When the city manager determines that there has been a demonstrated inability to recruit at the minimum salary or that an applicant possesses exceptional qualifications, the city manager may authorize the employment of an applicant at a higher rate than the minimum in the pay range. 
(Code 1967, § 2-29; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-71. - Trainee pay. 
    A new employee who does not meet all of the established qualifications for a position may be appointed with the approval of the city manager at a training pay no more than ten (10) percent below the minimum pay established for the position. The employee shall continue to receive a reduced salary during the probationary period until the appointing department head with the approval of the city manager determines that the trainee is qualified to assume the responsibilities of the position, or until the end of the probationary period when the employee is either discharged or moved to a listed rate in the pay range established for the position. 
(Code 1967, § 2-29; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-72. - Performance pay increases. 
(a)  The city manager shall each year include funds in the budget proposal to the city council providing for performance pay increases. 
(b)  Performance pay increases shall be granted to employees in recognition of individual job performance with the approval of the city manager, acting upon a recommendation of the employee's supervisors and department head. The amount of the performance pay increase shall vary depending on the employee's position within the assigned pay range, level of performance, and the annual guidechart for performance pay increases approved by city council. 
(c)  Typically, employees are eligible for performance pay increases once a year. However, if an exceptional performance level and/or other circumstances warrant, the city manager, upon recommendation of the department head and review by the human resources director, may grant more than one (1) increase per year to an individual. 
(d)  Employees in a trainee status as provided in section 16-71, part-time and temporary employees as defined in section 16-103, and employees serving a probationary period as provided in section 16-106 shall not be eligible to receive a performance pay increase. 
(e)  Regular employees who are serving a training period following promotion, transfer or voluntary demotion to a new job classification shall not be granted performance pay increases during that training period unless specifically authorized by the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 2-31; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91; Ord. No. 0-92-23, § 1(a), 4-13-92) 
Sec. 16-73. - Reclassified employees. 
    An employee whose position is reclassified to a class having a higher pay range shall receive an increase only if necessary to reach the minimum of the new salary range. An employee whose position is reclassified to a class having a lower pay range shall not receive a reduction in salary as a result of the reclassification. A reclassified employee is not considered to be serving a probationary or training period following the reclassification. 
(Code 1967, § 2-32; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-74. - Promoted employees. 
(a)  An employee promoted to a position in a class having a higher pay range shall receive a ten (10) percent pay increase or an increase to the minimum of the new salary range, whichever is higher, in recognition of the promotion. 
(b)  If an employee fails to perform satisfactorily in the new position, the employee may be: 
(1)  Reinstated to his former position if a vacancy exists; 
(2)  Moved to another position if a vacancy exists; 
(3)  Terminated. 
(c)  Following his promotion, a promoted employee shall serve in a training status for a period of time equal in length to the probationary period designated for the class of positions to which he has been promoted. At the end of the training period, the employee shall be: 
(1)  Retained in the position; or 
(2)  Granted an extended training period, subject to the concurrence of the human resources director; or 
(3)  Removed from the position in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 2-33; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-75. - Pay of transferred employee. 
    The pay of an employee reassigned to a position in the same class or to a position in a different class with the same salary range shall not be changed by the reassignment provided that such an employee may receive a pay increase with the approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-76. - Demoted employees. 
    The pay of an employee demoted to a position in a class with a lower pay range shall be adjusted to five (5) percent above the minimum of the new range or to five (5) percent below his former pay, whichever is lower. With justification presented by the department head, recommendation by the human resources director, and with the approval of the city manager, a demoted employee may be placed at some other point within the new pay range. 
(Code 1967, § 2-35; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-77. - Part-time employees. 
    The pay plan established by this article is for full-time service. An employee appointed for less than full-time service shall be paid at a rate not less than the minimum pay for a comparable class of positions in the pay plan, as determined by the city manager. For the purpose of this section, part-time employees are defined as those employees who do not work an average of twenty-five (25) hours per week in the immediately preceding twelve-month period. 
(Code 1967, § 2-36; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-78. - Workweek. 
(a)  The standard workweek of city employees is defined as the period commencing at 7:00 a.m. Saturday and ending at 6:59 a.m., the following Saturday. 
(b)  Sworn law enforcement employees of the police department, who are below the rank of police sergeant, work on a rotating-shift basis and are covered by a twenty-eight-day work period rather than a seven-day workweek. 
(c)  Fire protection employees of the fire department, who are below the rank of fire captain, work on a rotating-shift basis and are covered by a twenty-seven-day work period rather than a seven-day workweek. 
(d)  Exempt salaried employees not covered by subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall work a sufficient number of hours to accomplish the tasks for which they are responsible but not less than thirty-seven and one-half (371/2) hours per week. 
(Code 1967, § 2-37; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-79. - Pay periods. 
(a)  All hourly (nonexempt) employees and salaried (exempt) employees shall be paid biweekly on Friday for hours worked through 6:59 a.m. on the preceding Saturday, except that employees working on a shift that ends at 8:00 a.m. shall be paid for the entire shift. 
(b)  Salaried law enforcement and fire protection employees working on rotating shifts shall be paid biweekly on Friday for the appropriate work period ending immediately prior to the established pay day. 
(c)  If the pay day falls on a holiday, employees shall be paid on the last day prior thereto. 
(Code 1967, § 2-37.1; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-80. - Effective day of pay adjustments. 
    Pay adjustments approved after the first working day of a pay period shall become effective at the beginning of the next pay period or at such other date as specifically authorized by the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 2-38; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-81. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2018-54, § 1, adopted June 11, 2018, repealed § 16-81, which pertained to personal payment by finance director and derived from Code 1967, § 2-39, Ord. No. O-91-45, § 1, adopted July 8, 1991; and Ord. No. O-94-66, § 2, adopted Nov. 28, 1994. 
Sec. 16-82. - Call-in pay. 
    Any hourly employee called in to work for any period not immediately before or after his normal work period shall receive call-in pay in the amount of one (1) hour's pay at the regular rate in addition to being paid for the actual time worked for each occurrence. Actual time worked shall be computed in one-half-hour increments with any portion of one-half hour being considered as one-half hour. This provision does not apply to any employee on a standby basis. 
(Code 1967, § 2-40; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-83. - Report-in pay. 
    Any employee who is unable to work because of inclement weather or other factors beyond the city's control shall receive report-in pay in an amount equal to one (1) hour's pay at the employee's regular rate, provided that the employee reports to his immediate supervisor at his normal place of work at his normal reporting hour. This pay is to be paid only once in any given day. 
(Code 1967, § 2-40.1; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-84. - Tardiness. 
    Employees who report late for work shall be docked for such time as they are late with a minimum of one-quarter hour's pay being deducted for any one (1) incident. Employees who are habitually late may be subject to dismissal by the department head. 
(Code 1967, § 2-41; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-85. - Payroll deductions. 
(a)  Payroll deductions are allowable for the purpose of facilitating employee contributions for certain specified purposes. An employee may authorize deductions from his paycheck for payments for employee benefit programs and safety equipment, contributions to recognized community service organizations, and for legally required payments for social security and income taxes. Authority to allow specific deductions within the aforementioned permitted categories is vested in the city manager, provided that deductions may not be allowed for a purpose which is not open to all employees. 
(b)  No deduction shall be made from an employee's paycheck without express written prior consent of the employee unless such deduction is required by law. 
(Code 1967, § 2-41.1; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-86. - Educational incentive pay. 
(a)  Any employee who completes a course of formal study while in service which leads to an associate, bachelor's or master's degree shall be eligible for educational incentive compensation in amounts as approved periodically by the city council; provided that: 
(1)  The course of study must have been pursued outside regular employment. 
(2)  The course of study must be directly related to the employee's current job, departmental jobs or preparing the employee for transfer/promotion within the city organization. 
(3)  The degree must not be a requirement for the position held by the employee. 
(4)  The employee must have completed his initial probationary period. Effective July 1, 2002, employees hired in regular full-time sworn law enforcement positions will immediately become eligible for educational incentive pay for college degrees they have earned. Effective October 1, 2004, employees hired in regular full-time firefighting positions will immediately become eligible for educational incentive pay for college degrees they have earned. 
(5)  An employee earning educational incentive pay who is promoted to a position for which the degree is required will no longer be paid the educational incentive for that degree. 
(b)  Educational incentive pay will be paid in addition to base salary and is not included in computing performance pay increases or other increases which are granted as a percentage of base salary. 
(c)  Any employee applying for educational incentive pay must have received approval from the human resources director prior to entering the course of study leading to the degree if the course of study was begun after November 1, 1977. 
(d)  The provisions of this section are not applicable to the degrees earned by those employees who have received merit increases for those degrees in lieu of educational incentive pay prior to July 1, 1976. 
(Code 1967, § 2-41.2; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91; Ord. No. 0-98-90, § 1, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 0-02-66, § 1a, 7-22-02; Ord. No. 0-2004-75, § 1, 9-13-04) 
Sec. 16-87. - Longevity pay. 
(a)  The city council shall appropriate funds as a part of the city operating budget for a longevity pay plan, in recognition of long years of continuous service. 
(b)  Each full-time employee employed as of July 31, 2011, as defined in subsection (d) of this section will be eligible for longevity payments according to the following schedule: 
(1)  Five (5) full years of service but less than ten (10) years ..... 2.5% 
(2)  Ten (10) full years of service but less than fifteen (15) years ..... 4.0% 
(3)  Fifteen (15) full years of service but less than twenty (20) years ..... 5.0% 
(4)  Twenty (20) full years of service but less than twenty-five (25) years ..... 6.0% 
(5)  Twenty-five (25) full years of service or more ..... 6.5% 
Employees hired after July 31, 2011, shall not be eligible for longevity pay. 
    Payment shall be a percentage of the sum of the employee's base annual salary as of June 30 plus any overtime paid to the employee for the fiscal year ending June 30. Credit shall be given for continuous time in service through June 30 of the calendar year in which payment is being made. Longevity payments are made once annually on a date specified by the city manager, usually in December between the twenty-fourth and twenty-sixth pay periods. Employees must be actively employed by the city at the time payments are made in order to qualify for longevity pay, except as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Leave of absence, military leave or other authorized leave shall not constitute breaks in service provided that the employee has not worked for another employer, with the exception of the armed forces in the case of military leave, prior to his return to the city. Resignations discharges or unauthorized leave shall constitute broken service. 
(d)  Employees employed on or before July 31, 2011, shall have their eligibility for longevity pay based upon their total regular full-time service with the city. Employees with a break in service as defined in subsection (c) above, and who are subsequently rehired on or before July 31, 2011, shall have their prior full-time service with the city counted in determining their rate of longevity pay; the period of time during which they were not employed full-time with the city shall not be credited toward their longevity record. 
(e)  Once an employee is rehired on or before July 31, 2011, for full-time service, the employee must work for five (5) consecutive years before he will become eligible to receive longevity pay. At that point, any prior service will be added to current service to determine the employee's longevity payment rate. 
(f)  Employees having service with another unit of government which is creditable to the retirement system shall receive credit for such service time if they were employed by the city prior to November 1, 1977. 
(g)  Employees who retire or die while in service and who are otherwise eligible shall receive longevity payments at the time of their separation from service or death as a part of final compensation, and their payment shall be computed at one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the total annual allowance that would otherwise accrue for each full month of service for which no allowance has been paid beginning with the preceding July 1. 
(Code 1967, § 2-41.3; Ord. No. 0-89-52, § 1, 6-26-89; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91; Ord. No. O-2011-70, § 1, 7-11-11) 
Sec. 16-88. - Language skills incentive pay. 
(a)  An employee in the police, fire, finance (business office and collections) and utilities departments is eligible for language skills incentive compensation in amounts as approved periodically by the city council, provided that: 
(1)  The employee's possession and use of non-english language skills will be beneficial to the city's delivery of exceptional customer service; 
(2)  The employee's position, duties and schedule involve frequent customer contact and allow the employee to be available to other city work units who may need assistance in translating English to another language (or vice versa); 
(3)  The employee has demonstrated proficiency, through testing approved by the human resources department, in a language used by a significant portion of the city's customer base. Pay for languages in addition to Spanish (including American Sign Language) will be considered on a case-by-case basis and will be reviewed periodically by department heads and the human resources director. 
(b)  Language skills incentive pay may be discontinued when the employee is transferred to a position not allowing him/her to meet the eligibility criteria; when participation in the program interferes with regular job duties; when designated non-english language skills are no longer at the proficient level; or when the employee voluntarily withdraws from participation in the program. 
(c)  Employees choosing to participate in this program and who receive language skills incentive pay must be available on a regular basis to use bilingual skills. Typically, those language skills will be used during the employee's regular work hours; however, the city may require the employee to be available for stand-by or call back situations for up to a week with no additional "stand-by pay". 
(d)  Language skills incentive pay will be paid in addition to base salary and is not included in computing performance pay increases or other increases which are granted as a percentage of base salary. 
(e)  Any employee applying for language skills incentive pay must have received approval from the department head and human resources director prior to being tested for proficiency. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-66, § 1b, 7-22-02) 
Sec. 16-88.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 16-88.2. - Stand-by pay. 
    Any employee who is specifically designated for a specified period of time to remain at home or in close contact so as to be available to answer emergency calls during off-duty hours shall be compensated for such inconvenience in an amount equal to seven (7) times the employee's regular hourly rate of pay for each calendar week on a stand-by basis. 
    Any hours actually worked while on stand-by shall be compensated at the normal rate of pay except that any hours so worked that are in excess of forty (40) for the applicable workweek shall be compensated at a rate of one and one-half (11/2) times the normal hourly rate of pay for the affected employee. 
(Ord. No. 0-90-21, § 1, 3-12-90; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Secs. 16-89-16-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - APPOINTMENTS, DISMISSALS, DEMOTIONS, SUSPENSIONS 

Sec. 16-101. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this division shall be applicable to all employees except those exempted in section 16-30 unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(Code 1967, § 2-42; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-102. - Employment opportunities publicized. 
    The human resources director shall publicize opportunities for employment with the governmental unit including the pay ranges and employment qualifications for positions to be filled. 
(Code 1967, § 2-43; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-103. - Appointments. 
(a)  Role of human resources department. The human resources department shall be responsible for assisting the department head in recruiting and employing such employees as are authorized for the department by the classification plan and by the budget. All applications for employment shall be investigated by the human resources department which shall then refer those applicants most qualified for the position to the appointing department. No commitments shall be made to an applicant or employee before all available interested individuals have had the opportunity to be considered for the position. 
(b)  Authority designated. Department heads and the manager's staff shall be appointed by the city manager. Appointments to the position of city manager, city attorney and city clerk shall be made by the city council. 
(c)  Types of appointments. The types of employee appointments are defined as follows: 
(1)  Regular full-time: Appointed to an authorized regular full-time position requiring twenty-five (25) hours or more of work per week on average. 
(2)  Probationary: Appointed to an authorized regular full-time position and serving the initial probationary period following employment as provided in section 16-106. 
(3)  Regular part-time: Appointed to work in an authorized regular part-time position requiring less than twenty-five (25) hours per week on average. 
(4)  Temporary full-time: Appointed to replace a regular full-time employee who is unavailable for work due to approved leave or appointed to a temporarily or seasonally authorized position requiring twenty-five (25) hours or more per week on average. 
(5)  Temporary part-time: Appointed to replace a regular part-time employee who is unavailable for work due to approved leave or appointed to a temporarily or seasonally authorized position requiring less than twenty-five (25) hours per week on average. 
(Code 1967, § 2-44; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-104. - Qualification standards. 
    Employees shall meet the employment standards established by the position classification plan and such other reasonable minimum standards as to character, aptitude, ability to meet the public, and physical condition as may be established by the city manager with the advice and recommendations of the human resources director and department heads. 
(Code 1967, § 2-45; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-105. - Nepotism. 
(a)  Two (2) members of an immediate family shall not be employed in the same administrative division at the same time. 
(b)  No two (2) members of an immediate family shall be employed at the same time if it results in an employee's having regular direct or indirect supervisory authority of influence over management and personnel considerations affecting an immediate family member. 
(c)  Immediate family members of the city manager, assistant city manager(s), human resources director or finance director shall not be employed by the city. 
(d)  The provisions of this section apply to promotions, demotions, transfers, reinstatements and new appointments. Although these provisions are not intended to be retroactive, any circumstances or work assignments which conflict with this policy at the time of adoption of this section, should be reported to the city manager and resolved by the department head within one (1) year. 
(e)  Immediate family is defined as a spouse, parent, guardian, grandparent, grandchild, son, daughter, brother, sister and the various combinations of half, step and in-law relationships derived from these. Domestic partners, not married but living in the same household, are included in this definition. 
(f)  Departments may develop more restrictive policies on nepotism, subject to review of the human resources director and approval of the city manager, if they are determined to be in the best interest of departmental operations. 
(g)  Exceptions to the city's policy on nepotism can be made with the city manager's approval if unusual circumstances create significant recruitment difficulties or if employment of immediate family members in the same division will be limited to a short-term, temporary situation; however, the limitations set forth in 16-105(b) and (c) shall not be waived. 
(Code 1967, § 2-46; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91; Ord. No. 0-00-69, § 1, 8-14-00) 
Sec. 16-106. - Probationary period. 
(a)  All newly hired and rehired employees appointed to a regular, full-time position shall serve a probationary period following their date of hire or rehire. The standard length of the probationary period is six (6) months; certain classes of positions as designated by the city manager upon the advice of the department head and the human resources director may require a twelve-month probationary period. Employees serving a probationary period shall receive all benefits provided in accordance with this article, with the following exceptions or as otherwise provided: 
(1)  The employee may accumulate vacation leave but shall not be permitted to take vacation leave during the probationary period unless denial of such leave shall create an unusual hardship. Vacation leave may be granted to such employee only with the approval of the city manager. 
(2)  The employee, if dismissed during the probationary period, shall not be eligible to be paid for accumulated vacation leave. Furthermore, probationary employee does not have the right to appeal any suspension, demotion or dismissal action taken against him. 
(b)  Before the end of the probationary period, the employee's supervisor shall appraise the employee's performance in writing using the standard performance appraisal form, and the employee's department head shall indicate in writing to the city manager: 
(1)  That the employee has had an opportunity to discuss with his supervisor the employee's accomplishments, failures, strengths and weaknesses; 
(2)  Whether the employee is performing satisfactory work; 
(3)  Whether the employee should be retained in the position or should be discharged; and 
(4)  If the employee is to be retained in the position, whether the employee should receive a pay increase signifying the successful completion of the probationary period, or the employee has not yet completed the probationary period satisfactorily, and that the period should be extended for a specified period of time not to exceed six (6) months. 
(c)  A new appointee may be dismissed at any time during the probationary period if the appointing department head determines that the employee is not performing his assigned duties satisfactorily. 
(Code 1967, § 2-47; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-107. - Reinstatement. 
    An employee who has been separated because of reduction in force or who has resigned while in good standing shall be credited with his previously accrued sick leave if he is reinstated within ten (10) years. If the reinstated employee has continued to be a member of either the local government employee's retirement system or the law enforcement officers' benefit and retirement fund, he shall receive full credit for all accrued contributions to the time of his separation. The provisions of this section shall apply only to those employees who are reinstated after July 26, 1971. 
(Code 1967, § 2-48; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-108. - Discipline. 
(a)  Policy. It is the policy of the city to ensure the safe, efficient and effective conduct of its operations by establishing fair and reasonable rules and regulations governing the work performance and conduct of its employees and to administer and enforce these rules and regulations in an equitable manner without prejudice or favoritism. 
(b)  Definition. "Discipline" means the application of a method, through a system of rules, to ensure conduct of an employee which is in keeping with the objectives of the organization. It involves training and counseling to improve performance and rewards and penalties to correct behavior. 
(c)  Disciplinary system. The city's disciplinary system begins for an employee on his first day on the job and continues throughout his working career. The various elements that comprise this system include orientation, job instruction, corrective counseling, training, performance appraisal, reprimands, commendations, performance pay increases and disciplinary actions. 
(d)  Disciplinary actions. When an employee fails to meet the standards, objectives or rules for his job, work unit, department or the city, it is the responsibility of the employee's supervisor to take or recommend disciplinary action. The term "supervisor" may refer to the employee's immediate supervisors as well as other supervisors up the chain of command to department head who have the authority to initiate the following types of disciplinary actions: 
(1)  Corrective counseling; 
(2)  Oral reprimand; 
(3)  Written reprimand; 
(4)  Suspension without pay; 
(5)  Demotion; 
(6)  Dismissal. 
The degree of discipline administered in any given situation will depend upon the nature and severity of the infraction, the motive and past record of the employee, discipline administered in previous situations, and the applicable rules, regulations and procedures established in this policy statement and in departmental and work unit policies. 
(e)  Corrective counseling. 
(1)  Is an informal discussion between an employee and his immediate supervisor concerning an employee's job performance or conduct. 
(2)  Is designed to help the employee improve performance or conduct in the case of a minor mistake or rule infraction by clarifying the standards required, stressing the employee's good performance and weaknesses, and subsequently those steps necessary for correction. 
(3)  Can be administered by a supervisor without prior approval of the division or department head. 
(4)  Should be noted in employee's record located in the division or supervisor's incident file. 
(f)  Oral reprimand. 
(1)  Is a more formal discussion between an employee and his immediate supervisor concerning the employee's job performance or conduct. 
(2)  Is to be used where earlier counseling or training has not corrected the problem or where the employee has disregarded work rules or standards of conduct of a relatively serious nature. 
(3)  Can be administered by a supervisor without prior approval of the division or department head. 
(4)  Should be noted in employee's record located in the division or in supervisor's incident file. 
(g)  Written reprimand. 
(1)  Is a formal notification that the employee's work habits, performance or conduct are unsatisfactory and that the employee must improve or more serious action will be taken. 
(2)  Is to be used where earlier counseling, training or oral reprimands have not corrected the problem or where the employee has disregarded work rules or standards of conduct of a serious nature. 
(3)  Can be administered by a supervisor after prior review and approval by the division head. 
(4)  Must be recorded and a copy forwarded to the department head and to human resources department for placement in the employee's personnel file. To avoid misunderstandings it is strongly suggested that the written reprimand be signed by the employee acknowledging receipt. If the employee refuses to sign the reprimand, his refusal should be noted on the reprimand along with the date on which the reprimand is delivered. 
(h)  Suspension without pay. 
(1)  Disciplinary suspension means the temporary removal of an employee from his position without pay as a means of notifying the employee that his work habits, performance or conduct are significantly unsatisfactory. 
(2)  Nondisciplinary suspension means the temporary removal of an employee from his position without pay during the course of an investigation, hearing or trial of any criminal or civil matter or when suspension would be in the best interest of the employee or the city. 
(3)  Is to be used for severe infraction of rules or standards; for excessive violations after the employee has received a written warning and has made insufficient effort to improve performance; or for nondisciplinary reasons as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection. 
(4)  Can be administered by a supervisor: 
a.  Without prior approval if necessary to avoid undue disruption of work, to protect the safety of persons or property, or for other serious reasons. 
b.  With prior review and approval of the division and department head for up to six (6) workdays. 
c.  With prior review and approval of the division and department head and city manager for up to twenty (20) workdays. 
d.  With prior review and approval of the division and department head and city manager for an indefinite period of time as a nondisciplinary measure as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection. 
(5)  A copy of a notice to the employee will be forwarded to the human resources department and placed in the employee's permanent personnel record. 
(6)  An employee who has been suspended without pay will not be allowed to request annual or sick leave during the period of the suspension, nor will the employee accumulate annual or sick leave during this period. 
(7)  An employee who has been suspended without pay as a nondisciplinary measure and is subsequently fully reinstated may be authorized by the city council to receive full or partial pay and benefits for the period of the suspension. An employee who has been suspended without pay as a disciplinary measure and whose suspension, on appeal, is reversed may be awarded as much of the pay and benefits lost during the suspension as ordered by the city manager or recommended by a peer review panel. 
(i)  Demotion. 
(1)  Is the movement of an employee to a position in a class with a lower pay range. 
(2)  Is to be used when other disciplinary measures have been unsuccessful and the employee has continued to perform his duties unsatisfactorily. 
(3)  Can be administered by a supervisor only upon prior approval by the division and department head and human resources director. 
(4)  Must be fully documented in writing including the reasons for the demotion. This record will be forwarded to the human resources department and placed in the employee's permanent personnel record. 
(j)  Appeals. 
(1)  An employee served with an oral or written reprimand may file a grievance concerning the reprimand using the city's grievance procedure as provided in section 16-142. 
(2)  A regular full-time employee who has been suspended or demoted shall have the right to appeal the decision to the city manager within seven (7) calendar days of being notified of the decision. Within seven (7) calendar days of the receipt of the notice of appeal, the city manager or his designee shall schedule a hearing for the employee. At this hearing the employee shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to hear the evidence against him, to contest adverse evidence and to present favorable evidence. Within seven (7) calendar days following the hearing, the city manager shall render a written decision to the employee. In all such cases the decision of the city manager is final. 
(3)  As an alternative, a regular full-time employee who has been suspended or demoted may elect to appeal the decision to a peer review panel within seven (7) calendar days of being notified of the decision. The human resources director will facilitate the scheduling of an investigation by a panel of employees who have been trained as peer panelists. Because the peer review process is an "all employee" process, lawyers are not eligible to participate. An employee who is appealing a suspension or demotion decision may be assisted in preparing and presenting his grievance by a trained peer panelist. A written response, signed by all panelists, shall be issued notifying the employee of the panel's decision. In all cases going before a peer review panel, the decision of the panel is final. 
(Code 1967, § 2-49; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-109. - Dismissal. 
(a)  The provisions of this section are applicable to all regular full-time employees who have completed their probationary periods as provided in section 16-106. 
(b)  It is the policy of the city to correct the unsatisfactory work performance or conduct of its employees by providing each employee with the necessary information and training and by the fair and uniform use of disciplinary actions. When these efforts have failed, or when an employee's actions are of a serious or threatening nature, the city has the right and obligation, following a complete and fair hearing, to dismiss the employee from city service. 
(c)  Each supervisor has the authority to recommend the dismissal of an employee under his supervision. The employee's department head has the authority, after consulting with the human resources director concerning the facts of the case, notify the employee that he is being recommended to the city manager for dismissal. The department head must inform the employee that his dismissal will take effect unless the employee appeals the recommendation to the city manager or a peer review panel in accordance with provisions of this section. 
    The human resources director has the authority to review the facts of each case in which dismissal is recommended for conformance to policy and procedure. The human resources director acts in an advisory capacity only and does not have the authority to uphold or overturn the recommendation of the department head. 
    The city manager has the authority, upon the appeal of an employee, to uphold, alter or overturn the recommendation of the department head. In all such cases the decision of the city manager is final. 
    The peer review panel has the authority, upon the appeal of an employee, to uphold, alter or overturn the recommendation for dismissal by the department head. In all such cases, the decision of the peer panel is final. 
(d)  A regular full-time employee may be dismissed for any one (1) or combination of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud in securing or maintaining appointment or promotion; 
(2)  Inexcusable neglect of duty; 
(3)  Inefficiency or incompetency in performance of duties; 
(4)  Physical or mental disability which impairs performance of the work involved; 
(5)  Refusal to perform work assigned or to comply with reasonable written or verbal instructions of a supervisor; 
(6)  Use of alcohol or other mind-altering drugs while on duty, or reporting to work under their influence; 
(7)  Continued unexcused absence; 
(8)  Chronic absenteeism or tardiness; 
(9)  Conviction of a crime which will render the employee unable to perform tasks or which involves moral turpitude; 
(10)  Improper political activity as defined in section 16-158; 
(11)  Misuse, misappropriation, theft of or willful damage to public property; 
(12)  Discourteous treatment of the public or other employees; 
(13)  Use of abusive or obscene language or engaging in immoral or obscene behavior while on duty; 
(14)  Falsifying work or official city records; 
(15)  Unauthorized release of information which is designated by city policy as confidential; 
(16)  Disregard for citywide or departmental work and safety rules; 
(17)  Disregard for applicable residency restrictions; 
(18)  Failure to obtain or maintain a current license or certificate required by law as a condition for performing the job; 
(19)  Participation in any action that would in any way seriously disrupt or disturb the normal operation of the division, department or any other segment of municipal government; 
(20)  Possession of firearms or other deadly weapons on the job or on property owned, leased as lessee, operated, occupied, managed, or controlled by the city unless the employee is required as a condition of his or her employment to carry such firearms or deadly weapons. 
(21)  Acts during or outside of duty which are incompatible with the public service and which impair the ability of the employee to perform the tasks to which he has been assigned. 
The decision to recommend dismissal for any one (1) or combination of the above reasons will be based on the sound and considered judgment of the supervisor and/or department head in accordance with the provisions of this section to assure that the good of the city service is served thereby and that the intent of the policy is followed. 
(e)  Each employee who has been recommended by his department head for dismissal shall be presented with a written notice of such recommendation and shall have the right to appeal this recommendation to the city manager, or as an alternative, to a peer review panel, within seven (7) calendar days of his receipt of the notice or within ten (10) calendar days from the date the notice was mailed to the employee. 
    Within seven (7) calendar days of the notice of appeal, the city manager or his designee shall schedule a hearing for the employee. At this hearing the employee shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to hear the evidence against him, to contest adverse evidence and to present favorable evidence. 
    Within seven (7) calendar days following the hearing, the city manager shall render a written decision to the employee. In all cases, the decision of the city manager is final. 
    If the employee elects to appeal the recommendation for dismissal to a peer review panel, the human resources director will schedule a panel hearing within seven (7) calendar days of the notice of appeal. The employee may be assisted by a trained peer panelist in preparing and/or presenting his case. 
    Within seven (7) calendar days following the hearing, the peer panel will issue a written response to the employee signed by all panelists. In all such cases, the decision of the peer panel is final. 
(f)  An employee recommended for dismissal shall be immediately suspended without pay pending the exercise of his appeal rights. If the final decision is in favor of the employee, the city manager or the peer panel may award to the employee all or part of the pay and benefits lost as a result of the suspension. A dismissed employee is entitled to receive pay for all hours worked prior to his suspension pending appeal but is not entitled to any other back pay or pay for any unused vacation or sick leave. 
(Code 1967, § 2-50; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91; Ord. No. 0-96-2, § 1, 1-8-96) 
Sec. 16-110. - Reduction in force. 
    If a reduction in force becomes necessary, consideration will be given to the quality of each employee's past performance and the needs of the governmental unit as well as seniority in determining those employees to be retained. 
(Code 1967, § 2-51; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-111. - Exit procedure. 
    The human resources department shall be responsible for insuring that all debts owed to the city by a terminating employee are collected, and all compensation due a terminating employee is paid to the employee. In addition, prior to receiving their final pay all terminating employees will be interviewed by the human resources department to determine that all matters pertaining to the employee have been settled. 
(Code 1967, § 2-52; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Secs. 16-112-16-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT 

Sec. 16-126. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this division shall be applicable to all employees except those exempted in section 16-30. The benefits provided by this division shall be for permanent full-time service unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(Code 1967, § 2-56; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-127. - Hours of work. 
    The hours of work of employees shall be as determined by the city manager from time to time. 
(Code 1967, § 2-57; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-128. - Overtime. 
(a)  All hourly paid employees shall be compensated at a rate of one and one-half (1.5) times their regular hourly rate for all hours worked in excess of forty (40) hours during the workweek. holiday pay, annual leave, sick leave, call-in-pay, report-in pay, and standby pay do not count as hours worked in determining eligibility for overtime pay at the premium rate. 
(b)  Sworn law enforcement employees of the police department below the rank of sergeant and fire protection employees below the rank of captain qualify for partial overtime pay exemptions based on their twenty-seven-day and twenty-eight-day work periods. Employees who work more than the maximum work hours established by federal labor regulations for those special work periods would be eligible for overtime pay at the premium rate. 
(c)  The city, as employer, may elect to grant compensatory time off in lieu of overtime pay in cash. The compensatory time off is granted at a rate of one and one-half (1.5) hours for every hour of overtime worked. 
(d)  Under extreme emergency conditions, the city manager may determine that such conditions have imposed unusual and severe demands on city operations and employees, and upon such finding may authorize exceptions to the provisions of the overtime procedures stated in this section. The city manager may allow for additional pay or compensatory time for exempt/salaried employees who perform essential duties associated with an emergency and who would not ordinarily be eligible for overtime pay. Such exceptions allowing for additional pay do not apply to the city manager, his staff, or those exempt employees reporting directly to the city manager's office. The city manager shall report exceptions to overtime procedures under this provision to the city council for its information at the first council meeting following the effective date of the exceptions. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall apply to all regular and temporary employees. 
(Code 1967, § 2-58; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91; Ord. No. 0-96-54, § 1, 9-23-96) 
Sec. 16-129. - Vacation leave. 
(a)  Schedule. Each regular full-time employee with the appropriate number of years of service as defined in subsection (c) of this section shall earn vacation leave according to the following schedule: 
(1)  Less than five (5) full years of service, 2 × number of hours in normal workweek per year; 
(2)  Five (5) full years of service but less than ten (10) years, 2.4 × number of hours in normal workweek per year; 
(3)  Ten (10) full years of service but less than fifteen (15) years, 2.8 × number of hours in normal workweek per year; 
(4)  Fifteen (15) full years of service but less than twenty (20) years, 3.2 × number of hours in normal workweek per year; 
(5)  Twenty (20) full years of service but less than twenty-five (25) years, 3.6 × number of hours in normal workweek per year; 
(6)  Twenty-five (25) full years of service or more, 4 × number of hours in normal workweek per year. 
(b)  Breaks in service. Leaves of absence, military leave or other authorized leave shall not constitute breaks in service provided that the employee had not worked for another employer, with the exception of the armed forces in the case of military leave, prior to his return to the city. Resignations, discharges or unauthorized leave shall constitute broken service. 
(c)  Years of service. Employees shall have their eligibility for increased annual leave based upon their full-time service with the city. Employees with a break in service as defined in subsection (b) of this section, and who are subsequently rehired, shall have their prior full-time service with the city counted in determining their eligibility for increased annual leave; however, the period of time during which they were not employed full-time with the city shall not be credited. Employees having service with another unit of government which is creditable to the retirement system shall receive credit for such service time if they were employed by the city prior to November 1, 1977. 
(d)  Accumulation. Vacation leave may accumulate to a maximum of thirty (30) workdays of vacation leave, provided that upon the recommendation of a department head and with approval of the city manager, an employee may accumulate up to sixty (60) workdays of vacation leave for a special purpose. 
(e)  Conversion of excess accumulation. In the absence of any specific request by the employee to accumulate more than thirty (30) workdays of vacation leave, following the final pay period of the calendar year, any accumulated vacation leave in excess of thirty (30) workdays will automatically be converted to sick leave. 
(f)  Granting of leave. Employees shall be granted the use of earned vacation leave upon request at those times designated by department heads which will least obstruct normal operations of the department. However, an employee shall not be granted vacation leave while serving his probationary period unless the denial of the leave would create an unusual hardship. 
(g)  Final pay. Upon submission of his resignation, a regular, full-time employee shall be paid for vacation leave accumulated to the date of separate provided he has completed one (1) year of continuous service and provided he has submitted notice to his immediate superior at least two (2) weeks in advance of the effective date of resignation. An employee who is involuntarily separated without fault or delinquency on his part shall be paid for vacation leave accumulated to the date of separation. Compensation for accumulated vacation leave shall not be paid an employee separated for reasons of fault or delinquency or who does not submit the required notice. Upon the death of a regular employee, compensation for the accumulated vacation leave shall be paid to his estate. Final pay shall be limited to not more than thirty (30) workdays of accumulated vacation leave in all cases except in the event of the death of a regular employee. In such case all accumulated, unused vacation leave shall be paid. 
(Code 1967, § 2-59; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91; Ord. No. 0-94-66, § 3, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 16-130. - Sick leave. 
(a)  Privilege. Sick leave with pay is not a right which an employee may demand, but a privilege granted by the city. Notification of the desire to take sick leave should be submitted to the employee's supervisor prior to the leave or not later two (2) hours after the beginning of the scheduled workday. Departments or divisions may establish more restrictive rules regarding notification of a sick leave request if justified by the work schedule. If such rules are established, they are to be posted on employee bulletin boards and communicated to the employees affected. Failure to submit the required notice will subject the employee to loss of sick leave privileges. 
(b)  Rate earned. Each regular and probationary full-time employee shall earn sick leave at the rate of three and sixty-nine hundredths (3.69) hours per pay period (ninety-six (96) hours per year), except that firefighters shall earn sick leave at the rate of five and fifty-four hundredths (5.54) per pay period (one hundred forty-four (144) hours per year). For purposes of leave taken the firefighters' workday shall be considered to be each twelve (12) hours absent from duty. 
(c)  Granting. 
(1)  An employee may be granted sick leave from work with pay if his absence is due to sickness/disability, bodily injury, quarantine, required medical or dental examination or treatment, exposure to a contagious disease when continued work might jeopardize the health of others, or illness in the employee's immediate family which requires the care of the employee. 
(2)  In the event of the death of a member of the immediate family, the department head may grant an employee from one (1) to three (3) days of sick leave with pay per year. In the event of the death of some other family member or a close personal friend, an employee may be granted one (1) day of sick leave with pay per year. Subject to approval by the department head, additional time away from work in connection with the death of a family member or friend may be granted, but will be charged to vacation leave or will be taken as leave without pay. If the employee experiences more than one (1) incident per year of death among his family or friends, the department head may determine that additional sick leave days are warranted and should be granted during the same calendar year. 
(d)  Physician's certificate. Department heads may require a physician's certificate as to the nature of the illness and as to the employee's physical capacity to resume his duties for each occasion on which an employee uses sick leave, or requests leave, with or without pay, due to sickness. An employee who is absent due to sickness with or without pay five (5) or more times in a six-month period of one (1) day or more shall be required to furnish proof of illness for the next twelve (12) months in order to receive any sick leave benefits during the twelve-month period. The department head shall be responsible for the application of this provision to the end that employees shall not be on duty when they might endanger their health or the health of other employees, and there will be abuse of sick leave privileges. 
(e)  Accumulation. Sick leave shall be cumulative with no limit on the maximum accumulation. 
(f)  Credit for accumulated leave. 
(1)  Employees who retire, resign in good standing or are dismissed from employment with the City of Rocky Mount and are reinstated within ten (10) years shall retain all accumulated sick leave credit. 
(2)  Employees hired by the City of Rocky Mount on or after March 1, 2003, may transfer credit, upon their employment, for up to sixty (60) days or four hundred eighty (480) hours of sick leave accumulated but not used while working for another local or state government agency and participating as a contributing member of the N.C. Local Government Employees Retirement System or the N.C. State & Teachers Retirement System. Documentation of the leave balance with the former employer must be provided. Sick leave accumulation associated with withdrawn service is not eligible for transfer credit. 
(3)  After five (5) years of continuous service with the City of Rocky Mount as contributing members of the N.C. Local Government Employees Retirement System, employees may receive credit for the balance of sick leave accumulated but not used while working for another local or state government agency and participating as a contributing member of the N.C. Local Government Employees Retirement System or the N.C. State & Teachers Retirement System. Sick leave that may have been transferred upon initial employment in accordance with section 16-130(f)(2) will not be considered for additional credit. Documentation of the leave balance with the former employer must be provided. Sick leave accumulation associated with withdrawn service is not eligible for transfer credit. 
(4)  Employees who retire may receive additional service credit toward retirement for the unused portion of their sick leave in accordance with the applicable rules of the Local Government Employees Retirement System. Such credit shall be granted at the rate of one (1) month's service credit for each twenty (20) days of unused sick leave. 
(5)  No employee shall be paid for accumulated sick leave. 
(g)  Advancement. The city council may, on the recommendation of the city manager, advance sick leave to an employee with five (5) or more years of service who has exhausted his sick leave because of a major operation or illness. However, in no case shall sick leave be advanced in excess of two (2) working days per calendar year of service of the employee. 
(h)  Disability retirement. Any employee who has been on sick leave and/or leave without pay for a period of twelve (12) consecutive weeks shall be reviewed by the employee's department head and the human resources department. If at that time there is no likelihood that the employee will be able to return to work, the employee will be required to file an application for disability retirement. 
(i)  Shared leave provision. This shared leave program and policy has been established by the City of Rocky Mount for active duty employees who earn sick/vacation accruals. The purpose of this policy is to provide leave for eligible employees when attendance is inadvisable and/or impossible due to the catastrophic illness of the employee, as defined in subsection 6.27(B) of the City of Rocky Mount Personnel Policy, and when required absences exceed their accrued leave. The shared leave program is employee to employee and is available in addition to the benefits provided by the city. In cases of a catastrophic medical condition, an employee may apply for leave donations from other city employees and/or from the shared leave "bank." Consenting employees may agree to have leave donations transferred from their accumulated vacation balance to the sick account of a requesting employee or to the leave "bank". 
The city may modify or terminate the shared leave program at any time in its sole discretion. The shared leave program should be used before the city's advance sick leave provision. 
(1)  Definitions. 
a.  Serious medical condition: An incapacitating and/or life threatening non-job related illness/injury requiring an extended treatment and/or recovery period for which the employee anticipates being absent from work including, but not limited to cancer, major surgery, serious accident or heart attack, that: 
1.  Poses a threat to life or requires in-patient care, hospice care, or home health care; and 
2.  Keeps the employee from performing any portion of his regular work duties in accordance with a serious health condition as defined under the FMLA. 
Common illness or minor injury that is not serious or life threatening and incidents covered by worker's compensation and/or an employee's short-term disability policy shall be excluded from eligibility for shared leave. 
b.  Direct donations : Vacation leave donated from an employee to a qualifying named recipient. 
c.  Eligible employee : All regular employees with benefits, who have completed their initial probationary period with the city, shall be eligible to receive or to donate leave. 
d.  Shared leave bank : A holding account for leave. Leave can be donated directly to this account by employees to unnamed recipients. Unused donated leave is also deposited into this account. 
(2)  Leave recipient/employee requesting shared leave procedure. 
a.  Employee may request shared leave donations for a catastrophic medical condition if the employee has exhausted all accumulated vacation, sick, and compensatory hours. The application process can be initiated prior to the actual depletion of leave. 
1.  A request to receive donated leave and a certification of health care provider form, available in the human resources department and on the human resources department's web page, must be completed. If the recipient is unable to complete the application, their supervisor may do so upon verbal permission of the employee. No medical information can be released without the written signed consent of the recipient. 
2.  All applications to receive shared leave must first be submitted to the recipient's department head for his/her review before forwarding to the human resources department. If the department head determines that the employee meets the initial eligibility requirements of this rule, he shall provide a written recommendation to the director of human resources. The director of human resources may approve or deny the request. A denial of a request for shared leave may be appealed to the city manager. 
3.  When requesting shared leave, or at any time during the use of shared leave, an employee may be required by the director of human resources to undergo a medical review/examination to establish that the illness or injury is of a serious nature and keeps the employee from performing any portion of his regular work duties. If the employee fails to comply with the medical review and/or examination and/or fails to establish that a serious illness or injury exists, the use of shared leave shall be automatically denied or terminated by the director of human resources. 
4.  Once a request for shared leave has been approved by the director of human resources, all city employees will be notified that a recipient is in need of donations for shared leave. The shared leave program is voluntary and no employee shall be coerced, threatened, intimidated or financially induced into donating leave for purposes of this program. 
5.  Shared leave shall be applied retroactively to the date the employee depletes all forms of paid leave because of the current illness or injury. Shared leave shall be taken in full-hour increments. 
6.  While receiving shared leave the recipient shall not earn holidays, vacation or sick accruals. 
7.  Shared leave may be used only for the duration of the current serious illness or injury for which it was collected, up to a maximum of twelve (12) work weeks from the date the employee began using the shared leave. Shared leave may be granted for those serious health conditions for which the employee is expected to return to duty following a period of recuperation or treatment. 
8.  If the serious illness or injury improves so that the employee is no longer prevented from performing his regular work duties or the recipient separates from city service or retires, all unused portions of the shared leave shall be forfeited to a general pool. Leave time in this pool shall be administered by the department of human resources. Such leave time in this pool shall only be used to: 
(i)  Make up solicitation shortfalls, or 
(ii)  Be applied to the original recipient in the case of a relapse within a one-hundred sixty (160) work hour time period. When the employee has returned to work for one hundred sixty (160) consecutive, normal work hours, it shall be determined that he is no longer prevented from performing his regular work duties. 
(3)  Donor procedure. 
a.  An employee shall be eligible to donate only vacation hours to another employee or to the shared leave bank if the donation of vacation does not cause the accumulated vacation leave balance of the donating employee to be less than forty (40) hours. 
1.  Shared leave shall be paid according to the donating employee's regular rate of pay. The rate of pay of the donating employee shall be used in computing the amount of shared leave the requesting employee receives. For example, a leave donor who makes ten dollar ($10.00) an hour transfers an hour of vacation leave to a leave recipient who makes five dollars ($5.00) an hour. This translates into two (2) hours of sick leave for the leave recipient. 
2.  A shared leave donor authorization form, available in the human resources department and on the human resources department's website, must be completed. Shared leave shall be donated in full-hour increments. 
3.  Employees terminating service from the city are allowed to donate any vacation hours to the shared leave bank under this program. 
4.  Annual leave donation may be denied if it is determined by department head and approved by the human resource director that the potential leave recipient has a history of abusing sick leave. 
5.  Upon approval of the annual leave transfer application, the human resources department will forward the appropriate paperwork to the payroll technician. 
6.  Should the employee receiving donated leave terminate his/her employment with the city, direct donations balances will be deposited to the shared leave bank. 
(Code 19676, § 2-60; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91; Ord. No. 0-94-66, § 4, 11-28-94; Ord. No. 0-03-23, § 1, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 0-2005-101, § 1, 10-24-05) 
Sec. 16-131. - Sickness or disability covered by workers' compensation. 
    An employee absent from duty because of sickness or disability covered by the workers' compensation laws shall be eligible in accordance with the review and recommendations of the North Carolina Industrial Commercial as regulated by the North Carolina Workers' Compensation Act. The provisions of this section apply to all regular and temporary employees. 
(Code 1967, § 2-61; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-132. - Holidays. 
(a)  All employees shall receive full pay for the following holidays which shall be observed by all departments: 
New Year's Day; 
Martin Luther King's Birthday; 
Good Friday; 
Memorial Day; 
Independence Day; 
Labor Day; 
Thanksgiving Day and the following day; and 
Christmas. 
Regular part-time employees shall receive partial pay for the above-listed holidays based on the number of hours in their normal workday subject to the provisions in this section. 
(b)  Except for Christmas, which is provided for below, if the holiday falls on Saturday or Sunday, the preceding Friday or the following Monday will be observed as a holiday as determined by the city manager. Employees required to work on an observed holiday shall receive compensation at their regular rate for all hours worked on the holiday plus either: 
(1)  Holiday pay equal to their regular daily rate; or 
(2)  Time off on an hour-for-hour basis at a time which will least obstruct the normal operations of the department. If the employee actually works on the holiday and his hours worked during that workweek exceed forty (40), overtime pay will be due the employee for all hours over forty (40). 
Employees who do not work their regularly scheduled workday immediately preceding or following a holiday, and do not have authorized sick or annual leave, shall not receive holiday pay for the holiday. 
(c)  The Christmas holidays shall include December 24, 25 and 26. Eligibility for holiday pay for each department each year shall be the same as the eligibility for the general administrative offices as determined by the city manager. Holiday pay for the Christmas holidays shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of subsection (b) above. 
(d)  Holidays shall be defined as that period of time beginning at 7:00 a.m. on the day observed as the holiday and ending of 6:59 a.m. the following day, except that for the fire department, holidays are defined as that period beginning at 7:45 a.m. on the day observed as the holiday and ending at 8:00 a.m. on the following day. 
(Code 1967, § 2-62; Ord. No. 0-88-4, § 1, 1-11-88; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
State Law reference- Dates of public holidays, G.S. § 103-4. 
Sec. 16-133. - Military leave. 
    An employee who is a member of an armed forces reserve organization or the National Guard shall be granted two (2) calendar weeks of military leave for required military training in a calendar year, and any additional time necessary in the event of an emergency call-up. If the employee's military pay is less than the pay normally earned by the employee, the city will pay the employee sufficient salary to prevent a loss of his usual pay for the period of the military leave. 
    If an employee is called to active duty as a result of mobilization of forces by the commander-in-chief during a period of national emergency, the city manager shall request, and the city council may grant permission to pay an employee sufficient salary to prevent a loss in his/her usual pay for all or a part of the period of military leave. 
(Code 1967, § 2-63; Ord. No. 0-91-8, § 1, 2-11-91; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91; Ord. No. 0-92-23, § 1(b), 4-13-92) 
Sec. 16-134. - Civil leave. 
    An employee called for jury duty or as a court witness for the federal or state governments or a subdivision thereof shall be entitled to leave with pay for such duty in addition to keeping fees received for such duty. 
(Code 1967, § 2-64; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-135. - Educational leave. 
(a)  A leave of absence at full or part pay for a period not to exceed sixty (60) working days may be granted to an employee upon the recommendation of the supervising department head and with the approval of the city manager to permit an employee to take courses of study which will better equip the employee to perform his duties. 
(b)  Educational leave at full or part pay for a period not to exceed nine (9) months may be granted to an employee upon the recommendation of the supervising department head and with the approval of the city manager and the city council. 
(c)  An employee granted educational leave with full or part pay shall agree to return to the service of the city upon completion of his training and remain in the employ of the city for a period equal to twice the educational leave which he received, or reimburse the governmental unit for all compensation received while on educational leave. 
(Code 1967, § 2-65; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-136. - Reimbursement for training expense. 
    When an employee enters into a job-related training program with the prior approval of his department head and the city manager, he may be reimbursed for expenses such as tuition and books upon successful completion of the course. 
(Code 1967, § 2-66; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-137. - Leave without pay. 
    Upon the recommendation of the supervising department head and with the approval of the city manager, a regular full-time employee may be granted a leave of absence without pay for a period not to exceed six (6) months for reasons of personal or immediate family illness/disability, care of a newborn or adopted child, completion of education or special work which will permit the governmental unit to profit by the experience of the work performed. Notification and documentation of the need to extend an approved leave of absence shall be submitted to the city manager for review and approval. The provisions of this section do not apply to probationary employees. 
(Code 1967, § 2-67; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-138. - Insurance programs. 
    The city may make group life, accident, sickness and hospitalization insurance programs available for employee participation. Employees shall be enrolled in the programs upon their request or in accordance with the provisions of the insurance contracts. The city shall participate in the cost of the programs in such manner as determined by the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-68; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-139. - Local government employees' retirement system. 
    Each employee shall be required to join the local governmental employees' retirement system as a condition of employment. Such membership shall commence on the first day of employment. 
(Code 1967, § 2-70; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91; Ord. No. 0-2004-85, § 1, 10-11-04; Ord. No. 0-2005-101, § 2, 10-24-05) 
Sec. 16-140. - Compulsory retirement. 
(a)  Excluding disability or voluntary earlier retirement, law enforcement officers, uniformed employees of the fire department, and electric line workers shall be retired on the last working day of the month which includes their sixty-fifth birthday. 
(b)  Each employee included in a group with a mandatory retirement age of sixty-five (65) as indicated in subsection (a) of this section may be granted one-year extensions in service annually by the city council, subject to the annual recommendation of the employee's department head and the city manager and upon the finding of a medical examiner designated by the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-71; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-141. - Clothing allowance. 
    Law enforcement officers required to wear civilian clothing in the performance of their official duties shall be paid a clothing allowance, the amount and time of payment of which shall be determined by the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-72; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-142. - Grievance procedure. 
(a)  Purpose. The city recognizes that the fair and prompt resolution of employee problems, complaints and questions is critical to good employee relations. For that purpose, a formal grievance handling process has been established. This process is intended to enhance, not replace, communications between an employee and his/her supervisors. It is not intended to preclude use of an "open door" policy, wherein an employee may discuss work-related matters directly with any level of management or with human resources staff. Both the grievance handling process and the traditional "open door" policy are designed to encourage an employee to voice concerns about how the application of city policies or procedures may have affected him/her. Retaliation, in any form, against an employee who makes use of this process will not be tolerated. 
(b)  Policy. It is the policy of the city to provide a procedure to ensure that all employees have the opportunity for presentation and resolution of their grievances, complaints or problems in an atmosphere of mutual respect and understanding. All administrative and supervisory personnel are expected to act promptly and objectively within the framework of this policy. It shall be the responsibility of the Human Resources Director to review matters submitted by employees on the grievance and appeal forms to determine eligibility for investigation or resolution under the grievance handling process. 
(c)  Grievance defined. A grievance is a complaint or problem experienced by an employee pertaining to the terms and conditions of his/her employment, the application of city policies, the working relationships between an employee and his/her supervisor, or the working relationships between an employee and his/her coworkers. 
(d)  Procedure. When an employee experiences a grievance, he/she shall follow the procedure outlined below: 
(1)  Step 1. The employee should discuss the problem with his/her immediate supervisor to seek a mutually satisfactory solution. Within two (2) working days, that supervisor will meet with the employee to give a verbal response to the grievance. If not satisfied, the employee may proceed to the next step in the process within two (2) working days of the immediate supervisor's response in step 1. 
(2)  Step 2. The employee shall document his/her grievance on the standard grievance and appeal form with a written statement of the situation and what action is requested to rectify the matter. The form shall be submitted to the Human Resources Director for forwarding to the next level of management, which in most cases, will be the division head. Within five (5) working days, the manager at that level will schedule a meeting with the employee to discuss his/her response to the grievance. Within two (2) working days of this meeting, the employee will indicate acceptance or rejection of the division head's response on the grievance and appeal form. If the response is rejected, the employee may proceed to step 3. 
(3)  Step 3. The employee takes his/her grievance form to the Human Resources Director for delivery to the next level of management, typically the department head. Within ten (10) working days, the department head shall meet with the employee to discuss the results of his/her investigation into the matter and his/her response. The department head's response shall be documented on the grievance and appeal form. Within two (2) working days, the employee shall indicate acceptance or rejection of the department head's response by marking the appeal form appropriately. If the employee rejects the response, he/she may proceed to step 4. 
(4)  Step 4. The employee may, within five (5) days, elect to appeal the department head's response to: 
a.  The city manager-The city manager, or his designee, shall meet with and respond to the employee's grievance with ten (10) working days following the employees' rejection of the response in step 3. Within five (5) working days following the meeting with the employee, the city manager shall document his response to the grievance on the appropriate appeal form with a copy being furnished to the employee; or 
b.  The peer review panel-If the grievance is of a nature that the matter may be heard by a peer review panel, the employee may elect this route by so notifying the Human Resources Department. 
(5)  Step 5. In the event the subject matter of the grievance involves a loss, or reduction, of pay, or job, the employee may bypass steps 1-4 and proceed directly to step 5. 
    In step 5 the employee may request a hearing before the city manager, or his designee, or the peer review panel. The employee shall make the selection by completing the necessary forms in the Human Resources Department. 
a.  The city manager-If the employee elects this route, he/she will receive an administrative hearing at which he/she may be represented by an attorney and may call witnesses on his/her behalf. The city manager, or designee, in making a decision in the case, will make a finding of fact to support the decision in resolution of the grievance and may sustain or modify the supervisor's recommendation. In case of disciplinary action, the city manager has the right to disciplinary action, the city manager has the right to lessen or increase any action recommended by the employee's supervisor(s) based on the facts in the case. 
b.  The peer review panel-If the employee elects this route, he/she has elected to participate in an employee process. The employee may be assisted in preparing or presenting his/her grievance by a trained peer panelist, but lawyers, not being city employees are not eligible to participate in the peer review process. In cases of disciplinary action, the peer panel may decide to modify the action taken, but in no case can the panel make the discipline more severe than originally recommended by the employee's supervisor. 
(e)  Rights of employee. The employee or employees shall have the right to seek the assistance of anyone in the written presentation of their grievance. The employee or employees shall be allowed reasonable time with pay during working hours if needed to prepare for the presentation of a grievance, provided such time has been cleared with the employees' immediate supervisor so that the employees' absence will not interfere with the efficient operations of the department/division. The right of all employees to use the grievance procedure for the purposes set forth in this policy shall be protected by each supervisor involved. 
(f)  Extension of time limits. Due to the complexity of the grievance, availability of pertinent information, or other factors beyond the supervisor's control, he/she may not be able to meet the time limits for response outlined in the procedure. In that event, the supervisor must inform the employee of how much more time will be needed. No extension longer than twice the amount of time established in the procedure will be allowed. In cases where the supervisor takes more than the established time to render a decision, the employee will be granted an equivalent extension of the period allotted for him/her to consider acceptance or rejection of the response. If the aggrieved employee fails to appeal the decision of a supervisor to the next step in the grievance procedure during the time allotted, it will be considered that the employee has accepted the decision rendered. If the supervisor fails to respond to an employee's grievance within the time period specified, without having requested an extension, the grievance will automatically advance to the next level of management for review and resolution. 
(g)  Distribution of report form. Upon the final resolution of the grievance, either by the City Manager's or peer panel's rendering a decision, or by the employee's accepting the decision of a superior, the Human Resources Director will be responsible for filing a copy of the decision in a confidential grievance file. In cases involving appeals of disciplinary action, the decision shall be documented in the employee's permanent personnel record. 
(Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91; Ord. No. 0-92-23, § 1(c), 4-13-92) 
Sec. 16-143. - Protest of information in personnel file. 
    If an employee feels any material in his personnel file is misleading or inaccurate, the employee may file a statement of protest with the director of human resources to be placed in his personnel file. 
(Code 1967, § 2-74; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Secs. 16-144-16-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CONFLICT OF INTEREST AND POLITICAL ACTIVITY 

Sec. 16-156. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this division shall be applicable to all employees except those exempted in section 16-30. 
(Code 1967, § 2-78; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 16-157. - Conflicts resulting in financial gain; outside employment. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Conflict of interest means any act in which an elected official, appointed official or appointed employee receives a direct or indirect gain as a result of the exercise of their official responsibilities or as a result of using the position to which they have been elected or appointed. In any case in which a conflict of interest may be present, elected officials, appointed officials and employees appointed by the elected officials should make the circumstances known to the mayor or city council; and all employees appointed by the city manager should make the circumstances known to the city manager for a determination as to whether a conflict of interest does exist. 
(2)  Elected officials means those individuals elected to a position as may or councilmember. 
(3)  Appointed employees means individuals appointed to office by the city manager or his designee, and the city manager and city clerk. 
(4)  Immediate family means the same as defined in section 16-105. 
(5)  Appointed officials means those individuals appointed by the mayor, city council or any other governmental body or private entity to membership on a city board or commission. 
(b)  Specific acts creating conflicts. The following acts are deemed to be in conflict with the city's best interest: 
(1)  For an elected official, appointed official or appointed employee to give or receive gifts of more than token value which are in any way connected with their service or employment; 
(2)  For an elected official, appointed official or appointed employee or any member of their immediate family to benefit personally from any purchase of goods or services or to derive personal gain from any transaction in which they have an influence; 
(3)  For an elected official or appointed employee to have any direct or indirect interest in any enterprise doing business with the city except as a shareholder in a publicly-owned company where the amount of shares owned represents ten (10) percent of less of the total outstanding shares; 
(4)  For an elected official, appointed official, or appointed employee to loan or to borrow from individuals or concerns that do business with the city, except banks and other financial institutions; 
(5)  For an elected official or appointed employee to serve as an officer, director, employee or consultant of, or to receive income from, any enterprise doing business with the city or to seek to do so, except as may be permitted by law. 
(6)  For an appointed employee to use or permit others to use city employees, materials or equipment for personal purposes except in accordance with established policies permitting the same; 
(7)  For an appointed employee to accept compensation from noncity-related enterprises for services or time for which the employee is being paid by the city; 
(8)  For an elected official, appointed official or appointed employee to disclose to any person any information which may be used by the recipient for personal gain unless such information is in the public domain and generally available to others; 
(9)  For an appointed employee to accept any outside employment unless the same has been approved by the employee's department head and by the human resources office; in those cases where such employment is similar to or related to the employee's primary job responsibility, such approval must be granted by the city manager; 
(10)  For an elected official, appointed official or appointed employee to discuss possible future employment with a person, firm or any other business entity that is dealing with or may reasonably be expected to deal with the city concerning matters within the elected official's, appointed official's or employee's official duties or area of responsibility without disclosing such discussion concerning possible future employment to the city manager in the case of appointed employees or the mayor in cases of elected or appointed officials. 
(11)  For an elected official or appointed employee to commit any violation of G.S. § 14-234. 
(c)  Penalty for violation. Any violation of this section shall be deemed to be a conflict of interest and shall subject such violating employee to dismissal or other disciplinary action by the appointing authority or such legal action as permitted by the appropriate laws or ordinances. 
(Code 1967, § 2-79; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91; Ord. No. 0-02-116, §§ 1a-1f, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 0-03-6, § 1, 1-13-03) 
Sec. 16-158. - Post-employment and post-service restricted. 
(a)  Based on the principle that good government needs to be honest, fair and accountable and that integrity sustains public confidence in government, an elected official, appointed official or employee shall be restricted in the following activities for one (1) year following his/her service or employment with the city: 
(1)  A former elected official, appointed official or appointed employee may not appear for compensation before the city, or its boards or commissions, on behalf of any person or private interest regarding any matter with which the official or employee was directly concerned during his or her city service or employment. To "appear" includes making any oral or written communications, including letters or phone calls, to any elected official, appointed official or appointed employee with the intent to influence a decision on behalf of any person or business. For purposes of this section, a former official or employee is presumed to have had access to knowledge or information concerning all work performed by subordinate personnel. 
(2)  A former elected official, appointed official or appointed employee may not disclose or use, for private advantage or personal profit, any confidential information acquired in the course of his city service or employment which is not otherwise made available to the public. 
(3)  The restrictions contained in this section on post-employment or post-service shall not apply to positions with or representation on behalf of any other local, state or federal agency. 
(4)  Following separation from city service, a former elected official, appointed official or appointed employee may negotiate for or hold a position prohibited by this section if, after review of the mayor, for elected or appointed officials, and the city manager, for appointed employees, it is determined that the position involves no conflict with the purposes and interests of the city. Such findings shall be in writing and made public by the city council. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from contracting directly with a former elected official, appointed official or appointed employee to represent the city's interests. 
(c)  Penalties: 
(1)  Upon determination by the city that a violation of this section, involving contract work, business, sale or transaction, has occurred, and upon recommendation of the city manager, the city council shall have the power to make the transaction in question null and void. 
(2)  Any person found to be in violation of this section may be disqualified from being appointed or employed in service to the city for a period of one (1) year. 
(3)  Any person or business found to be in violation of this section may be subject to other disciplinary or legal action permitted by the appropriate laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 0-02-116, § 2, 12-9-02) 
Sec. 16-159. - Political activity restricted. 
(a)  Every employee has a civic responsibility to support good government by every available means and in every appropriate manner. Each employee may join or affiliate with civil organizations of a partisan or political nature, may attend political meetings, may advocate and support the principles or policies of civic or political organizations in accordance with the constitution and laws of the state and in accordance with the Constitution and laws of the Unites States of America. However, no employee shall: 
(1)  Engage in any political activity while on duty; 
(2)  Be required as a duty of his office or employment, or as a condition for employment, promotion or tenure of office, to contribute funds for political or partisan purposes; 
(3)  Solicit, or act as custodian of, funds for political or partisan purposes; 
(4)  Coerce or compel contributions for political or partisan purposes by any other employee of the governmental unit; 
(5)  Use any supplies or equipment of the governmental unit for political purposes; 
(6)  Hold political office except political party office. 
(b)  Any employee who wishes to become a candidate for partisan or nonpartisan political office shall obtain an approved leave of absence prior to the announcement of his candidacy. 
(c)  Any violation of this section shall be deemed improper conduct and shall subject such employee to dismissal or other disciplinary action by the appointing authority. 
(Code 1967, § 2-80; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91; Ord. No. 0-02-116, § 3a, 12-9-02) 
Sec. 16-160. - Political campaigns. 
    Campaign speeches or other political activities by individuals seeking an elective office shall not be conducted on the premises of any city property nor shall any political candidate for office seek to contact and talk to employees while the employees are working for the city. 
(Code 1967, § 2-81; Ord. No. 0-91-45, § 1, 7-8-91; Ord. No. 0-02-116, § 3b, 12-9-02) 
Sec. 16-161. - Service on certain city boards, authorities, and committees prohibited. 
    No employee of the city shall serve as a regular or alternate member of the community appeals board, board of adjustment, planning board, Rocky Mount Wilson Airport Authority, or the transportation advisory committee; provided, however, city employees may serve as ex-officio members of such boards, authorities, or committees as provided by the city council, and provided further, any city employee serving as a regular or alternate member of any such board, authority, or committee on the date of adoption of this section may complete his or her term but shall not serve any additional term on such board, authority, or committee. 
(Ord. No. 0-02-5, § 1, 1-28-02; Ord. No. 0-02-116, 12-9-02; Ord. No. O-2011-85, § 4, 9-12-11) 
Chapter 18 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; animals, Ch. 4; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; refuse, trash and waste, § 10-91 et seq.; housing, Ch. 11; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, Ch. 19; traffic and vehicles, Ch. 20; utilities, Ch. 21; zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Radioactive waste, G.S. § 104E-1 et seq.; solid waste management, G.S. § 130A-290 et seq.; waste containers on highways, G.S. § 136-18.3; public enterprises, G.S. § 160A-311 et seq.; placing glass or injurious substance in road, G.S. § 136-91; regulation of the placing of trash, refuse and garbage in city, G.S. § 160A-303.1. 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bulk container means a waterproof metal container of not less than four (4) cubic yards, or more than eight (8) cubic yards in size, designed for solid waste storage and compatible for mechanical lifting and emptying by city-operated solid waste collection vehicles. 
    Bulky solid waste means large items such as metal furniture, appliances or other items either too large or too heavy to be safely and conveniently loaded in solid waste transportation vehicles by collection personnel with the equipment available therefor. 
    Central business district means that area of the city bounded by Arlington, Franklin, Hammond and Thomas Streets. 
    Commercial solid waste means solid waste resulting from the operation of any commercial, institutional or mobile home park and multiple housing facilities with more than four (4) dwelling units. 
    Construction, demolition, land clearing and landscaping solid waste means discarded or unused construction materials, lumber, masonry, fixtures, stumps, trees, brush, dirt and other waste material resulting from construction, reconstruction, repair and demolition of buildings, structures or other improvements or from land clearing and landscaping activities on improved or unimproved property including trees exceeding six (6) inches in diameter at ground level. 
    Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a structure, and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used, or intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
    Garbage solid waste means all putrescible wastes, including animal and vegetable matter, resulting directly from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food by humans, including food wrappers and containers, and minimum amounts of liquid necessarily incident thereto but excluding sewage and human waste. 
    Hazardous solid waste means waste or combination of wastes, in any form, which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical, ionizing or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness, or which poses a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of or otherwise managed. 
    Industrial solid waste means sawdust, shavings, feathers, cartons, boxes, glass, paper, wood, textiles, chemicals, plastic or other waste materials from processing plants, factories or manufacturing operations. 
    Medical solid waste means waste generated in connection with the testing, treatment or care of medical patients who have or may have communicable diseases, such as bedding or clothes, used instruments or utensils, pathological specimens or other similar material. 
    Multiple housing facility means a housing facility containing more than one (1) dwelling under one (1) roof. 
    Occupant means any person who, alone or jointly with others, is in actual possession of any dwelling unit or any other improved real property, either as owner or as a tenant. 
    Residential solid waste means solid waste resulting from the maintenance and operation of dwelling units, excluding mobile home parks and multiple housing facilities with more than four (4) dwelling units. 
    Rollout container means a 90, or under certain conditions enumerated herein, a 65-gallon capacity container of heavy duty plastic material held by a steel frame mounted on wheels and approved by the director of public works for containing residential solid waste until it is collected for disposal at a landfill. 
    Solid waste means unwanted or discarded waste materials in a solid or semisolid state resulting from normal urban activities. 
    Yard solid waste means grass clippings, leaves, tree trimmings, shrubbery trimmings and other small quantities of rubbish normally coming from an occupied premises. 
(Code 1967, § 9-17; Ord. No. 0-90-66, § 1, 9-24-90) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-2. - Administration. 
    The collection, removal and disposition of all solid waste from within the city shall be under the jurisdiction and enforcement of the director of public works and his authorized agents, except as otherwise provided by the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 9-18) 
Sec. 18-3. - Right of entry. 
    Solid waste collection personnel are hereby authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of collecting solid waste therefrom as required by this chapter. Solid waste collection personnel shall not enter any building or part thereof including garage or carport for the purpose of collecting solid waste. 
Sec. 18-4. - Ownership of solid waste. 
    Upon collection of solid waste by the city, all such solid waste shall become the property of the city. 
Sec. 18-5. - Unlawful acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Deposit solid waste in any solid waste container which is not the property of that person without the consent of the owner of the container. 
(2)  Interfere in any manner with solid waste collection personnel or solid waste collection and transport equipment. 
(3)  Engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of solid waste within the corporate limits of the city without a permit from the director of public works. 
(4)  Permit any dirt, rocks, sand, brick, broken concrete, lumber, tree trunks, limbs or trimmings, cinders, plaster, gravel, paper, cardboard or any similar material to fall, be scattered or blown upon any street from any vehicle transporting such material, or fail to remove such material immediately from the street. 
(5)  Place, discard, dispose or leave any solid waste upon a street or highway within the city, or upon any property owned or operated by the city unless such solid waste is placed in a designated location or in a solid waste container. 
Sec. 18-6. - Promulgation of regulations. 
    The director of public works may make, amend, revoke and enforce reasonable and necessary regulations, not inconsistent with city ordinances, governing the storage, collection, transport, receiving and transfer, and disposal of solid waste. 
Sec. 18-7. - Precollection practices. 
    The occupant and/or owner of every dwelling unit and of every institutional, commercial or business, industrial or other establishment producing solid waste within the corporate limits of the city shall provide sufficient and adequate containers for the storage of all solid waste to serve such dwelling unit or establishment during the intervals between regular collections as provided in this chapter; and shall maintain such solid waste containers at all times in good repair and the area in which they are placed in a clean, neat and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1967, § 9-20) 
Sec. 18-8. - Residential solid waste storage, containers, etc. 
(a)  Garbage solid waste shall be stored in a rollout container until collected for disposal. Excess garbage which cannot be placed in the container must be bagged and on collection day placed beside or on top of the rollout container at curb side. Rollout carts shall be placed at the street curb or edge no earlier than dusk on the evening prior to scheduled collection and no later than 7:30 a.m. on collection days. Containers shall be returned to the back yard after collection but not later than the end of the collection day. 
    Failure to abide by this policy will result in the following penalty: 
Residents who leave their rollout carts at curbside in violation of this policy shall receive a courtesy card warning for the first violation and a warning sticker for the second violation. Third and future violations of failure to return the cart to its proper location will result in imposition of a penalty fee in an amount established by the city council from time to time and set forth in the fees and charges section of the administrative policy manual. 
(b)  Yard solid waste shall be securely bagged, boxed, packaged or otherwise containerized into one-man loads not exceeding fifty (50) pounds in weight, and placed at the curbline of the street for collection. Tree and shrubbery trimmings may be excluded from the containerizing requirement if cut into four-foot lengths and neatly stacked behind the curb with butt ends toward the street. Leaves may be excluded from the containerizing requirement during the portion of the year when special leaf collection equipment is in operation. During that time, leaves may be loosely piled directly behind the curbline but not in the gutter line or travel way portion of the street for collection. However, such loose piles of leaves will not be collected unless they are free of broken glass, cuttings, limbs, wire, or other debris that might damage collecting equipment. Yard solid waste may be placed in the rollout container if space permits. 
(c)  Bulky trash items such as worn-out furniture, stoves and other bulky items exceeding a one-man load will be collected if placed adjacent to and behind the front curbline or ditch line. The city will collect only those discarded appliances from which the electric motors have been removed. It shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or individual requesting collection of an appliance to remove the electric motor prior to collection by the city. Refrigerators and food freezers shall have the doors or lids removed. 
(d)  The occupant shall be responsible for maintaining the rollout container in a clean and operable condition. 
(e)  The city will furnish at no cost to the property owner one 90-gallon rollout container to each existing residence and business that is not already served by a dumpster. "Existing" residences and businesses are those that the city has certified for occupancy on or before July 1, 1991. Residences and businesses developed and certified for occupancy after July 1, 1991 will be required to furnish an approved rollout container at the property owner's expense in order to receive refuse collection service. 
(f)  The city will furnish one (1) container for each dwelling unit on a lot (for example, a duplex will receive two (2) containers). The owner of the property is responsible for the security and maintenance of the container and for its replacement in the event it is lost or removed during residency changes. The city will replace stolen carts, without cost, if a police report evidencing such theft is presented to the superintendent of environmental services. The owner, however, may provide in the lease agreement provisions that set forth the responsibilities of the tenant to the owner in the event the container has to be replaced. The city is not a party to any such agreement and will look to the owner to provide the container. An owner of property shall have ten (10) days after written notice to provide, or repair, a rollout container if none is available. The city will provide collection service for not more than two (2) containers per dwelling unit or business. The director of public works has authority to waive this limitation in circumstances where dumpster service is not practical or feasible. 
[(g)  Reserved.] 
(h)  The city will provide collection service to some properties using a 65-gallon container in accordance with the following conditions: 
(1)  The container must be requested by the occupant and approved by the superintendent of environmental services and meet city standards. 
(2)  The residence must be occupied by one person. 
(3)  The city will provide the container at no cost to the owner until July 1, 1991. 
(4)  The city reserves the right to replace the container with a 90-gallon container at any time it is determined by the superintendent of environmental services that the smaller container is not providing for the needs of the occupant. 
(i)  The city will exempt residents who are physically incapable of rolling the container to the street as certified by a physician, provided there is no relative, custodial or other help in the home capable of rolling the cart to the street. Residents with existing exemptions based upon age will retain their exemption 
    Residents may apply for exemption to this policy on forms provided by the city. The superintendent of environmental services will approve requests for exemption. 
    The superintendent will grant exemptions upon determination of physical incapability as certified in writing by a physician and determination that there is no relative, custodial or other help present in the household physically able to roll the container to the street. 
    Exemptions are valid for one (1) year from the date of the approval and must be certified annually based upon a verification by environmental services staff. A representative of the environmental services division will visit the applicant at renewal time to ascertain any changes in circumstances. Exemptions may also be secured on a temporary basis if warranted. The city will provide assistance in completing the application form as needed. Collection service to exempt residents will be provided in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Once per week collection service on Thursday or Friday unless more frequent collection is approved by the city manager. 
(2)  Refuse must be placed inside the rollout container. 
(3)  The city will approve the location of the container near the house. 
(4)  The city's refuse collectors will roll the container to the truck, empty it, and return it to the location near the house. 
(Code 1967, § 9-20; Ord. No. 0-90-66, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 0-92-74, § 1a, 9-28-92; Ord. No. 0-97-21, §§ 1, 2, 4-28-97) 
Sec. 18-9. - Commercial solid waste storage. 
    Commercial solid waste shall be stored in bulk containers of such size and number approved by the director of public works, and shall be placed in locations conveniently accessible to waste collection equipment. Exceptions to the bulk container requirement may be made by the director of public works if insufficient space exists on a premises, container location is inaccessible to waste collection equipment or other conditions exist that conflict with the public interest. Upon approving an exception to the bulk container requirement, the director of public works shall specify the type, size, number, and location of other solid waste containers. All containers shall be leakproof, waterproof, kept in good repair and covered at all times except when depositing waste therein or removing the contents thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 9-20) 
Sec. 18-10. - Industrial solid waste. 
    Industrial solid waste shall be collected, removed and disposed of by the operator of the factory, plant, operation or enterprise creating or causing the waste. 
Sec. 18-11. - Construction, demolition, land clearing, landscaping solid waste. 
    All construction, demolition, land clearing and landscaping solid waste shall be collected, removed and disposed of by the contractor or builder or, in the event of their failure, by the occupant of the property. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5. 
Sec. 18-12. - Refuse collection fees and charges. 
(a)  Charges and fees for the collection and disposal of solid wastes and recyclable waste shall be established by the city council from time to time, a schedule of which shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Charges and fees shall apply to the following categories of customers receiving solid waste collection service from the city: 
(1)  Residentially and nonresidentially occupied property whose solid waste is collected by the city in rollout containers; and 
(2)  Residentially occupied property whose solid waste is collected by the city in bulk containers; and 
(3)  Residentially and nonresidentially occupied property whose solid waste is collected by the city in bulk containers. 
(c)  A separate unit charge shall apply for each family or household occupancy of any structure served by a rollout or bulk container. A separate unit charge shall apply for each bulk container serving nonresidential property depending on the size of the container and frequency of collection. In the case of multiple customers sharing in the use of a common bulk container(s) having been previously agreed to by a majority of the affected customers, all customers will be required to participate on prorated basis according to the relative percentage of refuse deposited or as otherwise agreed to in writing and furnished to the superintendent of the environmental services division. 
    In the case of nonresidential occupancies served by a rollout container(s), a separate until charge shall apply for each container. 
(d)  In the case of multiple housing facilities containing more than four (4) dwelling units, the owner thereof shall pay annually to the city, not later than January 1, a fee that is equivalent to ten (10) percent of the dwelling units contained in the multiple housing facility multiplied by the annualized rate established by the city council as noted in subsection 18-12(a). In the event such fee is not paid, the owner thereafter shall pay fees in accordance with the nonresidential fee established for bulk containers. 
(e)  The fees and charges provided for in subsections (a) and (b) above shall be billed monthly and shall be payable with the city electrical, gas, water or sewer service billing, according to established billing procedures in effect at the time. Such charges, if unpaid, shall be a lien upon the property involved and may be collected as provided in G.S. § 105-385. 
(f)  If such charges shall not be paid as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, the city may discontinue further collection and removal of such garbage and refuse from the property involved. Further placement of garbage and refuse on such property shall be unlawful and shall subject the resident of the dwelling unit and for the owner of the property to all applicable health and sanitation regulations and laws. 
(Code 1967, § 9-20; Ord. No. 0-88-81, § 1, 9-26-88; Ord. No. 0-91-40, § 1, 6-24-91; Ord. No. 0-92-74, § 1b, 9-28-92) 
Sec. 18-13. - Hazardous solid waste. 
    Hazardous solid waste shall be handled, stored, collected, transported and disposed of as provided for in the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended. 
Sec. 18-14. - Restriction on contents of containers. 
    No person shall place any of the following items in a solid waste container for collection by public works department personnel: 
(1)  Dangerous items. Window glass, fluorescent tubes, sharp metal objects or other similar items which could cause injury to collection personnel. 
(2)  Hazardous and medical wastes. The generators of all such waste as defined by applicable federal and state laws are responsible for the storage, collection, transport and disposal in accordance with the latest regulations. 
(3)  Combustible material. Burning or smouldering material or any other items which would create a fire hazard to personnel or equipment. 
(4)  Destructive items. Rocks, bricks, concrete pieces, dirt and similar material that may be destructive to waste compaction equipment. 
(5)  Motor vehicle tires. Truck, tractor, farm implement, or more than four (4) passenger car tires shall not be placed in bulk containers. 
Sec. 18-15. - Medical solid waste. 
    Medical solid waste shall be incinerated or steam sterilized prior to collection. Sharp instruments such as hypodermic syringes and needles and similar items shall be incinerated or mutilated and sealed in impervious packages prior to collection in accordance with G.S. § 130A-294 or applicable federal laws regarding the storage, collection, transport and disposal of all such waste. 
Sec. 18-16. - Access to containers. 
    Routes for access to and egress from solid waste containers shall be improved and maintained to standards prescribed by the director of public works for the safety of solid waste collection personnel and equipment, and shall have at all points adequate clearance. Routes shall not be obstructed by locked gates, steps or vehicles, and service will not be provided when dogs or other animals threaten or interfere with collection personnel. 
Sec. 18-17. - Damage to containers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully cut, slash or upset any container, bag, box or package containing solid waste or to strew the contents thereof. 
Sec. 18-18. - Collection schedule. 
    Except in case of emergencies, holidays or circumstances over which the city and the public works department have no control, the public works department shall collect and remove solid wastes without fee except as otherwise provided, according to the following schedule: 
(1)  Residential and garbage solid waste: All such waste shall be collected two (2) times each week. 
(2)  Yard and bulky solid waste : All such waste shall be collected one (1) time each week. 
(3)  Commercial solid waste : All such waste shall be collected two (2) times each week. 
(4)  Central business district : Solid waste within the boundaries of this district shall be collected daily except Saturday and Sunday. 
Sec. 18-19. - Ownership of solid wastes. 
    Upon collection of solid waste by the city, all such solid waste shall become the property of the city. 
Sec. 18-20. - Disposal facility. 
    The public works department shall operate a solid waste disposal facility to be known as a solid waste transfer station for the receipt and safe, sanitary disposition of all waste generated from within the corporate limits of the city except hazardous waste, building construction/renovation waste, land clearing and landscaping waste, tree trimming waste, roofing waste, automotive tires and industrial wastes. Wastes hauled by private solid waste collection contractors for any nonresidential land use shall be transported directly to the county landfill and shall not be accepted at the solid waste transfer station. Wastes from any source outside the corporate limits of the city shall not be accepted at the solid waste transfer station. 
(Code 1967, § 9-26; Ord. No. 0-89-53, § 2,6-26-89) 
Sec. 18-21. - Solid waste disposal facility operations. 
    The director of public works shall operate a solid waste receiving or transfer site for the receiving and the safe and sanitary disposition of all solid wastes from within the city except hazardous waste, construction and demolition waste, land clearing and landscaping waste, and industrial waste that will, in the opinion of the director of public works, be unduly detrimental to the receiving or transfer site. The disposal site shall be open at the times prescribed by the director of public works for the receipt of solid wastes. Wastes from outside the corporate limits of the city shall not be accepted at the receiving or transfer site. 
Sec. 18-22. - Regulations. 
    The director of public works may make, amend, revoke and enforce reasonable and necessary regulations not inconsistent with city ordinances governing the storage, collection, transport, receiving and transfer and disposal of solid waste. 
Sec. 18-23. - Prohibitions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Deposit solid waste in any solid waste container which is not the property of that person without the consent of the owner of such container; 
(2)  Interfere in any manner with solid waste collection personnel or solid waste collection and transport equipment; 
(3)  Engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of solid waste within the corporate limits of the city without a permit from the director of public works; 
(4)  Permit any dirt, rocks, sand, brick, broken concrete, lumber, tree trunks, limbs or trimmings, cinders, plaster, gravel, paper, cardboard or any similar material to fail, be scattered or blown upon any street from any vehicle transporting such material or fail to remove such material immediately from the street; 
(5)  Place, discard, dispose or leave any solid waste upon a street or highway within the city or upon any property owned or operated by the city unless such solid waste is placed in a designated location or in a solid waste container. 
Chapter 19 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND CERTAIN OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Local improvements, § 380 et seq. 
Cross reference- Animals, Ch. 4; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; cemeteries, Ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; fire exit requirements, § 8-34; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; distribution of handbill regulations, § 10-51; public health nuisances prohibited, § 10-71 et seq.; housing, Ch. 11; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 13; peddlers and solicitors, § 13-66 et seq.; public grounds peddling and soliciting permit, § 13-111 et seq.; blocking or obstructing storm drains, etc., prohibited, § 14-6; discharge of certain materials in storm drains, etc., prohibited, § 14-7; parks and recreation, Ch. 15; soil erosion and sedimentation control, Ch. 17; solid waste, Ch. 18; traffic and vehicles, Ch. 20; truck routes established, § 20-181; utilities, Ch. 21; subdivisions, App. A; zoning, App. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - Consumption and possession of malt beverages and unfortified wine. 
(a)  Definitions. In addition to the common meanings of words, the following definitions shall be applicable herein: 
(1)  Malt beverages shall mean beer, lager, malt liquor, ale, porter, and any other brewed or fermented beverage containing at least one-half of one (0.5) percent, and not more than six (6) percent alcohol by volume. 
(2)  Open container shall mean a container on which the seal has been broken or container other than the manufacturer's unopened original container. 
(3)  Public street shall mean any highway, road, street, avenue, boulevard, alley, bridge, or other way within and/or under the control of the city and open to public use, including the sidewalks of any such street. 
(4)  Unfortified wine shall mean wine that has an alcoholic content produced only by natural fermentation or by the addition of pure cane, beet, or dextrose sugar, and that has an alcoholic content of not more than seventeen (17) percent alcohol by volume. 
(b)  Consumption on the public streets and on municipal property prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person who is not an occupant of a motor vehicle to consume malt beverages and/or unfortified wine on the public streets. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person to consume malt beverages and/or unfortified wine on any property, whether located inside or outside the corporate limits, owned, occupied, or controlled by the city including, but not limited to, public buildings and the grounds appurtenant thereto, municipal parking lots, public parks, playgrounds, recreational areas, tennis courts, and other athletic fields. 
(c)  Possession of open containers on the public streets and on municipal property prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person who is not an occupant of a motor vehicle to possess any open container of malt beverage and/or unfortified wine on the public streets. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess any open container of malt beverage and/or unfortified wine on any property, whether located inside or outside the corporate limits, owned, occupied, or controlled by the city including, but not limited to, public buildings and the grounds appurtenant thereto, municipal parking lots, public parks, playgrounds, recreational areas, tennis courts, and other athletic fields. 
(d)  Possession during special events prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess malt beverages and/or unfortified wine on public streets, alleys, or parking lots which are temporarily closed to regular traffic for special events. 
(e)  Exemptions: With the permission of the city manager or his/her designee in accordance with chapter 19 of the City Code, possession and consumption of malt beverages and/or unfortified wine shall be permitted within a building or premises on city owned property where appropriate permits have been obtained as required by law for the possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages for the period of time permitted thereunder. 
(f)  Penalty. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with G.S. § 14-4. 
(Code 1967, § 12-2; Ord. No. 0-95-21, § 1, 5-8-95 Ord. No. 0-95-62, § 1, 11-13-95; Ord. No. O-2012-104, § 1, 11-26-12) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate consumption of alcohol on public property, G.S. § 18B-300(c). 
Sec. 19-2. - Marking of streets, sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or attempt to advertise by marking or painting on any of the streets or sidewalks within the city. 
(Code 1967, § 3-2) 
Sec. 19-3. - Lights, barricades around obstructions and excavations. 
    Any person who puts any obstruction on any street or sidewalk or who cuts any excavation on any street or sidewalk without properly protecting the same with lights and otherwise in accordance with section 19-37 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day's continuance without such protection shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1967, § 17-6) 
Sec. 19-4. - Tampering with danger lights, barricades. 
    No person shall interfere with any lantern or other guard placed around any obstacle or excavation to protect same. 
(Code 1967, § 17-7) 
Sec. 19-5. - Depositing, storing material on streets, sidewalks. 
    No person shall deposit any rubbish, building material, etc., on the streets and sidewalks so as to be dangerous to vehicle or pedestrian traffic. Storage of building materials on city property may be permitted during construction, but only after the necessary permit for construction has been obtained and the storage area approved by the director of public works or his authorized representative. 
(Code 1967, § 17-11) 
Sec. 19-6. - Plants, fences, etc., within right-of-way. 
    No person shall plant or cause to be planted any tree, shrubbery, hedge or similar planting within the right-of-way of any street or sidewalk within the city limits, nor place or erect, or cause to be placed or erected, any fence, wall, edifice or other construction within the same. This section shall not apply to any street or sidewalk not accepted and maintained by the city. 
(Code 1967, § 17-13) 
Sec. 19-7. - Erection of poles, fixtures, etc., within right-of-way. 
    It shall be unlawful to erect or place any pole, stake (including without limitation stakes and poles designed to keep vehicles off grass), fixture, right-of-way structure, or any other structure, or any underground facility within the right-of-way of any street or sidewalk within the city limits except as provided in this article. Fences, lamp post, mailboxes, and similar structures made of wood, plastic, or lightweight metal and of a size, design, or type that will collapse upon impact with a motor vehicle, and trees, plants, and shrubs, provided they do not obstruct the view of intersections or the line of sight in horizontal curves, are permitted within the right-of-way of local residential streets without a license. Certain other existing heavy and permanent structures may be licensed for right-of-way use as provided in this Article. 
(Code 1967, § 17-14; Ord. No. 0-02-83, § 1, 9-23-02) 
Sec. 19-8. - Roller skates, skateboards within fire district. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use roller skates and skateboards upon the sidewalks or streets within the fire district of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 17-18) 
Cross reference- Fire limits, § 5-1; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8. 
Sec. 19-9. - Use of skates, coasters, etc., in roadway. 
    No person upon roller skates or a skateboard or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a street at a crosswalk or intersection, and except upon streets set aside as play streets. 
(Code 1967, § 19-16) 
Sec. 19-10. - Discharge of oily substances. 
(a)  No person shall pour or spill, or permit to drip upon the asphalt pavement of any street, alley or public place in the city any kerosene, gasoline, benzine or other similar oil or oily substance or liquid. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to pour, drain or permit to be poured or drained any oil or other petroleum products into any street, open ditch, sewer or on the sidewalks within the city. 
(Code 1967, § 17-17) 
Sec. 19-11. - Construction and repair specifications. 
    All paving, construction, reconstruction and repair of streets, alleys, curbs and gutters, sidewalks and driveways in the city shall be in accordance with the Manual of Specification, Standards and Design (latest edition) approved by the city council and filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, §§ 17-1, 17-5) 
Sec. 19-12. - [Use of roller skates, roller blades, skateboards or bicycles in certain areas.] 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use roller skates, roller blades, skateboards or bicycles upon the walkways around City Lake. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-83, § 1, 11-23-92) 
Sec. 19-13. - Right-of-way structures-Definitions. 
    Existing right-of-way structure means a right-of-way structure constructed, erected, or placed within the right-of-way of a local residential street prior to September 10, 2002. 
    Local residential street means a vehicular travel way constructed within a public right-of-way that has been recorded as such in the office of the register of deeds and is under the authority and control of the city. A residential street is designed and constructed to carry vehicular traffic volumes at low travel speeds and is not designated on the street mapping system as a collector or thoroughfare street. 
    Right-of-way license means a revocable license issued by the city granting the holder thereof the right to use a portion of the right-of-way of a local residential street for the purpose of having and maintaining an existing right-of-way structure. The license shall include, in addition to other provisions, insurance requirements, maintenance requirements, and a release and indemnity provision protecting the city. 
    Right-of-way structure means any mailbox support, fence, wall, endwall, entrance way, or similar structure located within the right-of-way of a local residential street that is constructed of wood, brick, stone, concrete, masonry, steel, or any other similar hard, heavy, and permanent material. Any mailbox, lamp post, fence, or similar structure made of wood, plastic, or lightweight metal, eight (8) inches or less in diameter, of a size, design, or type designed and constructed to collapse, breakaway, or go over upon impact with a motor vehicle, is not a right-of-way structure. 
(Ord. No. 0-02-83, § 2, 9-23-02) 
Sec. 19-14. - License required for right-of-way structure. 
    No person shall construct, erect, place, keep, or maintain any existing right-of-way structure within the right-of-way of any city street without first obtaining a license from the city. Right-of-way licenses shall be revocable upon thirty (30) days written notice if the city, in its sole discretion, determines that the use of the street right-of-way for such structure is in any way disruptive or unsafe to persons using the street or right-of-way, or if the city determines, in its sole discretion, that it needs to use the right-of-way for a purpose inconsistent with such structure, or if the licensee is in violation of any of the terms, conditions, or requirements of the license. 
(Ord. No. 0-02-83, § 2, 9-23-02) 
Sec. 19-15. - License requirements for right-of-way structures. 
    Any existing right-of-way structure may be licensed if the owner of the real estate adjacent to the local residential street right-of-way applies to the city for a license on or before December 31, 2002. A right-of-way license shall be issued to any owner of an existing right-of-way structure that meets the requirements of this Article. The owner shall release and indemnify the city against any and all liability caused by or resulting from the use of the right-of-way for such structure. 
(Ord. No. 0-02-83, § 2, 9-23-02) 
Sec. 19-16. - Regulations for right-of-way structures. 
    Any existing right-of-way structure constructed, erected, or maintained within the street right-of-way of a local residential street shall be marked with reflectors on all sides which are visible from the street. The size, type, and location of the reflectors for each structure shall be determined by the director of public works or his or her designee based on the size and location of such structure. 
(Ord. No. 0-02-83, § 2, 9-23-02) 
Sec. 19-17. - Transfer of right-of-way structure license. 
    Any person who purchases residential real estate which has a licensed, existing structure in the right-of-way adjacent to such property may apply to the city for a transfer of such license within thirty (30) days of the date of purchase. A right-of-way license shall be issued to the new owner if all the requirements of this article are met. 
(Ord. No. 0-02-83, § 2, 9-23-02) 
Sec. 19-18. - Removal of unlicensed right-of-way structures and poles, fixtures, etc. 
    Any existing right-of-way structure which has not been licensed on or before December 31, 2002, shall be removed from the right-of-way. In addition, any pole, stake, fixture, right-of-way structure, or other structure placed in the right-of-way in violation of this article shall be removed. 
(Ord. No. 0-02-83, § 2, 9-23-02) 
Secs. 19-19-19-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREETS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Local improvements, § 380 et seq.; planning and zoning, § 300 et seq.; authority to grant franchises for use, § 10(q); to maintain, repair, and regulate streets and sidewalks, § 10(g); ultimate street improvements, § 510 et seq. 
Cross reference- Truck routes established, § 20-181. 
State Law reference- Streets, G.S. § 160A-296. 

Sec. 19-36. - Construction or repair permit. 
(a)  No street, alley or curb and gutter shall be repaired nor any excavations made therein until a permit to do so has been obtained from the director of public works or his authorized representative. The director of public works or his authorized representative may for good and sufficient cause refuse to grant the permit, but the applicant therefor shall have the right to appeal from such refusal to the city manager. 
(b)  No street, alley or curb and gutter shall be constructed until a permit to do so has been obtained from the director of engineering or his authorized representative. The director of engineering or his authorized representative may for good and sufficient cause refuse to grant the permit, but the applicant therefor shall have the right to appeal from such refusal to the city manager. 
(c)  Permits issued pursuant to this section shall specify, as a minimum, the location and character of the proposed work, the address of the person to whom the same is granted, the name and address of the person by whom the work is to be done, when the work will be done and when it will be completed; the permit shall also specify when the same shall become void and shall require that written notice be given to the director of public works or engineering (as appropriate), or his authorized representative, when the work is actually begun and when it is completed. The permit shall be subject to revocation by the director of public works or engineering (as appropriate), or his authorized representative, for cause, and it shall be his duty to immediately revoke the same if the work or any part thereof is not done in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the city council and on file in the office of the city clerk. The permit shall become void if the work authorized therein is not completed within the time therein specified. 
(Code 1967, § 17-2) 
Sec. 19-37. - Protection of dangerous conditions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to pave, repair or do any excavation or other work on any street or alley in the city which may create or cause a dangerous condition in, on or near any street, sidewalk, alley or driveway without placing and maintaining proper guardrails and signal lights or other warnings at, in or around the same, sufficient to warn the public of such work or excavation and to protect all persons using reasonable care from injuries on account of same. The guardrails and signal lights or other warnings shall be in accordance with specifications approved by the city council and filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 17-3) 
Sec. 19-38. - Use of vehicles that damage or injure surface. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, push, pull or otherwise propel or cause to be driven, pushed or pulled or propelled over or along any street or other public way in the city any steam or gasoline tractor, motor car or other vehicle, wagon or equipment whatsoever, so as to cut, scrape, indent or otherwise deface or injure the paved surface of such street or other public way, or so as to crack, break or otherwise damage or injure the base or subbase of such paving. 
(Code 1967, § 17-8) 
Sec. 19-39. - Burning substances on paved surface. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or cause to be burned upon the paved surface of any such street or other public way in the city any oil, gasoline or other combustible substance or material whatsoever. 
(Code 1967, § 17-9) 
Sec. 19-40. - Deleterious matter on paved surface. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to mix and place or cause to be mixed or placed upon the paved surface of any street or other public way in the city, so as to come in contact therewith, any lime, concrete mixture or other like deleterious substance or material. 
(Code 1967, § 17-10) 
Sec. 19-41. - Service stations; location of gas lines, oil pumps, etc. 
    No filling or service station shall maintain any gasoline line or oil pump or underground gasoline or oil pumps or any device or equipment whatsoever for serving, oiling or servicing automobiles any closer than allowed by the zoning ordinance of the city, but in no case within twelve (12) feet of any right-of-way line of any public street or alley. 
(Code 1967, § 17-20) 
Sec. 19-42. - Site clearance at intersections. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "street gutter flow line" shall mean the street gutter flow line of the curb adjacent to and bordering upon each such restricted area; if there is no such curb, the height restriction set forth in this section shall be based upon the actual level of the paved or used portion of the public street or alley adjacent to and bordering upon each such restricted area. 
(b)  In addition to any penalty which may be imposed for the violation of this section, the city shall have the right to enter upon and remove from the triangular corner areas described in this section any of the growths prohibited by this section. Such entry and removal shall be without liability to the owners thereof. 
(c)  The areas in the city restricted by the provisions of this section are as follows: 
(1)  All of that portion of land lying within a triangular-shaped area on each street corner within the city and described by metes and bounds as follows: beginning at the precise corner of intersection point of the curbs of each of the two (2) streets forming each corner and extending twenty (20) feet along each such curbline from the curb intersection point, the third side being determined by the drawing of a straight line from the ends of such twenty-foot extensions. The foregoing areas shall be restricted regardless of whether the land is privately owned or unpaved or untraveled street right-of-way property. 
(2)  Where no curbs are in existence at such street intersections, the twenty-foot lines shall coincide with the central flow line of the ditches paralleling such uncurbed streets as shall be determined by the director of public works or his authorized representative. The provisions of this section shall apply only to those areas of the city in which the city's zoning ordinance requires construction on lots to be set back from the property line on each such lot. 
(d)  No person shall plant, grow or maintain in any restricted area any plant, hedge or shrub or other growth, except trees, at a height greater than two (2) feet from the street gutter flow line. 
(e)  Any trees planted, grown and maintained in any restricted area shall not have branches or foliage extending from the trunk thereof at a height lower than ten (10) feet from the street gutter flow line. 
(Code 1967, §§ 17-33-17-37) 
Secs. 19-43-19-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 19-61. - Construction or repair permit. 
    No person shall construct or maintain any driveway across any sidewalk or curbing or enter any public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit therefor from the director of engineering or his authorized representative, which permit shall be in addition to any other permit which may be required. The application shall be in writing and shall show the improvements proposed to be made thereon and the type of construction, the length of the driveways, and such other information as the director of engineering or his authorized representative shall require. If upon investigation the director of engineering finds that the construction and maintenance of such driveway or driveways will not substantially impair or interfere with the safety or the use of the street or sidewalk by the public or interfere with the drainage or protection of the sidewalk and street and that same will otherwise comply with the applicable provisions of this Code and ordinances of the city, he shall issue a permit for the construction of such a driveway. 
(Code 1967, § 17-4) 
Sec. 19-62. - Display of goods. 
(a)  No person other than a person owning or occupying any lot or premises in the city, and conducting a business at such location, shall have the right to display goods, wares, merchandise, signs or any other objects on the space on the sidewalk in front of his store or other place of business; provided, however, that no such display shall unreasonably restrict the use or access of such sidewalk areas by pedestrians, the city or any other person. 
(b)  If at any time it is determined by the chief of police that goods, wares, merchandise, signs or other objects are being displayed in a manner that unreasonably restricts the use or access of the sidewalks, he shall notify the person responsible for such display in writing. Upon receipt of such notice the person responsible shall remove or cause to be removed any objects obstructing the use or access of the sidewalk area. 
(Code 1967, § 17-12) 
Sec. 19-63. - Discharge of water. 
    Any person allowing a gutter, drain or downspout to discharge any water on a public sidewalk within the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day's continuance thereof shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall not apply in cases where the director of public works or his authorized representative has approved a method of discharging such water under or over the sidewalk and such drain is so constructed as to carry water away without spreading over the sidewalk and without constituting a menace to pedestrians. 
(Code 1967, § 17-16) 
Sec. 19-64. - Snow removal. 
    Each occupant of a business which fronts on a paved sidewalk or a portion of a paved sidewalk shall clear off any snow which may accumulate on the paved sidewalk in front of his business within twelve (12) hours from the time it accumulates. The failure so to do shall be deemed a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 17-21) 
Sec. 19-65. - Riding bicycle on sidewalks, walkways. 
    No person shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk or walkway within a business district in the city. 
(Code 1967, § 19-14) 
Secs. 19-66-19-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Parade floats to contain flame-proof materials, § 8-2; traffic and vehicles, Ch. 20. 

Sec. 19-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Block means that portion of any street lying between its intersections with other streets. 
    Demonstration means any assembly together or concert of action between more than four (4) persons for the purpose of protesting any matter, making known any position, or promoting certain persons or organizations, or attracting attention to such assembly. 
    Parade means any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition or procession of any kind in or upon the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks or other public places, involving more than four (4) persons or more than three (3) vehicles. 
(Code 1967, § 12-42) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 19-82. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  Students going to or from school classes or participating in educational or recreational activity where such activity is under the supervision and direction of the proper school authorities; 
(3)  Any governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions; 
(4)  Picketing or other orderly processions on the sidewalks, involving fewer than ten (10) persons, and conducted entirely within one (1) block, that do not violate any other municipal or state law; 
(5)  A parade that is conducted under the sponsorship of the city. 
Sec. 19-83. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Violation of this article shall be a criminal misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, as provided in G.S. § 14-4. 
(b)  In addition to or in lieu of criminal remedies, violation of this article shall subject the offender to the levy of a civil penalty in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Civil penalties remaining unpaid after seven (7) days may be collected by means of a civil action in the nature of debt. 
(c)  This article may also be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Sec. 19-84. - Effect of state law. 
    The prohibition contained in G.S. § 14-277.2 against possession of dangerous weapons and other provisions of law shall be strictly enforced. 
Sec. 19-85. - Permit-Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to organize, conduct or participate in any parade or demonstration in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place within the city unless a permit has been issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 12-43(a)) 
Sec. 19-86. - Same-Application. 
    A written application on a form supplied by the city shall be made to the chief of police by persons desiring to have a parade or demonstration. Such applications shall be submitted at least seventy-two (72) hours in advance. However, where good cause is shown or in the judgment of the chief the activity would involve significant political or religious features and therefore be entitled to enhanced deference or protection under the state and federal constitutions, the chief of police shall consider applications filed after the deadline. Employees of the police department shall immediately indicate the time of receipt on the face of the application. The application shall be signed by the applicant and shall include the following: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  If the parade or demonstration is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible head of such organization; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person to be present and responsible for the conduct of the parade or demonstration; 
(4)  The date when the parade or demonstration will be conducted; 
(5)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade or demonstration; 
(6)  The time when units of the parade or demonstration will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas; 
(7)  The times when the parade or demonstration will begin and terminate; 
(8)  The route to be travelled, the starting point and the termination point, or the location if stationary; 
(9)  A statement as to whether the parade or demonstration will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets, sidewalks, parks, alleys or other public places proposed to be traversed or occupied; 
(10)  The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles expected to participate, and the type of animals and a description of the vehicles; 
(11)  Whether minors are likely to participate. 
(Code 1967, § 12-43(c)) 
Sec. 19-87. - Same-Issuance. 
(a)  The application submitted under this article is expressly included as part of any permit granted. A permit shall be issued on a form supplied by the city to the person who signed the application. Such person shall be required to accompany the parade or demonstration, and the permit shall be invalid unless in his possession. The permit shall be deemed issued under the terms stated in the application unless otherwise provided. The permit shall set the duration, speed of travel and space between persons or vehicles in the parade or demonstration; may prescribe the portions or areas of streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places to be used; and may impose such other reasonable requirements necessary for the control and safe movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(b)  The chief of police shall issue a permit unless he makes written findings based upon specified facts that: 
(1)  The activity cannot be conducted without unreasonable interference with normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the area; or 
(2)  The activity cannot be held without unreasonably interfering with the provision of normal police and fire protection to the public; or 
(3)  The event will require the closing of or unreasonably restrict the flow of vehicular traffic along a highway under the control of the state, in which case the permit shall not be issued until permission has been secured from the state department of transportation. 
(Code 1967, § 12-43(d)) 
Sec. 19-88. - Same-Processing time; notice; right of appeal. 
    Applications for permits under this article shall be processed and decisions made as expeditiously as possible, and at least within forty-eight (48) hours. If the application was submitted more than seven (7) days in advance of the event, the permit, alternate permit or written notice of denial shall be mailed to the applicant. Otherwise, the police department shall exercise reasonable diligence in attempting to notify the applicant of the action taken as soon as possible by telephone or other means. Any person aggrieved by action taken on a permit application may file a written notice of appeal, first with the city manager and then with the city council. The city manager shall act on the appeal as expeditiously as possible. The city council shall hear an appeal as expeditiously as possible and in any event within seventy-two (72) hours after written notice of an appeal from the city manager's decision has been filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 12-43(f)) 
Sec. 19-89. - Same-Revocation. 
    The chief of police may revoke any permit granted for a parade or demonstration for the following causes: 
(1)  The substantial violation of this article or the terms and conditions or a permit; or 
(2)  A material misstatement of any fact on the application. 
(Code 1967, § 12-45) 
Sec. 19-90. - Unlawful participation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or participate in any parade or demonstration for any purpose or in any manner other than those set out in the application and permit. 
(Code 1967, § 12-43(a)) 
Sec. 19-91. - Alternate permits. 
    The chief of police, in denying an application as submitted under this article, may grant a permit for a date, time, place or over a route different from that named by the applicant, or subject to stated requirements and conditions. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within twenty-four (24) hours after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police, on a form supplied by the city. 
Sec. 19-92. - Interference, obstruction. 
    No person shall hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade or demonstration being conducted under authority of a lawfully issued permit. No driver of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade or demonstration when such vehicles or persons are in motion and identifiable as a parade or demonstration under this article. 
Sec. 19-93. - Sidewalk obstructions. 
    Police officers observing unreasonable obstructions of sidewalks as a result of a parade or demonstration, such that pedestrians are unreasonably hindered or forced to step into the street, shall take reasonable steps to make the sidewalk available for pedestrian travel. 
Sec. 19-94. - Parking restrictions. 
    The chief of police, when reasonably necessary, may prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or highway constituting a part of the route of a parade or demonstration. The chief of police shall cause signs to be posted to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street if such signs are posted less than twenty-four (24) hours in advance. 
ARTICLE V. - TREES 

Sec. 19-94.1. - Purpose. 
    In order to protect and conserve plantings on rights-of-way and public property, this article provides for the pruning, treatment and removal of trees, root systems, and shrubs as is deemed necessary by the city council or official acting under the authority of the city council. The article is also intended to provide for the trimming or removal of trees on public properties when they obscure street lights, interfere with overhead and underground utility lines or constitute a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or otherwise endanger public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 0-97-75, 12-15-97) 
Sec. 19-95. - Definitions. 
    [For the purposes of this article, certain terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.] 
    Public property means all real property that is owned or leased by the City of Rocky Mount or which is maintained by it, or any part of any rights-of-way as defined hereinafter. 
    Rights-of-way means property located within and adjoining the streets, roads and highways within the city, which rights-of-way are owned by the city or the state or are otherwise maintained by the city or the state. Questions of rights-of-way locations are determined by the city engineer. 
    Street trees means trees and shrubs within the rights-of-way of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public properties. 
(Ord. No. 0-97-75, 12-15-97) 
Sec. 19-96. - Tree advisory board. 
    The city council has established a tree advisory board to make recommendations to the city manager relative to trees and shrubbery on city property to the city manager and perform other duties as designated in this article. 
    The tree advisory board is comprised of eleven (11) members. Seven (7) of the members shall be appointed by the city council and four (4) shall be city staff members as follows: 
    The director of utilities or designee; the director of parks and recreation or designee; the director of development services or designee; and the director of public works or designee. The city manager may designate other employees to serve as staff to the board as needed. 
    Appointed members shall serve four-year terms with each member of the city council appointing one (1) member. 
    Any member who fails to attend at least seventy-five (75) percent of the regular and special meetings held by the board during any one-year period shall be removed from the board by the city council. Vacancies resulting from a member's failure to attend the required number of meetings shall be filled as provided herein. The chairman of the board will notify the proper appointing authority if a member is absent twenty-five (25) percent of the meetings, and appointment will be made by the appointing authority to fill that vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 0-97-75, 12-15-97; Ord. No. O-2010-68, § 1, 7-12-10; Ord. No. O-2018-79, § 2, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 19-97. - Operation. 
    The tree advisory board shall choose its officers, adopt rules for transaction of business, and keep a record of its members' attendance and of its resolutions, discussions, findings, and recommendations, which shall be public record. The board shall set a regular meeting schedule, and the chairman may call a special meeting upon request by a majority of board members. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. 0-97-75, 12-15-97) 
Sec. 19-98. - Compensation. 
    Members of the tree advisory board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 0-97-75, 12-15-97) 
Sec. 19-99. - Duties. 
    In coordination with city staff, the tree advisory board shall: 
(1)  Study, investigate, counsel and develop, and/or update annually, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs along streets, rights-of-way and on other public properties. 
(2)  Conduct tree surveys of existing trees along streets and on city property within the city. 
(3)  Foster communication among the citizens of Rocky Mount that will provide needed protection of trees and coordinate active measures to support their health and growth within the city. 
(4)  Investigate available grants, loans or contributions from other governmental agencies, public or private corporations, agencies, or individuals, and recommend the expenditure of any proceeds toward the accomplishment of the board's purpose. 
(5)  Locate and identify historic trees through the assistance of appropriate civic groups and, with the consent of any owners, may designate such trees by marker or device. 
(Ord. No. 0-97-75, 12-15-97) 
Sec. 19-100. - Applicability. 
    The terms and provisions of this article shall apply to all public property as defined herein. The terms and provisions of this article shall be consistent with any requirements imposed by state law or by the North Carolina Department of Transportation in connection with any state-owned or maintained rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 0-97-75, 12-15-97) 
Sec. 19-101. - Planting standards. 
    The tree advisory board shall be responsible for developing an official street tree species list comprised of three groups of trees: small trees, medium trees, and large trees. No trees other than those included in the list may be planted as street trees without permission of the board. 
    The tree advisory board shall also be responsible for establishing standards, as approved by the city manager, for the spacing of city trees in accordance with the species size classes in the official street tree species list. These standards will cover spacing between street trees, the distance street trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks, the distance street trees may be planted to overhead and underground electric lines, gas lines, water lines, sewer lines, or other utilities, and any other areas involving the spacing of street trees, park trees, or city owned trees. 
(Ord. No. 0-97-75, 12-15-97) 
Sec. 19-102. - Public tree care. 
    The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants, and shrubs within the rights-of-way of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and other public properties, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public properties. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall remove, mutilate or kill a tree growing on public property or in the public rights-of-way without first obtaining the approval of the city manager. 
    The city may remove or cause or order to be removed, any publicly owned tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electrical power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is infected with any injurious fungus, insect, or other pest. 
    This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners provided the selection and location of said tree(s) are in accordance with the guidelines for planting, spacing and maintenance developed by the tree advisory board. The city reserves the right to approve any plantings which take place in public rights-of-way areas maintained by the City of Rocky Mount. 
(Ord. No. 0-97-75, 12-15-97) 
Sec. 19-103. - Pruning guidelines. 
    It shall be unlawful, except as described below, for any person, firm or city department to top any street tree or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three (3) inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such degree as to remove the normal canopy and to disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees which interfere with or are an eminent threat to utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempt from this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-97-75, 12-15-97) 
Sec. 19-104. - Removal of stumps. 
    All stumps of street trees shall be removed in a timely fashion not to exceed ninety (90) days from removal of trees and to a depth so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surrounding surface of the ground. 
(Ord. No. 0-97-75, 12-15-97) 
Sec. 19-105. - Historic trees. 
    In order to protect significant trees within the City of Rocky Mount, the city council hereby establishes the historic tree designation. A historic tree may be designated by resolution of city council at the request of the tree advisory board. The property owner shall consent to the designation, in writing, before the historic tree is designated. Historic trees may be located on public or private property. A historic tree may lose its designation upon the written consent of the property owner to the board with approval by the city council. 
    No historic tree shall be trimmed, cut or removed without prior written notice. 
(Ord. No. 0-97-75, 12-15-97) 
Sec. 19-106. - Criteria; historic trees. 
    A tree shall meet one (1) of the following criteria in order to be designated as a historic tree. 
(1)  It has reached its mature growth. 
(2)  It is listed as a Champion Big Tree, as designated by the State Division of Forest Resources. 
(3)  It has significant historic value to the community. 
(4)  It is a rare species, or provides a habitat for rare species of plants, animals or birds. 
(Ord. No. 0-97-75, 12-15-97) 
Sec. 19-107. - Historic trees; public records. 
    A historic tree file, including the kind and nature of the trees and a map sufficient to indicate their location, shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and shall be a public document. 
(Ord. No. 0-97-75, 12-15-97) 
Sec. 19-108. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provision(s) of this article shall be notified of the specific violation by the city manager or his designee. The notice shall set forth the nature of the violation, a penalty not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) per offense, the measures required to comply with this article, if compliance is at all practicable, and a reasonable time period within which compliance must be attained. 
    The aforementioned notice will be delivered by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by hand delivery. 
(Ord. No. 0-97-75, 12-15-97) 
Sec. 19-109. - Emergencies. 
    During emergencies, such as windstorms, ice storms, fire or other disasters, the requirements of this article may be waived by the city manager during the emergency period so that the requirements will not hamper public or private work to restore order of and essential public services to the city. This provision shall not be interpreted to be a general waiver of the intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-97-75, 12-15-97) 
Sec. 19-110. - Severability. 
    Should any section or provision of this article be declared invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole or any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid. 
(Ord. No. 0-97-75, 12-15-97) 
Sec. 19-111. - Appeal process. 
    An appeal of any notice of violation or penalty issued by the city manager may be taken to the tree advisory board by any person aggrieved thereby by giving written notice to the city manager within seven (7) days from the receipt of the notice. 
    An appeal from any decision or order of the tree advisory board may be taken by any person aggrieved thereby to the city council by giving written notice to the city manager within seven (7) days of the decision or order. 
(Ord. No. 0-97-75, 12-15-97) 
Sec. 19-112. - Effective date. 
    This article shall be in full force and effect from and after December 31, 1997. 
(Ord. No. 0-97-75, 12-15-97) 
Secs. 19-113-19-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - YOUTH PROTECTION 

Sec. 19-120. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is: 
(1)  To promote the general welfare and protect all citizens and residents through the reduction of juvenile violence and crime within the city; 
(2)  To protect the safety and well being of the city's youngest residents, persons under the age of sixteen (16), whose inexperience renders them particularly vulnerable to becoming participants in unlawful activities, particularly unlawful drug activities, and to being victimized by older perpetrators of crime; and 
(3)  To supplement and enhance parental authority and strengthen the fundamental right of all parents to raise their children as law abiding citizens in the manner they see fit. 
(Ord. No. O-08-125, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Sec. 19-121. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Direct route means the shortest reasonable path of travel or a commonly used route to reach a final destination without any detour or stop along the way. 
    Emergency means an unforeseen circumstance, or combination of circumstances, or the status or condition resulting therefrom, requiring immediate action to safeguard life, limb, or property. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or death. This term also includes any action that is reasonably necessary in order to respond to a medical need requiring immediate attention of a family member of a juvenile, regardless of whether the juvenile's action is taken in order to prevent death or serious bodily injury. 
    Establishment means any privately owned place of business within the city operated for profit to which the public has access or is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
    Guardian means a person who is court appointed to be the guardian of a juvenile. 
    Juvenile means any person under the age of sixteen (16) years. 
    Owner/operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, limited liability company, or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment, including the employees, members or partners of an association, partnership, or limited liability company and the officers of a corporation. 
    Parent means a person who is a biological parent, adoptive parent, foster parent, stepparent, or any other person to whom legal custody has been given by court order. 
    Public place means any place that is generally open to and used by the public or a substantial group of the public, whether it be publicly or privately owned, including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, highways, alleys, rights-of-way, public vehicular areas and parking lots, transportation facilities, theaters, restaurants, shops, bowling alleys, schools and school grounds, places of business and amusement, playgrounds, parks, the common areas of apartment buildings, housing authority developments, office buildings, and other common areas open to or accessible to the public. 
    Remain means to linger or stay in a public place, to fail to leave a public place when requested to do so by a police officer, or to fail to leave the premises of an establishment when requested to do so by the owner/operator or an employee of the establishment. 
    Restricted hours . The time of night referred to in this article is based upon the prevailing standard of time, whether Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Saving Time, observed at that hour by the public in the city. 
    Restricted hours means: 
(1)  On any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday, 11:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and 
(2)  On any Friday, Saturday, or Sunday, 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. O-08-125, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Sec. 19-122. - Offenses. 
    Except as provided by section 19-123, the following offenses constitute a violation of this article: 
(1)  A juvenile commits an offense by being present in or remaining in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during the restricted hours. 
(2)  A parent or guardian of a juvenile commits an offense if he or she knowingly permits, or by lack of parental control, allows the juvenile to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during the restricted hours. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge that a parent or guardian should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a juvenile in that parent or guardian's legal custody. This requirement is intended to hold a parent or guardian to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an objective test: whether a reasonably responsible parent or guardian in the same or similar situation should have known that the juvenile was in a public place or on the premises of an establishment during the restricted hours. It shall be no defense that a parent or guardian was indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such juvenile. 
(3)  The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a juvenile to remain upon the premises of the establishment during the restricted hours. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge that an operator or employer should reasonably be expected to have concerning the patrons of an establishment. The standard for "knowingly" shall be applied through an objective test: whether a reasonable person in the operator's or employee's position should have known that the patron was a juvenile in violation of this article. 
(4)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person sixteen (16) years of age or older to aid or abet a juvenile in the violation of subsection (1) of this section. 
(5)  It shall be a violation of this article for a parent or guardian of a juvenile to refuse to take custody of the juvenile during the restricted hours. 
(Ord. No. O-08-125, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Sec. 19-123. - Exceptions. 
    A juvenile who is in a public place or establishment during the restricted hours shall not be in violation of this article if the juvenile is: 
(1)  Accompanied by his or her parent or guardian. 
(2)  Accompanied by an adult eighteen (18) years of age or older authorized by the parent or guardian of such juvenile to take the parent's or guardian's place in accompanying the juvenile for a designated period of time and purpose within a specified area. 
(3)  On an errand, using a direct route, at the direction of, and with a written statement from, the juvenile's parent or guardian until the hour of 12:30 a.m. 
(4)  In a motor vehicle with parental consent engaged in interstate travel through the city or originating or terminating in the city. 
(5)  Traveling in a motor vehicle with a parent or guardian, or traveling in a motor vehicle with an adult eighteen (18) years of age or older authorized by the parent or guardian of such juvenile to take the parent's or guardian's place in accompanying the juvenile for a designated period of time and purpose within a specified area. 
(6)  Engaged in a lawful employment activity, or using a direct route to or from a place of employment. 
(7)  Reacting or responding to an emergency. 
(8)  Attending or traveling to or from, by direct route, an official school, religious, or recreational activity that is supervised by adults and sponsored by a public or private school, the city or other governmental entity, a civic organization, or another similar entity that accepts responsibility for the juvenile. 
(9)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly. 
(10)  Married or emancipated. 
(Ord. No. O-08-125, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Sec. 19-124. - Defense. 
    An owner, operator, or employee of an establishment shall not be in violation of subsection 19-122(3) of this article if he or she promptly notified the police department that a juvenile was present on the premises of the establishment during the restricted hours and refused to leave. 
(Ord. No. O-08-125, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Sec. 19-125. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Before taking any enforcement action under this article, a police officer shall conduct a reasonable investigation to determine whether a juvenile in apparent violation of this article is shielded by one or more of the exceptions provided in section 19-123. 
(b)  The officer shall have an affirmative duty not to prepare a juvenile arrest report, issue a citation, or make an arrest under this article unless the officer reasonably believes, after due inquiry, that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no exception or defense in this article is available to the juvenile. 
(Ord. No. O-08-125, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Sec. 19-126. - Procedures. 
(a)  Confronting potential violators of this article. Upon observing a juvenile who is in apparent violation of this article, an officer should take the following steps: 
(1)  Request the juvenile's name, age, date of birth and address and, if necessary, provide the telecommunicator with the location of the potential violation, the number of persons involved and their identity or physical description. 
(2)  Should the individual be in violation of this article, ascertain why the youth is out, where he or she has been and where he or she is going. 
(3)  Inform the individual that he or she is in violation of this article. 
(4)  Determine from communications whether the individual has outstanding warrants and, if possible, whether he or she has been previously cited for a violation of this article. 
(5)  If the individual has two (2) prior violations of this article, particular consideration should be given to arrest as an alternative within the guidelines of this article. 
(6)  In all cases where a violation of this article has been identified, the officer shall complete the appropriate departmental record of the violation. 
(b)  Enforcement options. When a violation of this article has been identified, an officer may use reasonable discretion in determining an appropriate course of action. These options include directing the juvenile to proceed directly home, transporting the juvenile home, or arresting and detaining the juvenile until his or her parents or guardian can be reached for pickup. 
(1)  Directing a violator to proceed directly home is normally warranted for: 
a.  First offenses; 
b.  When the circumstances of the violation suggest a reasonable attempt on the part of the juvenile to conform with this article; or 
c.  When the officer feels that the individual will proceed home as directed. 
(2)  If directed to proceed directly home, the officer shall present a copy of the violation to the youth and provide counseling on the purpose and intent of this article and the potential police response to future violations. 
(3)  Transporting the juvenile home is normally warranted when: 
a.  The juvenile has more than one (1) violation of this article; 
b.  When there are indications that the juvenile has purposely ignored the provisions of this article; 
c.  When the officer has a reasonable suspicion, based on statements made or conduct observed, that the juvenile will not proceed home; 
d.  When the officer believes, after reasonable inquiry, that it is in the best interest of the juvenile that the officer make personal contact with the youth's parents or guardian; or 
(4)  When the juvenile is transported home, the parent or guardian should be contacted, informed of the specific circumstances of the violation, the nature and purpose of the law and potential consequences of future violations. A copy of the violation should be served on the parent or guardian, who should sign the original. Unwillingness of the parent or guardian to sign shall be noted on the violation or warning notice. 
(5)  Arrest of a juvenile for violation of this article should normally be made only after the juvenile has two (2) or more prior violations or when: 
a.  The officer has knowledge of the juvenile's past delinquent or criminal history that demonstrates a pattern of disregard for the law, 
b.  The circumstances of the offense, such as the time and location of the violation, provides reasonable suspicion of intent to commit additional delinquent or criminal acts, 
c.  The whereabouts of the parent or guardian cannot be determined in the exercise of reasonable diligence, or there are reasonable grounds to believe that the parent or guardian cannot provide supervision or control of the juvenile, or 
d.  The officer reasonably determines that no other appropriate options are available. 
e.  In all arrests, officers should clearly specify the basis for their arrest decision. 
f.  When a juvenile is arrested, he or she shall be transported to the appropriate holding area where his or her parent or guardian will be contacted as soon as possible for pickup. Such detention shall conform to the city's policy on legal detention of juveniles in terms of length, location of detention and nature of security used. The parent or guardian shall be provided the same information and notice of violation as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. O-08-125, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Sec. 19-127. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any juvenile who violates any section of this article is subject to being adjudicated delinquent. The court may, in its discretion, impose any dispositional alternatives that are authorized by the North Carolina Juvenile Code for any juvenile who is delinquent. 
(b)  Any person other than a juvenile who violates any section of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and imprisonment in the discretion of the court in accordance with G.S. § 14-4. 
(c)  In addition to any other penalty provided by this section, the parent or guardian having custody of a juvenile shall be liable and responsible for all costs incurred by the city for providing personnel to remain in the company of the juvenile who has been detained as a result of violation of this article when the parent or guardian does not pick up the juvenile within one (1) hour after receiving notice in person or by telephone that the city is detaining the juvenile for a violation of this article. The amount owed by the parent or guardian shall be based on the hourly wage of the city employee who is assigned to remain with the juvenile, plus the costs of the benefits for that employee. The city may collect the amounts due by any manner provided by law, including initiation of litigation to recover such amounts due and owing, plus reasonable attorneys fees and costs incurred. 
(Ord. No. O-08-125, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Secs. 19-128, 19-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SIDEWALK DINING 

Sec. 19-130. - Sidewalk dining permitted. 
    Any restaurant located in the central city area may serve food and beverages on adjacent city sidewalks and pedestrian ways upon the issuance of a sidewalk café permit and pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-40, § 1, 6-9-14; Ord. No. O-2014-58, § 1, 6-23-14) 
Sec. 19-131. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, which used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Central City Area means the city center of Rocky Mount as shown on a map on file with the city clerk of the city. 
    City means the City of Rocky Mount, North Carolina. 
    City manager means the city manager of the city or his or her designee. 
    Director of development services means director or department head for the department of development services for the city (also referred to as the director). 
    Pedestrian way means an improved public walk or passageway intended for use by pedestrians and adjacent to a restaurant, but not adjacent to any city street. 
    Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, association or other legal entity. 
    Restaurant means an establishment substantially engaged in the business of regularly and customarily preparing and serving meals, primarily to be eaten on the premises, including establishments such as restaurants, cafeterias, cafés, lunch stands, grills, snack bars, fast food businesses, and other establishments, such as drug stores, which have a lunch counter or other sections where food is sold to be eaten primarily on the premises. To qualify as a restaurant, an establishment's gross receipts from food and nonalcoholic beverages shall not be less than thirty (30) percent of the total gross receipts from food, nonalcoholic beverages, and alcoholic beverages. 
    Restaurant operator means the person operating a restaurant and its associated sidewalk café. As used in this article, this definition includes the owner, operator, or manager of the restaurant and associated sidewalk café, whether as property owner or a lessee or a tenant of the property on which the restaurant is located. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of the public way between the curb line of a public street and the adjacent property line of a restaurant that is reserved for and intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Sidewalk café means that area or portion of the sidewalk or pedestrian way immediately adjacent to an operating restaurant in which food and beverages prepared in the restaurant are served to members of the public, and which is operated under the same name and by the same restaurant operator as the adjacent restaurant pursuant to a sidewalk café permit issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-40, § 1, 6-9-14; Ord. No. O-2014-58, § 1, 6-23-14; Ord. No. O-2018-79, §§ 1, 2, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 19-132. - Application for permit. 
    Any person desiring to operate a sidewalk café shall complete and return to the director of development serivices' office an application for a sidewalk café, together with the application fee established by the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-40, § 1, 6-9-14; Ord. No. O-2014-58, § 1, 6-23-14; Ord. No. O-2018-79, § 2, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 19-133. - Issuance of permit. 
    The director of development services shall issue a permit for a sidewalk café as soon as reasonably possible and in any event within thirty (30) days from the date a completed application was submitted unless the director of development services finds in writing: 
(1)  The correct application fee has not been tendered to the city, and, in the case of a check, or bank draft, not honored with payment upon presentation; or 
(2)  That the operation of the sidewalk café as proposed by the application, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, this article and the city's building, zoning, and health regulations; or 
(3)  The applicant has failed to answer or falsely answered a question(s) or request for information on the application form provided. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-40, § 1, 6-9-14; Ord. No. O-2014-58, § 1, 6-23-14; Ord. No. O-2018-79, § 2, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 19-134. - Regulation governing the operation of sidewalk café. 
    Sidewalk cafés shall be operated in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  The sidewalk café must be associated with an operating restaurant such that it is under the same management and shares the same food preparation facilities, restroom facilities and other customer convenience facilities as the restaurant. The sidewalk café must be operated under the same name as the restaurant and may not be open or operated at any time when the restaurant is not open for business. Sidewalk cafés may not be operated earlier than 7:00 a.m. or later than 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 12:00 midnight on Fridays and Saturdays. 
(2)  The operation of the sidewalk café must be clearly incidental to the associated restaurant business. The seating capacity of the sidewalk café may not be more than fifty (50) percent of the interior seating capacity of the associated restaurant. 
(3)  The placement of tables, chairs, and other furnishing as shown in the drawing or site plan submitted with the application must be done in such a manner that at least four (4) feet of unobstructed space (as measured from the building face) remains on the sidewalk or pedestrian way for the passage of pedestrians. All fire exits or lanes must remain open and clear at all times, no table, chair, or any other obstruction may be placed therein. All applicable regulations pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act must be met. 
(4)  The restaurant operating the sidewalk café must front on and open onto the sidewalk or pedestrian way of the sidewalk café. The placement of tables, chairs, and other furnishings may not extend beyond the sidewalk or pedestrian way frontage of the associated restaurant or bar. With the written consent of the adjoining property owners and tenants, if any, the sidewalk café may extend onto the sidewalk or a pedestrian way abutting such adjoining property, but in no event shall the sidewalk café extend beyond any alleyway or vehicular entrance. 
(5)  The tables, chairs and other furnishing used in the sidewalk café shall not be anchored or permanently attached to the sidewalk in any way and shall be of a material that is easily movable. 
(6)  Unless expressly authorized by the city in writing the operation or furnishings of the sidewalk café shall involve no permanent attachments to, or alteration or encroachment upon, any street, sidewalk or pedestrian way, or to the exterior of the restaurant. 
(7)  The operation of the sidewalk café shall at all times be in accordance with the requirements of this article. At the direction of the director of development services any improperly placed or improperly sized furniture or barricade shall be removed. 
(8)  Each sidewalk café shall provide adequate trash receptacles for its patrons. At the end of each business day and during operating hours the operator shall remove all trash and debris of any sort from the area and the curb, and in additional shall remove from the sidewalk alongside and abutting properties any trash or debris originating as a result of the operation of the sidewalk café. 
(9)  Any alcoholic beverages permitted under state law to be sold in the associated restaurant may be sold in the sidewalk café. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-40, § 1, 6-9-14; Ord. No. O-2014-58, § 1, 6-23-14; Ord. No. O-2018-79, § 2, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 19-135. - Permit revocation. 
    The city manager may revoke a permit issued pursuant to this section, if he or she finds that the restaurant or restaurant operator has: 
(1)  Deliberately misrepresented or provided false information in the permit application; 
(2)  Violated any law, regulation, or ordinance regarding the possession, sale, transportation or consumption of intoxicating beverages or controlled substances; 
(3)  Operated the sidewalk café in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or to constitute a hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare; including failure to keep the sidewalk café area clean and free of refuse and trash; 
(4)  Failed to maintain any health, business, ABC, or other permit or license required by law; or 
(5)  Operated the restaurant or bar or sidewalk café in violation of this ordinance or of any city, county, state, or federal law, ordinance, or regulation. 
    Any applicant whose permit is revoked under this article shall receive a statement, in writing, outlining the reasons for denial of the permit. The applicant may appeal the denial of the permit to the city manager within fifteen (15) working days after the date of the written denial. The determination of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-40, § 1, 6-9-14; Ord. No. O-2014-58, § 1, 6-23-14) 
Sec. 19-136. - Reservation of rights. 
    The city reserves the right to require any sidewalk café established pursuant to this article upon not less than five (5) days written notice, or upon such shorter time as required by the circumstances, to cease part or all of its operation in the sidewalk café in order to allow for construction, maintenance, or repair of any street, sidewalk, utility, or public building by the city, its agents, or employees, or by any other governmental entity or public utility. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-40, § 1, 6-9-14; Ord. No. O-2014-58, § 1, 6-23-14) 
Sec. 19-137. - Term, transfer, and renewal. 
    Sidewalk café permits shall: 
(1)  Be issued for a period not to exceed one (1) year and shall expire on June 30 of each year. Permits may be renewed annually upon the payment of the renewal fee established by the city council provided the sidewalk café continues to be operated in compliance with this article. The right of appeal for the denial of a permit renewal shall be the same as for a permit revocation. 
(2)  Be in addition to any other licenses required pursuant to the city code. 
(3)  Not be transferable or assignable. 
(4)  Be subject to site inspection prior to initial permit issuance as well as annual permit renewal. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-40, § 1, 6-9-14; Ord. No. O-2014-58, § 1, 6-23-14) 
Sec. 19-138. - Severability. 
    In the event that any provision of this article, or any part thereof, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction on its face, or as applied, such holding shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of any of the remaining provisions of this article, or any part thereof, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance or of said provision as applied to any other person or circumstance. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the city council that this article would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective provisions not been included herein. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-40, § 1, 6-9-14; Ord. No. O-2014-58, § 1, 6-23-14) 
ARTICLE VIII. - DOWNTOWN PUBLIC ART 

Sec. 19-139. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. For definition purposes, a commercial message is any message that advertises a business conducted, services rendered, or goods produced or sold: 
    CCRP Design Committee (CCRPDC). A group of citizens selected to improve the physical appearance of Downtown, including the reviewing and approving of installations of public art, in the downtown area of Rocky Mount. 
    Downtown public art area. For the purposes of the CCRPDC, the downtown public art area is defined as that physical area bounded by and inclusive of the rights-of-way of Franklin Street to the west, Falls Road to the northeast, Goldleaf Street to the north, Atlantic Avenue and Arlington Street to the east, and East Raleigh Boulevard and West Raleigh Boulevard to the south, and described more particularly as: Beginning at the intersection of Falls Rd and N Franklin St, thence in a southerly direction with N Franklin St to the intersection with S. Franklin St. Thence with S Franklin St. in a southerly direction to the intersection with W. Raleigh Blvd. Thence in a easterly direction with W. Raleigh Blvd. to the intersection of Arlington St. Thence in a northerly direction with Arlington St. to the intersection of Arlington St., Tarboro St. and Atlantic Ave. Thence in a northerly direction with Atlantic Ave. to the intersection of E. Goldleaf St. Thence in a westerly direction with E. Goldleaf St. to the intersection with W. Goldleaf St. Thence with W. Goldleaf St. to the intersection of Falls Rd. Thence in a northerly direction with Falls Rd. to the intersection with N. Franklin St. the point and place of beginning. 
    Original art mural. A one-of-a-kind, hand-painted, hand-tiled, or digitally printed image on the exterior wall of a building that does not contain any commercial message as stated in section 709, of the Rocky Mount Sign Ordinance. 
    Public art. Artwork, mural, sculpture, figure, statue, model, display, structure or similar entity staged in or on public or private property for view from a public right-of-way, street, alley or sidewalk. 
    Sculpture. A three-dimensional work of art, especially by carving, modeling, or casting. 
    Vintage original art mural. An original art mural that existed prior to the operative date of this definition. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-4, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 19-140. - CCRP Design Committee Membership (CCRPDC). 
    The committee shall have five (5) voting members and five (5) city staff member as follows: 
(1)  Five (5) voting members will be the CCRP design committee. 
(2)  Staff support members will include: the City of Rocky Mount Downtown development manager, the Imperial Centre Visual Arts Specialist, one (1) City of Rocky Mount department of development services representative, one (1) City of Rocky Mount Engineering Department representative, and one (1) City of Rocky Mount Police Department representative. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-4, § 1, 1-12-15; Ord. No. O-2018-79, § 1, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 19-141. - Submission procedures. 
(a)  Proposals for public art shall be submitted to the downtown development manager, or their designee, by the property owner(s) of the proposed installation location. 
(b)  The submission shall, at a minimum, include a two-dimensional color rendering of the proposed art work to scale and labeled with dimensions. The rendering shall have a minimum size of eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches, and the scale shall be a minimum of one (1) inch equal one (1) foot. 
(c)  The committee will encourage, but not require, submission of three-dimensional models of proposed three-dimensional public art. 
(d)  Public art application. No person, firm or corporation may commence installation of public art on a site without first obtaining approval as provided in this section. Public art installed without an approved application shall be considered a public nuisance. The applicant must submit an application for public art to the downtown development manager for review. The applicant may not commence any public art installation before the application has been approved. A separate application is required for each art installation on a site. The application is a binding contract between the applicant and the city. 
    General application requirements. An application to install public art must be made in writing on forms furnished by the downtown manger. Three (3) copies of the application form and required submittal items shall be provided. The application must contain the general information specified in subsection A, below. 
A.  Required materials. 
(1)  Completed public art application form, including all appropriate signatures. 
(2)  Building elevation drawn to scale, and one (1) eight and one-half (8.5) inch by eleven (11) inch reduction suitable for photocopying, that identifies: 
a.  The façade on which the mural is proposed; 
b.  The location of existing and proposed murals; 
c.  The mural dimensions; 
d.  The height of the mural above grade; and 
e.  The building eave/cornice and roof line. 
(3)  Site plan drawn to scale and one (1) eight and one-half (8.5) inch by eleven (11) inch reduction suitable for photocopying that identifies: 
a.  Property lines; 
b.  Building location and façade on which the mural will be located; 
c.  Names of streets that abut site; and 
d.  North arrow. 
(4)  Written description of the type of mural (painted, mosaic, etc) and details showing how the mural is affixed to the wall surface. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-4, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 19-142. - Review parameters. 
(a)  The CCRPDC shall consider the following for each public art submission: 
(1)  Size. 
(2)  Scale. 
(3)  Content. 
(4)  Color. 
(5)  Medium or media. 
(6)  Originality. 
(7)  Installation location. 
(b)  The CCRPDC shall deny approval of any proposed public art that includes any of the following: 
(1)  Commercial advertising. 
(2)  Commercial signage. 
(3)  Commercial logo(s). 
(4)  Political mascot(s). 
(5)  Vulgar or obscene content. 
(6)  Any design element that is could pose a copyright or trademark infringement. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-4, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 19-143. - Approval procedures. 
(a)  Proposals submitted to the downtown development manager, or their designee, by the first day of any month shall be reviewed by the CCRPDC at the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(b)  Approval of any proposed public art shall require approval by majority of the CCRPDC membership (i.e., five (5) members). 
(c)  Public art already in place as of the adoption of this document shall not be required to be submitted for CCRPDC approval and may remain in place, unless altered or expanded upon. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-4, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 19-144. - Appeal procedures. 
    The property owner of any Public Art request denied approval may appeal the CCRPDC's decision to the Central City Revitalization Panel (CCRP). The CCRP's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-4, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 19-145. - Installation and maintenance. 
(a)  The property owner and/or the artist shall be responsible for all labor and materials necessary to install the approved public art in a safe and secure manner in accordance with all city, state and federal regulations. 
(b)  The property owner shall notify the downtown development manager, or their designee, a minimum of one (1) week prior to installation. 
(c)  The property owner shall be responsible for all maintenance required for any public art located on his or her property. 
(d)  The property owner shall be responsible for the removal of any public art located on his or her property in the event that it is damaged, has its integrity compromised, or poses a health or safety hazard to persons or property. 
(e)  If the property owner fails to maintain the art and subsequently does not take responsibility for its removal, the City will address it as a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-4, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Sec. 19-146. - Design standards. 
(a)  Location of mural on the building. Murals are permitted on the following building walls: 
(1)  Central City Historic District. Within the Central City Historic District, murals are permitted only on non-street facing walls and street-facing walls that are more than twenty (20) feet from a street lot line. 
(2)  All other areas. Murals are permitted on any wall. 
(b)  Qualifying wall surfaces for murals. 
(1)  Murals are permitted only on the flat planes of walls. Murals are not allowed on walls made of stone, or unpainted brick, per the HPC standards. 
(2)  Murals are permitted only on walls that have not had a specific material, color or texture reviewed and approved through CCRPDC Review unless a new CCRPDC Review has allowed the mural to change the originally approved color, texture, or material. 
(3)  Mural areas will not be painted on or obscure architectural features such as: windows, doors (other than egress-only), pilasters, cornices, window, door or other building trim, feature bands, and other recessed or projecting features. 
(c)  Number of mural permits per building wall. Only one (1) mural permit may be obtained per wall. 
(d)  Mural size and materials. 
(1)  The top of the mural may be no higher than the floor level of the third floor for projects on buildings greater than two (2) stories. 
(2)  Minimum size for a mural area is thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(e)  Hierarchy of regulations. 
(1)  Any ground floor window area requirements triggered at any time for the portion of a building displaying a mural will require the removal of the mural. 
(2)  If a mural installation includes any changes to a building that would otherwise require CCRPDC review, those changes must be approved through CCRPDC review prior to approval of the public art application. Examples include a new wall material, lighting, extensions of the mural above the existing height of the building, electrical changes, etc. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-4, § 1, 1-12-15) 
Chapter 20 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate traffic, § 10(h); codification of traffic ordinances in map books, § 486; traffic regulation, § 460 et seq. 
Cross reference- Animals, Ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; fire lines established, § 8-33; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; trucks delivering fish shall have adequate sanitary drainage, § 10-1; distribution of handbill regulations, § 10-51; spillage from any vehicles prohibited, § 10-52; loud or disturbing noises including bicycle and vehicle noises prohibited, § 10-152; abandoned vehicles prohibited, § 10-176 et seq.; housing, Ch. 11; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 13; peddlers and solicitors, § 13-66 et seq.; parks and recreation, Ch. 15; solid waste, Ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, Ch. 19; parades and demonstrations, § 19-81 et seq.; subdivisions, App. A; zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Motor vehicles and traffic generally, G.S. Ch. 20; authority of city relative to traffic, G.S. § 20-169; streets, traffic and parking, G.S. § 160A-296 et seq.; power to regulate the use of streets, G.S. § 160A-296; speed restrictions, G.S. §§ 20-141(e), 20-158.1, 20-169; authority of city to control traffic on streets, etc., G.S. § 160A-300. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized emergency vehicle means vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles and such ambulances designated or authorized by the chief of police. 
    Block means a portion of any street located between two (2) street intersections. 
    Business district means the territory contiguous to a highway when fifty (50) percent or more of frontage thereon for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business. 
    Crosswalk means that portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at intersections; any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
    Driver means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
    Intersection means the area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral curb lines or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of two (2) or more highways which join one another at an angle whether or not one such highway crosses the other. 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails. 
    Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
    Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this city. 
    Official traffic-control devices means all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected by authority of the city council or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
    Official traffic signal means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
    Park means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading. 
    Pedestrian means any person afoot. 
    Police officer means every officer of the municipal police department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
    Private road or driveway means every road or driveway not open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Public conveyance means any vehicle other than a taxicab or railroad train for transporting for fare. 
    Railroad means a carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars, operated upon stationary rails. 
    Railroad train means a steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars. 
    Residence district means the territory contiguous to a highway not comprising a business district when the frontage on such highway for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is mainly occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for dwelling purposes. 
    Right-of-way means the privilege of the immediate use of the roadway. 
    Roadway means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
    Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Standing means any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not. 
    Stop, when required, means complete cessation of movement. 
    Stop or stopping, when prohibited, means any stopping of a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purpose of vehicular traffic. 
    Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and other conveyances either singly or together while using any street for purposes of travel. 
    Traffic signs means authorized signs or markers which are assumed to be permanently or temporarily placed or erected or installed at certain places and which purport to give notice of direction or to convey a prohibition or warning; the presence of such signs, though not compulsory, is generally dictated by necessity or common sense, with a view to furtherance of public safety. 
    Truck means any vehicle which exceeds twenty-one (21) feet in length. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks; provided, that for the purpose of this chapter, a bicycle or a ridden animal shall be deemed a vehicle. 
(Code 1967, § 19-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 20-2. - Obedience to chapter provisions. 
    It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 19-2) 
Sec. 20-3. - Placing advertising on motor vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall distribute advertising or printed matter of any kind by placing the same in or on any unoccupied motor vehicle that is parked on any street or in other public places. 
(b)  This section shall in no way affect the usual and customary sales and delivery of newspapers and periodicals, and shall not prevent the distribution of advertising matter in business buildings or private residences. 
(Code 1967, §§ 3-7, 3-8) 
Secs. 20-4-20-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOTOR VEHICLE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authorized, G.S. § 160A-213. 

Sec. 20-26. - Imposed. 
    Each owner of any vehicle, private or for hire, public dray, taxi, truck or other motor vehicle, resident therein within the city limits, and for which a state license plate or tag is issued, shall pay an annual privilege tax in an amount determined by the city council and published in the Manual of City Policies. Ownership shall be determined annually as of January 1. For purposes of this section, "resident therein" shall mean the vehicle's fixed and permanent situs; when the owner or operator is a resident of the city and the vehicle is garaged herein; or, if used as a common carrier or for hire, has its base of operation within the city. It shall be a rebuttable presumption, if a vehicle is registered by the state department of motor vehicles at an address within the city, that such address is the place of residence for the vehicle. 
(Code 1967, § 19-27; Ord. No. 0-90-37, § 1, 6-4-90) 
Sec. 20-27. - Collection. 
    The privilege tax imposed by this article shall be based on a fiscal year of July 1 to June 30 and shall be billed and collected by the collector of revenue in the same manner as property taxes. 
(Code 1967, § 19-28) 
Secs. 20-28-20-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 20-46. - Driving through funeral procession. 
    No vehicle shall be driven through a funeral procession, except fire department vehicles, police patrols and ambulances responding to calls. 
(Code 1967, § 19-61) 
Cross reference- Parades and processions generally, § 19-81 et seq. 
Sec. 20-47. - Driving over closed streets. 
    No person shall drive any motor car or other vehicle upon a part of any street or sidewalk in the city that has been closed to public traffic for the purpose of paving or repairing the same, until after the city manager has declared the same open for traffic. In case of emergency, the city manager may in the exercise of his discretion grant to any person a permit for the limited and necessary use of any part of a street or sidewalk as has been closed to public traffic as set out above. 
(Code 1967, § 19-65) 
Sec. 20-48. - Corner-cutting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle upon or across any sidewalk, driveway, filling station or other commercial driveway or other similar surface located at the corner of any intersection protected by a traffic light or other traffic-control sign, signal or device for the purpose of evading the regulations governing the turning of motor vehicles at intersections. 
(Code 1967, § 19-66) 
Sec. 20-49. - Quiet zones. 
    Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected or installed as a quiet zone pursuant to section 20-76, no person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning device of the vehicle, except in an emergency. 
(Code 1967, § 19-92) 
Sec. 20-50. - Play streets. 
    Whenever authorized signs are placed designating any street or part thereof as a play street pursuant to section 20-76, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such designated street, except persons who have business or who reside within the designated area. All such persons shall exercise the greatest care when driving upon any play street. 
(Code 1967, § 19-93) 
Sec. 20-51. - One-way streets. 
    Upon those streets and parts of streets designated as one-way streets in accord with section 20-76, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction, when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1967, § 19-91) 
Sec. 20-52. - Driving or parking on sidewalks prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to drive an automobile on the sidewalks of the city except for the purpose of crossing the same over designated driveways, and it shall be unlawful to park an automobile on any sidewalk, including that portion of sidewalk designated as a driveway. 
(Ord. No. 0-94-69, § 1, 12-12-94) 
Secs. 20-53-20-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of town to regulate traffic by means of traffic-control devices, G.S. § 20-169. 

Sec. 20-76. - Designation of traffic zones, through streets, etc.; erection, installation of devices. 
(a)  The city manager shall have the power to designate, lay off and indicate, with the approval of the city council, by appropriate signs and markings, parking spaces and zones; no-parking zones; limited parking zones; zones in which vehicles shall be parked at an angle to the curb; loading zones; safety zones; school zones; hospital zones; quiet zones; traffic zones other than the above; speed limits; truck routes; through streets; stop streets and intersections; yield right-of-way intersections; one-way streets; streets to be laned for traffic; play streets; bus stops and taxicab stands. He shall also have the power to designate and indicate, with the approval of the city council, intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by traffic signals, intersections at which left turns and/or right turns and U-turns shall be prohibited, and intersections at which markers, buttons or other indications shall be placed to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles traversing or turning at such intersections. 
(b)  Whenever any designation is made in accord with this section, the city manager shall erect and install such signs, markings, lines, signals and other traffic-control devices as may be necessary to clearly indicate such designation and to put drivers of vehicles on notice of the restriction, limitation or prohibition resulting from such designation. 
(c)  All designations made pursuant to this section shall be codified by entry upon the map book entitled Traffic Control Ordinance Map. The map book shall be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 19-77) 
Sec. 20-77. - Obedience to devices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or use a vehicle upon the streets of the city contrary to any signs, signals or other traffic-control devices that are placed upon the streets for the purpose of directing traffic, except upon direction of a police officer and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 19-78) 
Sec. 20-78. - Necessity of signs for enforcement. 
    No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective without signs being placed to give notice thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 19-79) 
Sec. 20-79. - Moving or damaging devices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to move, deface or otherwise damage any sign, signal or other traffic-control device placed upon the streets of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 19-80) 
Secs. 20-80-20-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SPEED REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Jurisdiction over state highways within the city, § 460(a), (b). 
State Law reference- Speed limits and powers of local authorities relative thereto, G.S. § 20-141. 

Sec. 20-96. - Maximum limits generally. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle on a street or highway within the city at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of the following speeds: 
(1)  Twenty (20) miles per hour in any business district; 
(2)  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour in any residential district; 
(3)  Forty-five (45) miles per hour in places other than those named in paragraphs (1) and (2) above for: 
a.  All vehicles other than passenger cars, regular passenger vehicles, pickup trucks of less than one-ton capacity, and school buses loaded with children; and 
b.  All vehicles of whatever kind which are engaged in towing, drawing or pushing another vehicle; provided this paragraph shall not apply to vehicles engaged in towing, drawing or pushing trailers with a gross weight of not more than three thousand (3,000) pounds; 
(4)  Fifty-five (55) miles per hour in places other than those named in paragraphs (1) and (2) above for passenger cars, regular passenger-carrying vehicles, and pickup trucks of less than one-ton capacity; 
(5)  Whenever the state highway commission determines upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that a higher maximum speed than those set forth in this section is reasonable and safe under the conditions found to exist upon any part of a highway inside the city limits, it shall determine and declare a reasonable and safe speed limit, not to exceed a maximum speed of sixty-five (65) miles per hour. 
(c)  The fact that the speed of a vehicle is lower than the foregoing limits shall not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reasons of weather or street conditions, and speed shall be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the street or highway, and to avoid causing injury to any person or property either on or off the street or highway, in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(Code 1967, § 19-105) 
Sec. 20-97. - Variation of maximum limits. 
    The city council may alter the maximum speed limit as established in section 20-96 on any street or portion thereof which is not a part of the state highway system and which is not maintained by the state highway commission in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 20-141(f). No such alteration shall be less than twenty-five (25) miles per hour. No such alteration of the speed limits shall become or remain effective unless signs have been conspicuously placed giving notice of such speed limit for such street. 
(Code 1967, § 19-106) 
Sec. 20-98. - School zones. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any vehicle at a speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour in any school zone during a period of time of thirty (30) minutes prior to and thirty (30) minutes following the times when the school begins and ends its daily schedule. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, a school zone shall be deemed to be that portion of any street abutting any school property for a distance not to exceed five hundred (500) feet on either side of the school property. 
(Code 1967, § 19-107) 
Sec. 20-99. - Exemptions. 
    The speed limitations set forth in this article shall not apply to vehicles when operated with due regard for safety under the direction of the police in the chase or apprehension of violators of the law or of persons charged with or suspected of any such violation, nor to fire department or fire patrol vehicles when traveling in response to a fire alarm, nor to public or private ambulances when traveling in emergencies, nor to vehicles operated by the duly authorized officers, agents and employees of the state utilities commission when traveling in performance of their duties in regulating and checking the traffic and speed of buses, trucks, motor vehicles and motor vehicle carriers subject to the regulations and jurisdiction of the state utilities commission. This exemption shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequence of a reckless disregard of the safety of others. 
(Code 1967, § 19-108) 
Secs. 20-100-20-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 

Sec. 20-121. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  The penalty for parking in a parking area for longer than the maximum time established by this article shall be as approved by the city council and set forth in the City's Administrative Policy Manual, Policy No. X.6.7 entitled "Parking Violation Fees." 
(b)  The penalty for all other violations of this article relating to the parking of automobiles or other vehicles shall be as approved by the city council and set forth in the City's Administrative Policy Manual, Policy No. X.6.7 entitled "Parking Violation Fees", except that the penalty for violating G.S. 20-37.6(e) (1)-(3), Enforcement of handicapped parking privileges, shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(c)  Upon receiving a citation serving as notice of a violation of the parking regulations set forth in this article, the owner or operator of the vehicle found in violation shall be responsible for the penalties herein established. 
(d)  Any penalty for a parking violation that is not paid within ten (10) days of issuance of the citation will accrue an additional penalty of five dollars ($5.00) for each ten (10) days that it remains unpaid for the first thirty (30) days. Any penalty for a parking violation that is not paid within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the citation will accrue an additional penalty of five dollars ($5.00) per month, up to a maximum total penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) per infraction for all violations except that for violations of G.S. 20-37.6(e)(1)-(3). Enforcement of handicapped parking privileges, the maximum total penalty shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per infraction. When the fifty dollar ($50.00) or one hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) maximum as applicable is reached for either a single violation or more than one (1) violation for the same owner or operator, such owner or operator will be notified in writing of the intent of the city to pursue the claim through an appropriate civil action. Once the civil action is initiated, any fees involved in the civil action will be added to the settlement of each action. 
(e)  The penalties imposed under this section shall be collected solely as civil penalties and no parking penalties or fines shall be enforced through criminal misdemeanor process, nor shall they be enforced as infractions pursuant to G.S. § 14-4. This section shall not be construed as limiting any authority of the city to tow or remove any vehicle in violation of any provision for which the removal is otherwise authorized and to charge the owner of such vehicle with the costs of removal and storage. 
(Code 1967, § 19-123; Ord. No. 0-89-45, § 1, 6-26-89; Ord. No. 0-90-67, §§ 1, 2, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 0-96-29, § 1, 6-10-96; Ord. No. 0-2007-55, §§ 1.a., 1.b., 6-11-07) 
Editor's note- Section 2(b) of Ord. No. 0-2007-55, provided that this amendment shall be effective on and after July 1, 2007. 
Charter reference- Civil fines in lieu of criminal penalties, § 464. 
Sec. 20-122. - Moving vehicle of another into illegal parking area or position. 
    No person shall move a vehicle not owned by such person into any prohibited parking area or sufficiently away from a curb to make such distance unlawful. 
(Code 1967, § 19-124) 
Sec. 20-123. - Manner of leaving parking space. 
    When a parked vehicle is moved from its parking space, the driver thereof shall move out in the direction in which the vehicle is headed or, if it is parked at an angle with the curb, the driver shall back out on that angle until he has cleared other parked vehicles and shall then proceed in the direction in which the vehicle is most nearly headed. 
(Code 1967, § 19-125) 
Sec. 20-124. - Prohibited for certain purposes. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any street for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying it for sale; 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency; 
(3)  Storing such vehicle by a garage, dealer or other person when such storage is not incident to the bona fide use and operation of the vehicle; 
(4)  Storing any detached trailer or van when the towing unit has been disconnected; 
(5)  Advertising. 
(Code 1967, § 19-128) 
Sec. 20-125. - Stopping with left side of vehicle to curb. 
    No vehicle shall stop with its left side to the curb in the business district, except that on one-way streets vehicles shall stop headed in the direction of traffic. 
(Code 1967, § 19-129) 
Sec. 20-126. - Methods of parking. 
(a)  Parallel parking. Except as provided in subsection (b), all vehicles shall park parallel to the curb and not more than twelve (12) inches therefrom. 
(b)  Angle parking. On streets or parts of streets designated and marked as zones for angle parking as provided in section 20-76, automobiles and other vehicles shall be parked at an angle to the curb as indicated by such markings. 
(c)  Parking between lines. On any street that is marked off with lines indicating the parking spaces for vehicles, vehicles shall be parked between such lines and it shall be unlawful for any person to park outside such lines. 
(Code 1967, § 19-130) 
Sec. 20-127. - Parking in prohibited zones generally. 
    When signs are placed, erected or installed giving notice thereof, or the curbing or street has been painted yellow or red in lieu of such signs, no person shall park a vehicle at any time in any zone designated as a no-parking zone as provided in section 20-76. If parking is prohibited in such zone only between certain hours, this section shall apply only between such hours, as indicated on the signs erected in such zone. 
(Code 1967, § 19-131) 
Sec. 20-128. - Parking in limited parking zone. 
    Whenever a limited parking zone is designated in accord with section 20-76 limiting the times and conditions under which vehicles may be parked, no person shall park any vehicle in such zone except in accord with the signs and markings erected therein. 
(Code 1967, § 19-132) 
Sec. 20-129. - Parking in bus stops, taxicab stands. 
    Whenever any bus stop or taxicab stand is designated and marked as provided in section 20-76, no automobile or other vehicle shall be parked therein, except those for which the space or stand has been designated. 
(Code 1967, § 19-133) 
Sec. 20-130. - Parking in reserved spaces. 
    Whenever any parking space is designated as being reserved for law enforcement officers, no vehicle shall be parked therein except a vehicle for which the space is reserved. 
(Code 1967, § 19-134) 
Sec. 20-131. - Parking or leaving transport trucks unattended. 
    Transport vehicles containing flammable or combustible liquids or flammable gas or any material defined as hazardous in accordance with the North Carolina State Fire Prevention Code shall not be parked or left unattended on a street, highway, avenue or alley, on any residential streets or within five hundred (500) feet of a residential area, apartment or hotel complex, educational facility, hospital or care facility, or on any mercantile or assembly parking lots or places that would present an extreme life hazard except when such parking is in connection with actual loading or unloading of the vehicle. 
Exception: The operator of any vehicle as designated in this section shall be allowed no more than one (1) hour for a meal break. Vehicles may not park upon any street, highway, avenue or alley, on any residential streets or within five hundred (500) feet of a residential area, apartment or hotel complex, educational facility, hospital, care facility or any shopping center during such break. 
(Code 1967, § 19-137; Ord. No. 0-2005-26, § 1, 4-11-05) 
Cross reference- Trucks and other commercial vehicles, § 20-181 et seq. 
Sec. 20-132. - Backing to curb. 
    In no case shall the driver or person in charge of any vehicle permit the same to remain backed to the curb, except when actually loading or unloading. 
(Code 1967, § 19-140) 
Sec. 20-133. - Loading zones-Generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or permit the same to remain parked in any loading zone designated and marked as provided in section 20-76 between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. except for the immediate loading and unloading of merchandise. 
(Code 1967, § 19-141) 
Sec. 20-134. - Same-Buses. 
    Only intracity buses may stop and load or unload passengers in loading or unloading zones specifically marked and designated therefor as provided in section 20-76. No stops for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers by such buses shall be made on any street in the business section of the city except as so designated. Buses may stop at any corner in the residential sections of the city for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers, except as so designated. On streets with three (3) lane markings at intersections, the stop must be made at least one hundred (100) feet from the intersection. 
(Code 1967, § 19-142) 
Sec. 20-135. - Use of parking lots. 
(a)  Definitions. The term "parking lot" for the purposes of this section, means any area within the city on which more than five (5) automobiles may be parked and shall include public parking lots and those parking lots which are for the principal purpose of providing parking during business hours for shopping centers, stores, restaurants, drive-ins, theaters and other business or commercial establishments. 
(b)  Congregation on premises. It shall be unlawful for more than five (5) people to congregate on any one (1) parking lot in the city between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., if the closest part of the parking lot is within three hundred (300) feet of a private residence, except for the purpose of patronizing a business establishment which is actually open for business between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(c)  Enumeration of offenses. It shall be unlawful for any person on a parking lot in the city between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., to do one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Talk in a loud or boisterous manner; 
(2)  Drink beer or any kind of alcoholic beverage; 
(3)  Throw any type of bottle, can, container, trash or paper on the parking lot; 
(4)  Use profanity or cursing in such a manner that those standing in the immediate vicinity of the person may hear the profanity or cursing; 
(5)  Make such noise or disturbance that persons living in homes or other dwelling accommodations within three hundred (300) feet of the parking lot are disturbed in their place of living and deprived of their peace and quiet. 
(Code 1967, § 19-143) 
Sec. 20-136. - Parking of certain trucks in residential areas. 
    It shall be unlawful to park on a city street for a period greater than two (2) hours any vehicle having a length in excess of twenty-five (25) feet, or in excess of ten (10) feet in height, within a distance of three hundred (300) feet of any dwelling or residence within the corporate limits of the city. This section shall not apply to trucks immediately delivering items to or receiving items from dwellings or residences. 
(Code 1967, § 19-144; Ord. No. 0-92-42, § 1, 6-1-92) 
Sec. 20-137. - City-owned parking lots-Authority to designate areas. 
    The city manager shall have the power to designate, lay off and indicate in city-owned parking lots, with the approval of the city council, by appropriate signs and markings, parking spaces, no parking areas, limited parking areas, parking spaces for law enforcement officers, parking spaces for city vehicles, parking spaces for city employees, and other conditions under which vehicles may be parked thereon. 
(Code 1967, § 19-174) 
Sec. 20-138. - Same-Erection, installation of devices indicating designations. 
    Whenever any designation is made in accord with section 20-137, the city manager shall erect and install such signs, markings, lines and other devices as may be necessary to clearly indicate such designation and to put drivers of vehicles on notice of the restriction, limitation or prohibition resulting from such designation. 
(Code 1967, § 19-175) 
Sec. 20-139. - Same-Violations; penalty. 
    Upon receiving a citation, serving as notice of a violation of the parking regulations set forth in sections 20-137 and 20-138, the owner or operator of the vehicle found in violation shall be responsible for the penalties established in section 20-121. 
(Code 1967, § 19-176; Ord. No. 0-89-45, § 2, 6-26-89) 
Sec. 20-140. - Same-Removal, impoundment of vehicles for violation; costs; disposition of unclaimed vehicles. 
(a)  Whenever a police officer finds a vehicle parked in violation of sections 20-137 and 20-138, such officer may, with the approval of the chief of police or desk sergeant on duty, have the vehicle removed to the city garage by a wrecker and the vehicle shall be held there until it is claimed by the legal owner or is otherwise disposed of, as provided by this section or other applicable law. 
(b)  Whenever any vehicle is so removed and impounded, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to notify the owner thereof promptly. The owner may redeem and repossess the vehicle upon payment of the costs and expenses incident to the impounding. If the owner of the vehicle is unknown, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to promptly advertise the impounding of such vehicle once in a newspaper published in the city. The owner may redeem and repossess the vehicle upon payment of the cost and expenses incident to the impounding and advertising. 
(c)  If at the end of thirty (30) days from the date of the impounding of such vehicle the owner thereof has not claimed the same and paid the charges herein provided, the chief of police shall advertise and sell the vehicle pursuant to the provisions of G.S. Ch. 20, § 77 governing storage charges insofar as the same are applicable to the vehicle to be sold for the towing and storage charges thereon. 
(Code 1967, § 19-177) 
Sec. 20-141. - Removal of markings used to enforce parking regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erase or otherwise remove or obscure any mark or other indication placed on a tire or other portion of a motor vehicle by a person authorized to enforce the parking regulations of the city for the purpose of aiding such person in determining the length of time a motor vehicle has been parked in a particular location. 
(b)  There shall be a civil penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the violation of this section. Upon receiving a citation, which shall serve as notice of a violation of this section, the person found in violation shall be responsible for the penalties herein established and shall make payment thereof to the city within ten (10) days of the issuance of the citation. 
(c)  Any penalty for a violation of this section that is not paid within ten (10) days of issuance will accrue an additional penalty of five dollars ($5.00) per ten (10) days it remains unpaid for the first thirty (30) days. Any penalty that is not paid within thirty (30) days of issuance will accrue an additional penalty of five dollars ($5.00) per month, up to a total of forty-five dollars ($45.00) per infraction. When the forty-five dollar ($45.00) maximum is reached for either a single violation or more than one violation for the same person, he/she will be notified in writing of the intent of the city to pursue claims through appropriate civil action. Once a civil action is initiated, any fees involved in the civil action will be added to the settlement of each action. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-27, § 1, 3-20-89) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 0-89-27, § 1, adopted March 20, 1989, amended the 1967 Code by the addition of § 19-145 and at the discretion of the editor said provisions have been included herein as § 20-141. 
Secs. 20-142-20-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BICYCLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Loud or disturbing noises including bicycle and vehicle noises prohibited, § 10-152. 
State Law reference- Lights and lighting equipment, G.S. § 20-129. 

Sec. 20-161. - Operation on sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle upon any sidewalk in any business or commercial area, including the fire district, in the city. 
(Code 1967, § 6-4) 
Sec. 20-162. - Clinging to moving vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person while riding a bicycle to hold on to a moving automobile, truck or other vehicle. 
(Code 1967, § 6-5) 
Sec. 20-163. - Riding double. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of a bicycle when upon a street to carry any other person on the handlebar, frame or other part of the bicycle, and it shall be unlawful for any person to so ride upon a bicycle. 
(Code 1967, § 6-6) 
Secs. 20-164-20-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TRUCKS AND OTHER COMMERCIAL VEHICLES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Trucks delivering fish shall have adequate sanitary drainage, § 10-1; abandoned vehicles prohibited, § 10-176 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, Ch. 19; streets, § 19-36 et seq.; parking of gasoline tank trucks restricted, § 20-131. 

Sec. 20-181. - Truck routes. 
(a)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section: 
(1)  Cargo means any property transported by truck. 
(2)  Direction sign means the customary highway marker designating the highway route number or that a certain direction should be followed to reach a given destination. 
(3)  Intersection of routes means the point reached on a highway within the city at which a direction sign indicating that a turn should be made from one route to another is located. 
(4)  Local truck means any truck having three (3) or more axles which enters, leaves or operates within the city for the purpose of either collecting or discharging cargo or for the purpose of either collecting or discharging passengers within the city. 
(5)  Local truck route means those routes or streets established in subsection (d) and designated by signs as local truck routes. 
(6)  Operator means the person physically operating a truck, or a person therein and directing its operation. 
(7)  Passenger means any person transported by truck. 
(8)  Special truck routes means those routes or streets defined in subsection (e). 
(9)  Through truck means any truck having three (3) or more axles which passes through the city without stopping for the purpose of either collecting or discharging cargo or for the purpose of collecting or discharging passengers. 
(10)  Through truck route means those routes or streets established in subsection (b) and designated by signs as numbered state or federal routes. 
(11)  Truck means any motor vehicle used or designed to be used for the transportation of cargo or passengers including, but not limited to, the following: trucks; intercity buses; truck-drawn trailers, when the truck is designed primarily for use in towing a trailer. The following motor vehicles are excluded from this meaning: passenger automobiles; pickup trucks; vehicle-drawn trailers, when the vehicle drawing the trailer is not designed primarily for drawing a trailer; motorcycles; motor scooters; school buses; charter buses; and other nonscheduled buses. 
(b)  Through truck routes designated. Through truck routes are established for the passage of through trucks over the streets and highways within the city designated as provided in section 20-76. 
(c)  Use of through truck routes. 
(1)  The operator of a through truck entering the city on any through truck route shall proceed exclusively on a through truck route until he leaves the city. 
(2)  The operator of a through truck entering the city by way of a route not a through truck route or local truck route shall, upon entering the city, proceed to the nearest through truck or local truck route, whichever is nearer. Upon reaching a local truck route, the operator of a through truck shall proceed along such route or routes to the nearest through truck route. Upon reaching the through truck route, the operator of a through truck shall proceed exclusively upon a through truck route until he leaves the city. 
(d)  Local truck routes designated. Local trucks may travel over any street or highway within the area bounded by and including the following streets: 
(1)  Grace Street from North Church Street to Raleigh Road; 
(2)  Grand Avenue from North Church Street to Atlantic Avenue; 
(3)  Atlantic Avenue from Grand Avenue to Raleigh Road; 
(4)  Raleigh Road from Grace Street to Atlantic Avenue; 
and upon other streets designated as provided in section 20-76 as local truck routes for the passage of local trucks over the streets and highways within the city. 
(e)  Use of special truck routes by local trucks. 
(1)  The operator of a local truck shall, upon leaving the origin of his trip, proceed by the shortest route to the nearest through truck route or local truck route except when the shortest route between the origin and the destination of a local truck is less than the distance between the origin and the nearest truck route. 
(2)  The operator of a local truck proceeding on a local truck route or a through truck route shall proceed exclusively on such route or routes until he reaches his destination or a point on that route from which he shall proceed by the shortest nonthrough truck route to his destination. 
(3)  The operator of a local truck entering the city on any route other than a through truck route or local truck route shall, upon entering the city, proceed by the shortest route to the nearest local truck route or through truck route and shall proceed on such route until either the point of destination is reached or a point on that route nearest his destination is reached (which will yield the shortest nonthrough truck route to this destination). Exception: When the shortest route between the point of entry into the city and the destination of a local truck is less than the shortest route from the point of entry into the city to the nearest through truck route or local truck route, the operator of a local truck, upon entering the city, shall not be required to proceed to the nearest through truck route or local truck route before proceeding to his destination. 
(Code 1967, § 19-94) 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate, § 460(a). 
Secs. 20-182-20-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - RAILROADS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Railroad crossings, G.S. § 160A-298. 

Sec. 20-201. - Speed limit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any railroad train to be operated within the city at a rate of speed greater than fifty (50) miles per hour. No railroad train shall be operated at a greater rate of speed than twenty (20) miles per hour on that portion of the railroad tracks in the city known as the Norfolk Branch of the CSX Transportation railroad. 
(Code 1967, § 16-1) 
Sec. 20-202. - Railroad crossings-Construction; maintenance. 
    Each railroad crossing in the city shall be made and maintained smooth and safe and shall be paved with such material and at such grade as the city may direct. No grade shall be raised or lowered without the consent of the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 16-2) 
Sec. 20-203. - Same-Protection by flagmen, barrier gates. 
(a)  Whenever an engine or engine and cars crosses Marigold Street, Church Street, Franklin Street or Falls Road crossing, it shall be the duty of the railroad employees to protect these crossings by flagmen. 
(b)  Whenever an engine and cars cross any railroad crossing on the Norfolk branch of CSX Transportation during switching operations, it shall be the duty of the employees of the railroad company to protect the crossings by flagmen and it shall be the duty of the flagman to give ample and proper notice to the traveling public of the approach or passing of all trains. 
(c)  All railroad companies whose tracks cross Thomas Street, Sunset Avenue, Tarboro Street, Western Avenue-Hill Street, Nash Street-Marigold Street, shall at all times during the day and night maintain necessary, adequate and proper gates at the crossings and shall at all times give ample and proper notice of the passing of all trains by requiring the watchman to lower the gates before any trains pass across it, and shall keep the same lowered a sufficient time to protect and warn the public. The gates shall be equipped with automatic gongs so arranged that they will ring as the gates go down and continue to ring until they are raised. 
(Code 1967, § 16-3) 
Sec. 20-204. - Same-Obedience to gates and warnings. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle against, under or around any railroad crossing gate or to drive any vehicle across a crossing when the railroad gates at the crossing are down. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether on foot or riding to cross any railroad at any grade crossing at which there is a flagman, watchman or signalling device when such flagman, watchman or signalling device gives warning of the approach of a train, engine or car. 
(Code 1967, § 16-4) 
Sec. 20-205. - Same-Procession of traffic when closed. 
    Whenever any person driving a vehicle enters any street intersection adjacent to the intersection of the railroad tracks with Goldleaf Street, Thomas Street, Sunset Avenue-Tarboro Street, Western Avenue-Hill Street or Nash Street-Marigold Street, and is unable to continue across the tracks because of the warning of the railroad signal device or for other cause, it shall be his duty to turn his vehicle at the intersection and to proceed with the traffic on the intersecting street, and it shall be unlawful for the driver to stop his vehicle in the intersection to await clearance of the railroad crossing or for other cause. 
(Code 1967, § 16-5) 
Sec. 20-206. - Obstruction of city drainage system. 
    It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to obstruct the drainage of the city in any way or by any means whatsoever. 
(Code 1967, § 16-8) 
Sec. 20-207. - Whistle blowing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, or its employees, operating or running trains through the city to blow or have blown the whistles of the engine of such train, except for the purpose of blowing for the board or semaphore as required by the rules of the railroad or in case of emergency as additional warning of any impending danger to life or property. 
(Code 1967, § 16-9) 
Secs. 20-208-20-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - TRAFFIC CONTROL PHOTOGRAPHIC SYSTEMS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 0-2003-90, § 1, adopted Nov. 24, 2003, amended art. X, §§ 20-250-20-254, in their entirety. Formerly, said sections pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Ord. No. 0-02-56, § 1, adopted June 24, 2002. 

Sec. 20-250. - Definitions. 
    Traffic control photographic system is an electronic system consisting of a photographic, video or electronic camera and a vehicle sensor installed to work in conjunction with an official traffic control device and to automatically produce photographs, video or digital images of each vehicle violating a standard traffic control statute or ordinance. 
    In operation means operating in good working condition. 
    System location is the approach to an intersection toward which a photographic, video or electronic camera is directed and is in operation. 
    Vehicle owner is the person identified by the North Carolina Division of Motor Vehicle as the registered owner of a vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 0-2003-90, § 1, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 20-251. - General. 
    The engineering department shall administer the traffic control photographic program and shall maintain a list of system locations where traffic control photographic systems are installed. 
    The engineering department shall implement a system for capturing traffic control violations, as defined under G.S. § 20-158, with a traffic control photographic system that will use the photographic images as prima facie evidence of the traffic violations and will authorize the traffic engineer or an agent of the department to issue civil citations. 
    Any citation for a violation of G.S. § 20-158 or other traffic violation, issued by a duly authorized law enforcement officer at a system location shall be treated, pursuant to G.S. § 20-176, as an infraction so long as the system photographic images are not used as prima facie evidence of the violation. 
    The citation shall clearly state the manner in which the violation may be appealed. The citation shall be processed by officials or agents of the engineering department and shall be forwarded by personal service or first-class mail to the owner's address as given on the motor vehicle registration. 
(Ord. No. 0-2003-90, § 1, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 20-252. - Offense. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a vehicle to cross the stop line at a system location when the traffic signal for that vehicle's direction of travel is emitting a steady red light, or for a vehicle to violate any other traffic regulation specified in G.S. § 20-158. 
(b)  The owner of a vehicle shall be responsible for a violation under this section, except when he can provide evidence that the vehicle was in the care, custody, or control of another person at the time of the violation, as described in subsection (c). 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (b), the owner of the vehicle shall not be responsible for the violation if, within thirty (30) days after notification of the violation, he/she furnishes the officials or agents of the city: 
(1)  The name and address of the person or entity who leased, rented, or otherwise had the care, custody, and control of the vehicle at the time of the violation; or 
(2)  An affidavit by him/her stating that, at the time of the violation, the vehicle involved was stolen or was in the care, custody, or control of some person who did not have his permission to use the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 0-2003-90, § 1, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 20-253. - Penalty. 
    Any violation of section 20-252(a) shall be deemed a non-criminal violation for which a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be assessed, and for which no points authorized by G.S. § 20-16(c) shall be assigned to the owner or driver of the vehicle nor insurance points as authorized by G.S. 58-36.65. Failure to pay the civil penalty or file an appeal within thirty (30) days after the mail date notification of the violation shall result in an additional penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00). The city may establish procedures for the collection of the civil penalties and may enforce the penalties by a civil action in the nature of a debt. 
(Ord. No. 0-2003-90, § 1, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 20-254. - Appeals. 
    A notice of appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days after notification of the violation. The failure to give notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the citation. Appeals shall be heard through an administrative process established by the department of engineering. An individual desiring a hearing must post a bond equal to the amount of the civil penalty ($50.00) within thirty (30) days after mail date of the violation. Once an appeal is requested and the bond posted, an appeal hearing will be scheduled. The hearing officer's decision is subject to review in the Superior Court of Nash/Edgecombe County by proceedings in the "nature of certiorari". 
(Ord. No. 0-2003-90, § 1, 11-24-03) 
Chapter 21 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Franchises, § 400 et seq. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; utilities review board, § 2-166 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; gas, Ch. 9; gas standards adopted, § 9-3; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; housing, Ch. 11; soil erosion and sedimentation control, Ch. 17; solid waste, Ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and certain other public places, Ch. 19; subdivision, App. A; zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Public enterprises, G.S. § 160A-311 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Scope. 
    All pertinent provisions of this chapter are hereby made a part of the terms and conditions whereby the city shall furnish sewer, electric, gas, water or any other utility service to any person; or whereby the city shall make any sewer, electric, gas or water or any other utility connections or perform any work of any kind in connection with the furnishing of sewer, electric, gas or water service. 
(Code 1967, § 20-1) 
Sec. 21-2. - Application for service. 
    Written application shall be made for water, sewer, gas, electricity or any other utility service that may be furnished by the city to the city upon forms furnished therefor. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the type of utility service desired, the purposes for which the application is made and such other information as the city may request. 
(Code 1967, § 20-2) 
Sec. 21-3. - Compliance with city codes. 
(a)  No request for electric service or water service for other than construction purposes shall be granted with respect to any structure including but not limited to dwellings, commercial buildings or mobile homes proposed to be served by the city's distribution systems until the applicable inspector for the city finds the structure to be in full compliance with the building code, plumbing code and electrical code of the city and until a certificate of occupancy has been issued with respect to the same. The supervisor of inspection services may waive the requirements for a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Electrical service and water service shall be discontinued to all structures found unfit for human habitation under the housing code or building code of the city provided the owners and occupants are notified in writing in advance of such discontinuance of service. 
(Code 1967, §§ 20-2.1, 20-7) 
Sec. 21-4. - Meters-Required. 
    Meters shall be required to measure the consumption of each utility service furnished by the city. 
(Code 1967, § 20-3) 
Sec. 21-5. - Same-Installation, maintenance. 
    All meters required by this chapter and used to measure the consumption of utility services furnished by the city shall be installed and maintained under policies which may be established from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 20-4) 
Sec. 21-6. - Same-Injuring, tampering with. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized employee of the city, to tamper with any meter; or to in any manner injure any meter; or to manipulate or attempt to manipulate any meter in any manner so as to affect its registration or measurement of the metered utility service. 
(Code 1967, § 20-5) 
Sec. 21-7. - Attachments on poles. 
    No person shall make any attachment of any kind to any city power or light pole without the consent of the director of public utilities or his representative. 
(Code 1967, § 20-6) 
Sec. 21-8. - Water and sewer charges. 
    Customers of the city water and sewer systems shall be charged for water and sewer service according to rate schedules adopted and amended from time to time by resolution of the city council which are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1967, § 20-8) 
Sec. 21-9. - Water and sewer connection. 
(a)  The expression "water and sewer connection," as used in this section, shall be construed to mean the installing of one (1) commode and one (1) sink in each residence, together with an adequate water supply under pressure for the operation of same. Apartment houses shall be equipped with one (1) commode and one (1) sink for each family occupying the building. Schools, churches, theaters, mercantile establishments, industrial plants and other places of similar character shall be equipped with as many plumbing appliances as may be necessary in the opinion of the city superintendent of environmental services, his duly authorized agent or the city building inspector. 
(b)  Every person owning or having an estate in a structure and lot in the city, which lot abuts or adjoins a street or alley along which there is a public sanitary sewer, shall within fifteen (15) days from the date of a legal notice served by the city superintendent of environmental services, his authorized agent or the supervisor of inspections or his authorized agent, make water and sewer connections with the structure; provided such owner can make sewer connections within two hundred (200) feet from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the public sanitary sewer and water connections within three hundred (300) feet from the nearest point of a public water supply to the nearest point of the building. 
(Code 1967, §§ 10-1, 10-6) 
Sec. 21-10. - Septic tanks in sewered area. 
    Every person owning or having an estate in a structure and/or lot making connection with a public sanitary sewer and upon which a septic tank exists shall within thirty (30) days from the date of notice served by the superintendent of environmental services, his authorized agent, the supervisor of inspections or his authorized agent, fill or remove the septic tank according to procedures and practices approved by the superintendent of environmental services. 
(Code 1967, § 10-10) 
Sec. 21-11. - Springs and wells in sewered area. 
    When water has been provided for any premises by the city, all open wells and springs on such premises, or on premises occupied by persons using water from such city service, shall be filled within thirty (30) days after notice by the superintendent of environmental services. 
(Code 1967, § 10-7) 
Sec. 21-12. - Partial utility payments. 
    The city provides various enterprise and utility services to its citizens and customers and the city sometimes receives utility bill payments for less than the total amount of the monthly bill. In the event that any customer shall pay less than the entire amount due on any utility bill or statement from the city, the amount paid by the customer shall be applied by the city among the various enterprise service categories in the following order of priority: 
(1)  Bad debt; 
(2)  Deposit; 
(3)  Past due and oldest utility charges; 
(4)  Current utility charges; 
(5)  Non-utility charges. 
    For subsections (3) and (4), the city offers electric, gas, water, sewer, stormwater, and refuse enterprise services that are included in utility charges. All partial payments for utility services will be paid for as a percentage of what is owed on each utility type so payments will be distributed uniformly across all services billed. The percentage is calculated as the prorated portion of each service's relationship to the total balance. For example: if the electric service charge is one hundred dollars ($100.00) and the stormwater charge is ten dollars ($10.00) for a total bill of one hundred ten dollars ($110.00); a fifty-dollar ($50.00) payment will be applied as forty-five dollars ($45.00) or ninety (90) percent ($100.00/$110.00) to electric charges and five dollars ($5.00) or ten (10) percent ($10.00/$110.00) to stormwater charges. 
(Ord. No. O-2007-117, § 1, 11-12-07) 
Secs. 21-13-21-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SANITARY SEWERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1, adopted June 24, 2013, deleted the former Art. II, §§ 21-26-21-41.3, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. O-2007-125, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 26, 2007; and Ord. No. O-2009-3, §§ 1-3, adopted Jan. 12, 2009. 
Charter reference- Extension of lines for commercial development, § 10(x); public utility franchises, § 450 et seq.; use of revenue from public utilities, § 10(w). 
Cross reference- Utilities review board, § 2-166 et seq. 

Sec. 21-26. - Purpose and policy. 
    This section sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the City of Rocky Mount, hereafter referred to as the city, and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403). 
    The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants and wastewater discharges into the municipal wastewater system that will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants and wastewater discharges into the municipal wastewater system that will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into any waters of the state or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludges from the municipal system; 
(4)  To protect both municipal personnel who may be affected by sewage, sludge, and effluent in the course of their employment as well as protecting the general public; 
(5)  To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the municipal wastewater system; and 
(6)  To ensure that the municipality complies with its NPDES or non-discharge permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws to which the municipal wastewater system is subject. 
    This article II, Sanitary sewers, provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
    This article II, Sanitary sewers, shall apply to all users of the municipal wastewater system as authorized by G.S. 160 A-312. By discharging wastewater into the wastewater system, domestic and industrial users located within or outside the city limits agree to comply with the terms and conditions established in this article II, Sanitary Sewers, as well as any permits, enforcement actions, or orders issued hereunder. Dischargers subject to this article II, Sanitary sewers, are also subject to the satellite user's ordinance. Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of water resources shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article II, Sanitary sewers. Any powers granted to or imposed upon the director of water resources may be delegated by the director of water resources to the POTW superintendents or to other city personnel. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-27. - Definitions and abbreviations. 
    This section is gender neutral with respect to masculine and feminine gender. References using either terms of "masculine" or "feminine" shall apply to both genders. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive or discretionary. The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of their use. 
(1)  Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this section, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
    Act or the Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et. seq. 
    Action level. The concentration based numeric value that the grease interceptor effluent, at the device's outlet tee and prior to mixing with any other waste water from the contributing establishment's property, are expected to achieve on a consistent or stipulated basis. 
    Approval authority. The director of the division of water quality of the state department of environment and natural resources or his designee. 
    Authorized representative of the industrial user. 
(1)  If the industrial user is a corporation, authorized representative shall mean: 
a.  The president, secretary, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-running functions for the corporation, or 
b.  The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operations and has the duty of making capital investments and initiate comprehensive measures to insure long term environmental compliance and if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, an authorized representative shall mean a general partner or the proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the industrial user is a federal, state, or city facility, an authorized representative shall mean a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in subsections a. and b. may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
(5)  If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements for the section must be submitted to the director of water resources or duly authorized personnel prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at 20° Celsius, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g. mg/L). 
    Building sewer. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the POTW. 
    Bypass. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
    Carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (CBOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at 20° Celsius, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g. mg/L). CBOD results do not include oxygen utilized by nitrogenous material. 
    Categorical standards. Federal categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment standard. 
    City. City of Rocky Mount, North Carolina. 
    City manager. Manager of the city. 
    Color. The true color due to the substances in solution expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/L) or such units as the director of water resources specifies. 
    Common interceptor. Means one (1) or more interceptors receiving FOG laden wastewater from more than one (1) establishment. Common interceptors may be located at shopping centers, malls, entertainment complexes, sporting arenas, hotels, multi-tenant "flex" spaces, mixed use spaces, and other sites where multiple establishments are connected to a single grease interceptor. The owner of the property on which the common grease interceptor is located shall be primarily responsible for the maintenance, upkeep, and repair of the common interceptor. 
    Control authority. The term "control authority" shall refer to the POTW organization. 
    Director of water resources. Director of the department of public works and water resources for the city and serves as the permittee and chief administrative officer of the Control Authority. 
    Division. The term division shall refer to the North Carolina Division of Water Quality. 
    Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Fats, oils, and greases means organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are collectively referred to herein as "grease" or "greases" or "FOG". 
    Food service establishments or FSE means those establishments primarily engaged in activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for consumption foodstuffs and that use one (1) or more of the following preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sautéing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching, infrared heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food preparation or serving activity that produces a consumable food product in or on a receptacle requiring washing to be reused. 
    FOG enforcement response plan means the document and written plan and procedures by which the director of water resources implements an enforcement strategy applicable to the FOG control and management program established herein. The plan applies to FOG program violations and matters of program noncompliance. Stipulated penalties for specific and programmatic infractions are addressed in the plan. The FOG enforcement response plan is on file in the office of the director of water resources and available for review by interested persons. 
    FSE user is defined as a specific user group employing a common FOG interceptor. User(s) shall include property owners who provide common interceptors for one (1) or more independent establishments, including tenants. 
    Grab sample. A sample taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
    Grease trap or interceptor means a device for separating waterborne greases and grease complexes from wastewater and retaining such greases and grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. Grease traps also serve to collect solids that settle, generated by and from activities that subject users to this section, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. Grease traps and interceptors are collectively referred to herein as "grease interceptors". Grease interceptors are at least five hundred (500) gallons and are remotely located. Grease traps are devices designed to capture grease from one (1) to a maximum of four (4) fixtures. 
    Hauled wastes. Wastewater (domestic, industrial, holding tank, or septage) which is transported to the POTW by any method other than through the collection system. 
    Holding tank waste. Any waste from holding tanks, including but not limited to such holding tanks as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Indirect discharge or discharge. The discharge or the introduction from any non-domestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1317), into the POTW, (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
    Industrial user. Any person which is a source of indirect discharge. 
    Inflow. Water other than sewage that enters a sanitary sewer system including water entering through a building sewer from sources such as roof leaders, collar drains, yard drains, area drains, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections between storm sewer and sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling towers, stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash waters, or drainage. 
    Interference. The inhibition or disruption of the POTW collection system, treatment processes, operations, analytical testing, or its sludge process, use, or disposal, that causes or contributes to a violation of any requirement of the control authority's (and/or POTW's, if different from the control authority) NPDES collection system or non-discharge permit or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with specified applicable state and federal statutes, regulations, or permits. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with section 405 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (42 U.S.C. § 6901, et seq.), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuary Act (MPRSA) or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
    Federal categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. §1317) that applies to a specific category of industrial users, and that appears in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
    Federal prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge standard. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 21-30.1 and are developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR Part 403.5. 
    Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
    Minimum design capability means the design features of a grease interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and retain greases and settled solids from grease-laden wastewaters discharged to the public sanitary sewer. 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system (or NPDES) permit. A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342), or pursuant to N.C.G.S. 143-215.1 by the state under delegation from EPA. 
    New source. 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307(c), provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b. or c. but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  For purposes of this definition, construction of a new source has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities that is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts that can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition. 
    Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
    Noncooking establishments means those establishments primarily engaged in the preparation of precooked foodstuffs that do not include any form of cooking, but that may produce a consumable food product in or on a receptacle requiring washing to be reused. 
    Nondischarge permit. A disposal system permit issued by the state pursuant to N.C.G.S. 143-215.1. 
    Non-domestic discharge. Any substances other than human excrement and household gray water (shower, dishwashing operations, etc.) discharged into the POTW. Common characteristics of non-domestic pollutants in wastewater discharges include, but are not limited to, pH, temperature, total suspended residue (solids), turbidity, BOD/CBOD, COD, toxicity, odor, and color. 
    On-site grease interceptor treatment or onsite treatment means mechanisms or procedures utilized by a user to treat grease interceptor contents on the user's site, followed by the reintroduction of such treated wastewater back into the interceptor. On-site grease interceptor treatment may only be accomplished by a user if the user or the user's contract service provider is permitted by the N.C. Division of Waste Management as a septage management firm or service provider. 
    Pass through. A discharge that exits the POTW into waters of the state in quantities or concentrations that, alone or with discharges from other sources, causes a violation, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation, of the control authority's (and/or POTW's, if different from the control authority) NPDES, collection system, or non-discharge permit, or a downstream water quality standard even if not included in the permit. 
    Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and city entities. 
    pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed as standard units, and calculated as the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
    Pollutant. Any "waste" as defined in N.C.G.S. 143-213(18) and dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, metals, CBOD, COD, toxicity, and odor). 
    POTW treatment plant. That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
    Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW collection system and/or treatment plant. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR Part 403.6(d). Pretreatment program. The program for the control of pollutants introduced into the POTW from non-domestic sources developed by the city in compliance with 40 CFR Part 403.8 and approved by the approval authority as authorized by N.C.G.S. 143-215.3(a)(14) in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.11. 
    Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment standards. Prohibited discharge standards, categorical standards, or local limits which applies to an industrial user. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) or municipal wastewater system. A treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1292) owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. For the purposes of this section, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, or in any other way, users of the POTW. 
    Sanitary sewer. A sewer intended to receive domestic sewage and industrial waste, without the admixture of surface water and stormwater. 
    Sanitary sewer overflow means an overflow or discharge of raw sewage from publicly owned treatment works (POTW) due to a blockage in a line. 
    Satellite user. Any governmental or private entity that conveys wastewater to the POTW by contract or agreement with the city. 
    Service provider means any third party not in the employment of the user that performs maintenance, repair, and other services on a user's grease interceptor at the user's directive. 
    Severe property damage. Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the industrial user's treatment facilities that causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources that can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
    Significant industrial user or SIU. An industrial user that discharges wastewater into a publicly owned treatment works and that: 
(1)  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand gallons (25,000) gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); or 
(2)  Contributes process wastewater which makes up five (5) percent or more of the NPDES or non-discharge permitted flow limit or organic capacity of the treatment plant. In this context, organic capacity refers to CBOD, TSS, Ammonia; or 
(3)  Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR Part 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471; or 
(4)  Is designated as such by the control authority on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation, or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, or for contributing to violations of the POTW's effluent limitations and conditions in its NPDES or non-discharge permit, or for contributing to violations of the POTW's receiving stream standard, or for limiting the POTW's sludge disposal options. 
(5)  Subject to division approval under 15A NCAC 02H .0907(b), the control authority may determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria in paragraphs (1) and (2) above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standards or requirement, or for contributing to violations of the POTW's effluent limitations and conditions in its NPDES or non-discharge permit, or contributing to violations of the POTW's receiving stream standard, or for limiting the POTW's sludge disposal options, and this is not a significant industrial user. 
(6)  Subject to division approval under 15A NCAC 02H .0907(b), the control authority may determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria in paragraph (3) above meets the requirements of 40 CFR Part 403.3(v)(2) and thus is a non-significant categorical industrial user. 
(7)  Subject to division approval under 15A NCAC 02H .0907(b), the control authority may determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria in paragraph (3) above meets the requirements of 40 CFR Part 403.12(e)(3) and thus is a middle tier significant industrial user. Sampling and inspection requirements may be cut in half as per 40 CFR Parts 403.8 (f)(2)(v)(C) and 403.12 (e)(3). 
    Significant noncompliance or SNC. Is status of noncompliance of a significant industrial user when one or more of the following criteria are met. Additionally, any industrial user which meets the criteria in (1)(c) and (d), or (5) below shall also be SNC: 
(1)  Violations of wastewater discharge limits. 
a.  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits. Is defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter (not including flow) during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(1) 
b.  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations. Is defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter (not including flow) during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(1) multiplied by applicable TRCs: TRC = 1.4 for BOD/CBOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease 1.2 for all other pollutants (not including flow and pH). 
c.  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that control authority and/or POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of city personnel or the general public); 
d.  Any discharge of a pollutant or wastewater that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the control authority's or the POTW's, if different from the control authority, exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR Part 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) and subsection 21-40.2(e) of this sewer use ordinance to halt or prevent such a discharge. 
(2)  Violations of compliance schedule milestones, contained in a pretreatment permit or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing construction, and attaining final compliance by ninety (90) days or more after the schedule date. 
(3)  Failure to provide reports for compliance schedule, self-monitoring data, baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, and other required compliance reports within forty-five (45)(days from the due date. 
(4)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
(5)  Any other violation or group of violations that the control authority and/or POTW determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
    Slug load or discharge. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which has reasonable potential to cause interference or pass-through, or in any other way violates the POTW's regulations, local limits, or industrial user permit conditions. This can include but is not limited to spills and other accidental discharges; discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature; a non-customary batch discharge; or any other discharges that can cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 21-30.1. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC). A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987. 
    Stormwater. Any flow occurring or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting there from, including snowmelt. 
    Superintendent. The person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this section, or his duly authorized representative. 
    Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Upset. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
    User. Any person who contributes, causes, or has responsible charge over the contribution of wastewater into the POTW including persons who discharge wastewater from mobile sources. 
    User's contract service provider is permitted by the N.C. Division of Waste Management as a septage management firm or service provider. 
    Wastewater. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, mobile sources, treatment facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, that are contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW including but not limited to: 
(1)  Domestic. Being wastewater: 
a.  From the noncommercial preparation, cooking, and handling of food; 
b.  From washing or bathing water of various types; and 
c.  From sanitary conveniences containing human excrement and similar substances of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions. 
(2)  Holding tank. Being wastewater from non-treatment holding tanks, including but limited to chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and vacuum pump tank trucks. 
(3)  Industrial. Being wastewater from industrial manufacturing, commercial, trade or business establishments as distinct from "domestic" wastewater. 
(4)  Septage. Being domestic wastewater removed from a septic or Imhoff sewage treatment system or domestic sewage sludge from a package treatment plant. 
    Wastewater permit. As set forth in section 21-33.2. 
    Waters of the state. All streams, rivers, brooks, swamps, sounds, tidal estuaries, bays, creeks, lakes, waterways, reservoirs and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, that are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
(2)  The following abbreviations when used in this section, shall have the designated meanings: 
a.  BOD; CBOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand; Carbonaceous Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
b.  CFR - Code of Federal Regulations 
c.  COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand 
d.  EPA - Environmental Protection Agency 
e.  gpd - Gallons per day 
f.  L - Liter 
g.  mg - Milligrams 
h.  mg/L - Milligrams per Liter 
i.  NCAC - North Carolina Administrative Code 
j.  NCGS - North Carolina General Statutes 
k.  NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
l.  O & M - Operation and Maintenance 
m.  POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works 
n.  RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
o.  SIC - Standard Industrial Classification 
p.  SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act 
q.  TSS - Total Suspended Solids 
r.  TKN - Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen 
s.  U.S.C. - United States Code 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-28. - Fees. 
    It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the city's wastewater disposal system for the implementation of the program established herein and to generate sufficient revenue to pay at least the cost of operation and maintenance, capital additions and total debt service necessary to the proper operation and maintenance (including replacement and additions) of the system. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-28.1. - Applicability. 
    The applicable charges or fees shall be according to a schedule adopted by the city council and published in the city's administrative policy manual. A copy of these fees and charge will be made available from the director of water resources. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-28.2. - User charges. 
    A user charge shall be levied on all users including, but not limited to, persons, firms, corporations or governmental entities that discharge, cause or permit the discharge of sewage into the POTW. 
(1)  The user charge shall reflect at least the cost of debt service, capital additions, operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the POTW. 
(2)  Each user shall pay its proportionate cost based on volume of flow and other costs of service. 
(3)  The city manager shall review annually the sewerage contributions of users, the total costs of debt service, capital additions, operation and maintenance (including replacement) of POTW and will make recommendations to the city council for adjustments in the schedule of charges and fees as necessary. 
(4)  Charges for flow to the POTW not directly attributable to the users shall be distributed among all users of the POTW based upon the volume of flow of the users. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-28.3. - Surcharges. 
    All industrial and resale users of the POTW are subject to industrial waste surcharges on discharges which exceed the following levels: 
CBOD 200 mg/L; 
COD 600 mg/L; 
TSS 250 mg/L; 
NH 3 N 25 mg/L; 
TKN 40 mg/L 
    The amount of surcharge will be based upon the mass emission rate (in pounds per day) discharged above the concentration levels listed above. The amount charged per pound of excess shall be according to a schedule adopted by the city council and published in the city's administrative policy manual. 
(1)  The volume of flow used in determining the total discharge of wastewater for payment of user charges and surcharges shall be based on the following: 
a.  Metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter readings maintained by the city, or 
b.  If required by the city or at the individual dischargers option, other flow monitoring devices which measure the actual volume of wastewater discharged to the sewer. Such devices shall be accessible and safely located, and the measuring system shall be installed and maintained at the users expense according to arrangement that may be made with the city. 
c.  Where any user procures all or part of his water supply from sources other than the city, the user shall install and maintain at his own expense a slow measuring device of a type approved by the city. 
(2)  The character and concentration of the constituents of the wastewater used in determining surcharges shall be determined by samples collected and analyzed by the city. Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative of the actual discharge and shall be analyzed by using procedures set forth in 40 CFR Part 136. 
(3)  The determination of the character and concentration of the constituents of the wastewater discharge by the director of water resources or his duly appointed representatives shall be binding as a basis for charges. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-28.4. - Pretreatment program administration charges. 
    The schedule of charges and fees adopted by the city may include charges and fees for: 
(1)  Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operation the pretreatment program; 
(2)  Monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures; 
(3)  Reviewing slug control plans, including accidental and/or slug load discharge procedures and construction plans and specifications; 
(4)  Permitting; 
(5)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements of the pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-29. - Fats, oils and greases. 
Sec. 21-29.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to support section 21-32.5 of the City of Rocky Mount Sewer Use Ordinance in preventing the introduction and accumulation of fats, oils, and greases (FOG) into the municipal wastewater system which will or tend to cause or contribute to interference in the daily operation of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW). Food service establishments and other industrial or commercial establishments generating wastewater containing fats, oils or greases are subject to this section. This section shall regulate such users by requiring that grease interceptors and other approved strategies be installed, implemented, and maintained in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-29.2. - Interceptor installation and maintenance. 
(a)  Grease interceptors or traps shall be installed and maintained at the user's expense when a user operates a food service establishment. Grease interceptors may be required in non-cooking or cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs establishments and other industrial or commercial establishments when the establishment generates wastewater containing fat or grease in excess of section 21-30.1 as provided in the City of Rocky Mount's Sewer Use Ordinance. The director of water resources is authorized to determine when an interceptor or trap is necessary to prevent contribution or accumulation of grease to the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. Upon notification by the director of water resources or his or her designee that the user is subject to the terms of an enforcement action, as stipulated in the FOG enforcement response plan, said user shall not allow wastewater discharge concentration from subject grease interceptor to exceed the action level as prescribed in the sewer use ordinance, expressed as hexane extractable material. All grease interceptors shall be of a type, design, and capacity approved by the director of water resources and shall be readily and easily accessible for maintenance and repair, including cleaning and city inspection. All grease interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of accumulated waste content as required to maintain the minimum design capability or effective volume of the grease interceptor, but not less often than every sixty (60) calendar days or as permitted in a valid program modification. Users who are required to pass wastewater through a grease interceptor shall adhere to the following provisions: 
(1)  Grease interceptor sizing formula to obtain minimum design capability for new installations, amendments, or modifications to existing installations shall be as follows: 
GI = SC x FF x RT x SF 
Whereby: 
GI = interceptor volume in gallons 
SC = Seating capacity 
RT = Retention time (0.4 hour) 
SF = 9.375 Storage factor (dimensionless) 
FF = Flow factor (gallons/seat/hour) 
Deep frying and dishwasher ..... FF = 3.0 
No deep frying and dishwasher ..... FF = 2.5 
Deep frying and disposable serving ware ..... FF = 2.5 
No deep frying, reusable serving ware, and no dishwasher ..... FF = 2.0 
No deep frying and disposable serving ware ..... FF = 1.5 
No cooking of any type and disposable serving ware ..... FF = 0.5 
(2)  Provide for a minimum hydraulic retention time of twenty-four (24) minutes (0.40 hour) at actual peak flow between the influent and effluent baffles, with twenty-five (25) percent of the total volume of the grease interceptor being allowed for any food-derived solids to settle or accumulate and floatable grease derived materials to rise and accumulate, identified hereafter as a solids blanket and grease cap respectively. 
(3)  Remove any accumulated grease cap and solids blanket as needed, but at intervals of not longer than sixty (60) calendar days at the user's expense, or in accordance with a valid program modification or other requirements established by the director of water resources. Grease interceptors shall be kept free of inorganic solid materials, such as grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells, towels, rags, etc., which could settle into this solids blanket and thereby reduce the effective volume and detention time of the grease interceptor. 
(4)  Operate and maintain the grease interceptor to achieve and consistently maintain any applicable grease action level. "Consistent" shall mean any wastewater sample taken from such grease interceptor must meet the terms of numerical limit attainment described in subsection 21-29.2(a). 
(5)  If a user documents that conditions exist ("space constraints") on their establishment site that limit the ability to locate a grease interceptor on the exterior of the establishment, the user may request an interior location for the interceptor. Such request shall contain the following information: 
i.  Location of city sewer main and easement in relation to available exterior space outside building. 
ii.  Existing plumbing layout at or in a site. 
iii.  A statement of understanding, signed by the user or authorized agent, acknowledging and accepting conditions the director of water resources may place on permitting an identified interior location. Conditions may include requirements to use alternative mechanisms, devices, procedures, or operations relative to an interior location. 
iv.  Such other information as may be required by the director of water resources. 
(6)  If the user performs on-site grease interceptor treatment pursuant to a modification granted under subsection 21-29.5(c)(2), the user shall: 
i.  Prior to commencement of onsite treatment obtain written approval by and from the director of water resources of all processes utilized in said onsite treatment. 
ii.  If any pumped wastes or other materials removed from the grease interceptor are treated in any fashion on-site and reintroduced back into the grease interceptor as an activity of and after such on-site treatment, the user shall meet the criteria contained in subsection 21-29.2(6)(iii) below. 
iii.  Attain and adhere to the criteria listed below: 
a.  After thirty (30) minutes of settling time, not more than 3.0 milliliter per liter of settleable solids, as measured in a one (1) liter Imhoff cone shall be allowed. 
b.  Within and not more than twenty-four (24) hours after onsite grease interceptor servicing, not more than two (2) (inches) of settable solids and/or grease shall be allowed to have accumulated therein as a result of said operations. 
c.  Service vehicles and equipment used in onsite grease interceptor servicing shall be registered with the North Carolina Division of Waste Management. 
d.  When service is being provided, grease interceptor service vehicles and equipment shall have onboard, at all times, a certificate of approval for the operations and methods used, issued by the director of water resources. 
e.  Any tanks, tankage, or vessel(s) associated with a modification shall be empty upon arrival at the initial FSE user site. 
(7)  The use of biological or other additives as a grease degradation or conditioning agent is permissible only upon prior written approval of the director of water resources. Any user using biological or other additives shall maintain the trap or interceptor in such a manner that attainment of any grease wastewater, action level, solids blanket or grease cap criteria, goal or directive, as measured from the grease interceptor outlet or interior, is consistently achieved. 
(8)  The director of water resources may make determinations of grease interceptor adequacy, need, design, appropriateness, application, location, modification(s), and conditional usage based on review of all relevant information regarding grease interceptor performance, facility site and building plan review by all regulatory reviewing agencies and may require repairs to, or modification or replacement of grease interceptors. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-29.3. - Recordkeeping. 
(a)  The user shall maintain a written record of grease interceptor maintenance for three (3) years. All such records will be available for inspection by the city's representatives at all times. These records shall include: 
(1)  FSE name and physical location. 
(2)  Date and time of grease interceptor service. 
(3)  Name of grease interceptor service company. 
(4)  Name and signature of grease interceptor service company agent performing service. 
(5)  Notes of any deficiencies in grease interceptor structure or access. 
(6)  Established service frequency and type of service: full pump-out, partial pump-out, on-site treatment (type of nature or operations). 
(7)  Number and size of each grease interceptor serviced at FSE location. 
(8)  Approximated amount, based upon the best professional judgment of the contract service provider, of grease and solids removed from each grease interceptor. 
(9)  Total volume of waste removed from each grease interceptor. 
(10)  Destination of removed wastes, food solids, and wastewater disposal 
(11)  Signature and date of FSE personnel confirming service completion. 
(12)  Such other information as required by director of water resources. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-29.4. - Inspections. 
(a)  All food service establishments grease handling facilities shall be subject to review, evaluation, and inspection by authorized representatives of the director of water resources during normal working hours. 
(b)  Results of inspections will be made available to user. The city's inspector may make recommendations for correction and improvement. 
(c)  The city's inspector will inspect each establishment as needed, to check such things as, but not limited to, the sink and trap set-up, quantity of grease in the interceptor, clarity of effluent, grease recycling bin, and vendor hauling records. However, the city inspector will initiate additional inspections, sampling, and pursue enforcement if the required hauling vendor paperwork is not complete or if the facility is located in the area where blockages have occurred. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-29.5. - Design and permit modifications. 
(a)  No non-grease laden sources are allowed to be connected to sewer lines intended for grease interceptor service. 
(b)  Access manholes shall have an installed diameter of twenty-four (24) inches, a maximum weight of fifty (50) pounds, and shall be provided over each chamber, interior baffle wall, and each sanitary tee. The access penetrations, commonly referred to as "risers" into the grease interceptor shall also be, at a minimum, twenty-four (24) inches in diameter. The access manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater sampling activities. 
(c)  A user may request a modification to the following requirements of this ordinance. Such request for a modification shall be in writing and shall provide the information set forth below. 
(1)  The director of water resources may modify the 60-day grease interceptor pump-out frequency when the user provides data and performance criteria relative to the overall effectiveness of a proposed alternate and such can be substantiated by the director of water resources. Proposed alternatives may include: documented measurement of solids and grease loading of interceptor with sludge judge, grease interceptor pumping or maintenance matters, bioremediation as a complement to grease interceptor maintenance, grease interceptor selection and sizing criteria, onsite grease interceptor maintenance, and specialized kitchen sanitation which reduces loading to interceptor. 
(2)  The director of water resources may modify the method(s) or procedure(s) utilized to service a grease interceptor when the user provides data, and performance criteria relative to the overall effectiveness of a proposed alternate method or procedure and such can be substantiated by the director of water resources. If a modification to maintenance and service procedures is permitted it shall be a conditional discharged permit approval. 
(3)  Any modification must be approved by the director of water resources in written form before implementation by the user or user's designated service provider. The user shall pay modification fees as set forth in the administrative policy X.9.1 water and sewer miscellaneous fees. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-29.6. - Exclusions. 
(a)  A food service establishment determined to have no immediate adverse impact on the city's sanitary sewer collection system because of the business type may be granted an exemption from the grease trap/interceptor installation requirements. 
(b)  The director of water resources may, at any time, revoke an exemption and require that a grease trap/interceptor be installed. 
(c)  To obtain an exemption, a food service establishment must request an inspection, and then be approved by the director of water resources. 
(d)  The following are exempted from grease interceptor requirements due to business type: 
(1)  An establishment classified as a residential group home by State of North Carolina; 
(2)  An establishment serving beverages only; 
(3)  An establishment serving beverages and/or ready to eat, packaged, or unpackaged food items (with or without warming); 
(4)  A snack bar with no food preparation other than food warming; 
(5)  A produce stand that only offers whole, uncut fresh fruits, and vegetables; 
(6)  A bed-and-breakfast that prepares and services breakfast only to guests, with no more than six (6) guestrooms and no more than twelve (12) guests; 
(7)  Other establishments serving only ready to eat foods with or without food warming. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-29.7. - Administrative remedies. 
(a)  Notification of violation. Whenever the director of water resources finds that any food service establishment has violated or is violating this section or any subsection hereof, or any prohibition, limitation, or requirements contained therein, the director of water resources or his or her designee shall serve upon such a person a written notice stating the nature of the violation and the terms as they apply to the City of Rocky Mount FOG enforcement response plan. 
(b)  Consent orders. The director of water resources is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement to comply with the requirements contained herein, which document shall contain a provision providing for the termination of water and sewer utility service in the event of failure to comply with the consent order or similar document. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the discharger to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the order or other document. 
(c)  Termination of service. The director of water resources shall order termination of water and sewer utility service to the user in the event of failure to comply with the terms of the consent order or other document establishing an agreement to comply. 
(d)  Fees. The director of water resources is hereby authorized to assess reasonable cost against users in an amount not to exceed the cost incurred by the city associated with obtaining compliance with the requirements contained herein including but not limited to the following incurred costs: 
(1)  Sampling costs. 
(2)  Inspection and re-inspections. 
(3)  Publication costs. 
(4)  Clean up and repair costs. 
(5)  Legal fees. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-29.8. - Fees and penalties. 
    The schedules for annual fees and penalties shall be as set forth in administrative policy X.9.1 water and sewer miscellaneous fees of the city's administrative policy manual and as provide in the city's FOG enforcement response plan. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-30. - General sewer use requirements. 
Sec. 21-30.1. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No person shall contribute or cause to be contributed into the POTW, either directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater that causes interference or pass through. These general prohibitions apply to all users of a POTW whether or not the user is a significant industrial user or subject to any federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. Pollutants, substances, wastewater, or other wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the municipality wastewater system. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the collection system or POTW, including but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR Part 261.21, including gasoline, kerosene, benzene and naphtha, or that by their nature or quantity are of sufficient concentration, either alone or with interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion in the POTW, or be injurious in any way to the POTW or its personnel, or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two (2) successive readings on an explosion hazard meter taken of a wastewater either at the point of discharge into the system or causing at any point in the system be more than five (5) percent nor any single reading over ten (10) percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. 
(2)  Solids such as garbage, rags, textile remnants or waste, scraps, (except fibers of scraps that will pass through a one-quarter-inch mesh screen and will be carried freely in suspension under flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers), viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstructions in the flow in the POTW resulting in interference (but in no case solids greater than one-half-inch in any dimension), or any solid or viscous wastes which will or may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or sewer lift station, or may otherwise interfere with the proper operation of the wastewater collection and treatment system. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, grease, animal entrails and tissues, paunch manure, bones hair, hides or fleshings, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone dust, metal shavings, glass, straw, grass, clippings, spent grains or hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, tar asphalt residues, and other residues from refining or otherwise processing petroleum products. 
(3)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(4)  Any wastewater having a pH of less than six (6.0) or more than nine (9.0) standard units except by permit authorization, but in no case wastewater having a pH of less than five (5.0) or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage to the POTW or equipment. 
(5)  Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) in sufficient quantity, either by flow or concentration, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to cause interference with the POTW. 
(6)  Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150° F (66° C), or that will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater that causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104° F (40° C). 
(7)  Any pollutants or noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids or other wastewaters that, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(8)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the director of water resources in accordance with section 21-31.3. 
(9)  Any material that would be identified as hazardous waste according to 40 CFR Part 261 if not disposed of in a sewer except as may be specifically authorized by the director of water resources. 
(10)  Any substance that may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case, shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal regulations or permits issued under section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(11)  Any wastewater that imparts objectionable color which cannot be removed by the POTW's treatment process, including but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts sufficient color to cause the treatment plant effluent to render the waters injurious to public health or secondary recreation or to aquatic life and wildlife or to adversely affect the palatability of fish or aesthetic quality or impair the receiving waters for any designated uses. 
(12)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved by the director of water resources in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(13)  Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, inflow, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, cooling water, and unpolluted industrial wastewater unless specifically authorized by the director of water resources. 
(14)  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than two hundred (200) mg/L whether emulsified or not, provided that up to five hundred (500) mg/L may be discharged by permit authority. Also prohibited are any wastes containing the above substances which may solidify or become viscous in the system at temperatures between 32° and 150° degrees Fahrenheit. 
(15)  Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
(16)  Any medical wastes except as specifically authorized by the director of water resources in a wastewater discharge permit. 
(17)  Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts, or other chelating agents that will produce metallic complexes that interfere with the municipal wastewater system. 
(18)  Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the municipal wastewater system. 
(19)  Any wastewater causing the treatment plant effluent to violate state water quality standards for toxic substances as described in 15A NCAC 2B.0200. 
(20)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test. 
(21)  Recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy. 
    Pollutants, substances, wastewater, or other wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the municipal wastewater system. All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial use's pretreatment facility before connecting with the system. 
    When the director of water resources determines that a user(s) is contributing into the POTW any of the above enumerated substance(s) in such amount which may cause or contribute to interference of POTW operation or pass though, the director of water resources shall: 
a.  Advise the user(s) of the potential impact of the contribution on the POTW in accordance with section 21-40.2; and 
b.  Take appropriate actions in accordance with section 21-33 for such user to protect the POTW from interference or pass through. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-30.2. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are required to comply with applicable standards as set out in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 and incorporated herein. 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the director of water resources may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.6(c). 
(2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the director of water resources shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR Part 403.6(e). 
(3)  Any user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR Part 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)  Any industrial user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.15. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-30.3. - Local limits. 
    An industrial waste survey will be required of any sure or potential use whose wastewaters or potential wastewaters exceed typical domestic concentrations or whose wastes contain pollutants which contribute greater than one (1) percent of the design or treatment capacity (i.e. allowable pollutant loading) of the wastewater treatment plant. The industrial waste survey will be used to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in this section. The following limits will be considered to be domestic limits for purposes of initiating the industrial waste survey. 
200 mg/L CBOD 0.061 mg/L copper 600 mg/L COD 250 mg/L TSS 0.015 mg/L cyanide 0.049 mg/L lead 40 mg/L TKN 0.0003 mg/L mercury 25 mg/L Ammonia as Nitrogen 0.021 mg/L nickel 0.005 mg/L silver 0.003 mg/L selenium 2.0 mg/L fluoride 0.050 mg/L total chromium 0.003 mg/L arsenic 0.150 mg/L zinc 0.003 mg/L cadmium 0.0003 mg/L molybdenum  
    Industrial user-specific local limits for appropriate pollutants of concern shall be included in wastewater permits and are considered pretreatment standards. The director of water resources may impose mass limits in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limits above. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-30.4. - State requirements. 
    State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this section. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-30.5. - Right of revision. 
    The city reserves the right to establish limitations and requirements that are more stringent than those required by either state or federal regulation if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in section 21-28.1 or the general and specific prohibitions in section 21-30.1, as is allowed by 40 CFR Part 403.4. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-30.6. - Dilution. 
    No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards, unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-31. - Pretreatment of wastewater. 
Sec. 21-31.1. - Pretreatment facilities. 
    Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this section and wastewater permits issued under section 21-33.2, and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in section 21-30.1 within the time limitations as specified by EPA, the state, or the director of water resources, whichever is more stringent. 
(1)  Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted for review to the city by the director of water resources before construction of facility. The review of such operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this section. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be approved by the director of water resources prior to the user's initiation of changes. 
(2)  Additional pretreatment measures. 
a.  Whenever deemed necessary, the director of water resources may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and require such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this section. 
b.  The director of water resources may require any industrial user discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
c.  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director of water resources, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of fat, oil, grease, or sand except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the director of water resources and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. 
d.  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-31.2. - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
(a)  The director of water resources shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs a plan or other action to control and prevent slug discharges and accidental discharges as defined subsection 21-27(1). All SIUs must be evaluated within one (1) year of being designated an SIU. The director of water resources may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan or other specific action. Alternatively, the director of water resources may develop such a plan for any user. 
(b)  All SIUs are required to notify the director of water resources or duly authorized personnel immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental discharge, discharge of non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load. Also see sections 21-36.5 and 21-36.6. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the director of water resources of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 21-36.6; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-31.3. - Hauled wastewater. 
    The disposal through the city's wastewater treatment facility of hauled wastewater, of all types, shall be under the control of the POTW superintendent and shall be in accordance with any conditions set by the superintendent. Disposal of industrial wastewater shall not be allowed except by specific authorization of the director of water resources. 
(1)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the POTW superintendent, and at such times as are established by the POTW superintendent. Such waste shall not violate section 21-30 or any other requirements established by the city. The director of water resources may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. 
(2)  The director of water resources shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain written permission to discharge. The director of water resources may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The director of water resources may require the industrial waste generator or hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. The director of water resources also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this section. 
(3)  The POTW superintendent may require samples to be taken of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. 
(4)  Waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste hauler, any applicable permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of the waste. If industrial wastes, the form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and a statement stating that the wastes contain no known hazardous or regulated wastes per (40 CFR 261). 
(5)  Fees for such discharge shall be charged according to a schedule adopted by the city council and published in the city's administrative policy manual. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-32. - Use of public sewers required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property in areas under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal excrement, garbage, or objectionable waste. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet in areas under the jurisdiction of the city any wastewater except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this section and with regulations of the DQW. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is a public sanitary sewer, is hereby required at the expense of the owner to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this section, within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the property line. Under unusual or specific circumstances, the city may waive this provision. 
    An owner who has a private wastewater disposal system that complies with all recommendations of the Nash and Edgecombe County health department and the DQW shall have the option of paying the sewer use fee in lieu of connecting to the public sewer. In such case the owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facility in a sanitary manner in accordance with the recommendations of the Nash or Edgecombe County health department and the DQW and shall bear the cost of operating and maintaining the private wastewater disposal system at no expense to the city. 
    Where a sanitary sewer is not available within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a property line, the owner shall not be required to pay a sewer use fee. At such time as a public sanitary sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, the owner shall be required to pay the sewer use fee whether or not he elects to connect to the public system. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-32.1. - Connecting unpolluted waters. 
    No person shall make any connection of roof down spouts, exterior foundation drains, area drains, or other sources of inflow, groundwater, or other unpolluted waters to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected, directly or indirectly, to a public sanitary sewer. Unpolluted waters may be discharged to city storm sewers and drainage ditches subject to approval of the director of water resources and provided that all required federal, state, and local permits required for such a discharge are secured by the person causing the discharge. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-32.2. - Multiple connections through one-building sewer. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one (1) building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no sanitary sewer is available nor can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway. The building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one-building sewer. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-32.3. - Use of old building sewers. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, upon examination and testing by the director of water resources, to meet all requirements of the city and this section. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-32.4. - Connection of building sewer to public sewer. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining written approval from the director of water resources. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer provided, however, that such indemnification shall not extend to loss or damage due solely to willful misconduct or negligence on the part of the city. All new building sewers including any necessary replacement of existing building sewers shall comply with the current and applicable state building code standards for plumbing. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to keep and maintain the building sewer connected to the public sewer in good repair. The owner shall be responsible for making necessary repairs, at his own expense, to the building sewer when notified in writing by the director of water resources that repairs are necessary. Should the owner fail to repair the building sewer within fifteen (15) days after receiving written notification that such repairs are necessary, the city may make the necessary repairs and shall assess the owner for the cost of the repairs. 
    Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, wastewater carried by such building drain may be lifted by a means approved by the city and discharged to the building sewer. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of applicable building and plumbing codes and other applicable rules and regulations of the city. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any connection to a public sewer shall be made at an existing manhole or one built for that connection at the expense of the user. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures shall be approved by the city before installation. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-32.5. - Special interceptors. 
    Grease, oil, and sand interceptor sewers shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director of water resources, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable oil in excessive amounts, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director of water resources, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at his expense in continuously efficient operation at all times. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal, which are subject to review by the state, county, or the director of water resources. Any removal and hauling of collected materials shall be performed according to applicable state, federal, and local regulations. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-32.6. - Outside connections. 
    Any person owning or controlling premises located beyond the corporate limits of the city and desiring to install a plumbing system for the purpose of discharging domestic sewage and/or industrial waste into the sanitary sewers of the city may do so by complying with the requirements of this section and paying an additional permit fee and a yearly sewer rental charge to be fixed by the city council. The fees prescribed in the city's administrative policy manual as well as the monthly sewer service charges. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-32.7. - Protection from damages. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any element or appurtenances of the POTW including equipment belonging to the city used for the purposes of making tests or examinations and left upon the premises of a person discharging wastes into the sewers. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-33. - Permits, application and issuance. 
Sec. 21-33.1. - Wastewater dischargers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or discharge to the POTW without first obtaining the permission of the city. By discharging into the city's wastewater system, the user agrees to comply with the terms in and conditions of this section, as well as any permit, enforcement actions, or orders issued hereunder. When requested by the director of water resources, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request. The director of water resources is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-33.2. - Industrial permits. 
    All significant industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial user permit prior to the commencement of discharge to the POTW. Existing industrial users who are determined by the director of water resources to be significant industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial user permit within one hundred eighty (180) days of receiving notification of the director of water resources' determination. Industrial users who do not fit the significant industrial user criteria may at the discretion of the director of water resources be required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit for non-significant industrial users. 
(1)  Significant industrial user determination. All industrial users proposing to discharge non-domestic wastewater, or proposing to change the volume or characteristics of an existing discharge of non-domestic wastewater shall request from the director of water resources a significant industrial user determination. If the director of water resources determines or suspects that the proposed discharge fits the significant industrial user criteria he will require that a significant industrial user permit application be filed. 
(2)  Significant industrial user permit application. Users required to obtain a significant industrial user permit shall complete and file with the city, an application in the form prescribed by the director of water resources, and accompanied by an application fee in the amount prescribed in the schedule of charges and fees. Significant industrial users shall apply for a significant industrial user permit within ninety (90) days after notification of the director of water resources' determination in section 21-33.2(1). The application shall include at a minimum the information required by 15A NCAC 02H 0.0916 (c)(1)(A-M). In support of the application, the user shall submit, any other information deemed necessary by the director of water resources to evaluate the permit application. This may include reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12 (b) and section 21-36. The application shall include at a minimum: 
a.  Name of industrial user; 
b.  Address of industrial user; 
c.  Standard industrial classification (SIC) code(s) or expected classification and industrial user category; 
d.  Wastewater flow; 
e.  Types and concentrations (or mass) of pollutants contained in the discharge; 
f.  Major products manufactured or services supplied; 
g.  Description of existing on-site pretreatment facilities and practices; 
h.  Locations of discharge points; 
i.  Raw materials used or stored at the site; 
j.  Flow diagram or sewer map for the industrial user; 
k.  Number of employees; 
l.  Operation and production schedules; and 
m.  Description of current and projected waste reduction activities in accordance with G.S. 143-215.1(g); 
(3)  Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by the current authorized representative of the user on file with the director of water resources or duly authorized representative for the city, as defined in subsection 21-27(1) authorized representative and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(4)  Application review and evaluation. The director of water resources will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. 
a.  The director of water resources is authorized to accept applications for the city and shall refer all applications to the POTW staff for review and evaluation. 
b.  Within thirty (30) days of receipt the director of water resources shall acknowledge and accept the complete application; or if not complete, shall return the application to the applicant with a statement of what additional information is required. 
(5)  Tentative determination and draft permit. 
a.  The POTW staff shall conduct a review of the application and an on-site inspection of the significant industrial user, including any pretreatment facilities, and shall prepare a written evaluation and tentative determination to issue or deny the significant industrial user permit. 
b.  If the staff's tentative determination in subsection a. is to issue the permit, the following additional determination shall be made in writing: 
1.  Proposed discharge limitations for those pollutants proposed to be limited; 
2.  A proposed schedule of compliance, including interim dates and requirements, for meeting the proposed limitations; and 
3.  A brief description of any other proposed special conditions that will have significant impact upon the discharge described in the application. 
c.  The staff shall organize the determinations made pursuant to subsections a. and b. and the city's general permit conditions into a significant industrial user permit. 
(6)  Permit supporting documentation. City staff shall prepare the following documents for all significant industrial user permits. 
(1)  An allocation table (AT) listing permit information for all significant industrial users, including but not limited to permit limits, permit effective and expiration dates, and a comparison of total permitted flows and loads with division approved maximum allowable loadings of the POTW, including flow, on forms or in a format approved by the division. The AT shall be updated as permits are issued or renewed, and as permits are modified where the permitted limits or other AT information is revised. 
(2)  The basis, or rationale, for the pretreatment limitations, including the following: 
(A)  Documentation of categorical determination, including documentation of any calculations used in applying categorical pretreatment standards; and 
(B)  Documentation of the rationale of any parameters for which monitoring has been waived under 40 CFR Part 403.12(e)(2). 
(7)  Final action on significant industrial user applications. 
a.  The director of water resources shall take final action on all applications not later than ninety (90) days following receipt of a complete application. 
b.  The director of water resources is authorized to: 
1.  Issue a significant industrial user permit containing such conditions as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of this section and G.S. 143-215.1; 
2.  Issue a significant industrial user permit containing time schedules for achieving compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements; 
3.  Modify any permit upon not less than sixty (60) days notice and pursuant to subsection 21-33.2(8); 
4.  Revoke any permit pursuant to section 21-40.2; 
5.  Suspend a permit pursuant to section 21-40.2; 
6.  Deny a permit application when in the opinion of the director of water resources such discharge may cause or contribute to pass through or interference of the wastewater treatment plant or where necessary to effectuate the purposes of G.S. 143-215.1. 
(8)  Permit modification. 
a.  Modification of permits shall be subject to the same procedural requirements as the issuance of permits except as listed below. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
1.  Changes in the ownership of the discharge when no other change in the permit is indicated; 
2.  A single modification of any compliance schedule not in excess of four (4) months; 
3.  Modification of compliance schedules (construction schedules) in permits for new sources where the new source will not begin to discharge until control facilities are operational. 
b.  Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a federal categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to federal categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by subsection 21-33.2(2), the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of the applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard. 
c.  A request for a modification by the permittee shall constitute a waiver of the 60-day notice required by G.S. 143-215.1(b) for modifications. 
(9)  Permit conditions. 
a.  The director of water resources shall have the authority to grant a permit with such conditions attached as he believes necessary to achieve the purpose of this section and G.S. 143-215.1. Wastewater permits shall contain, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  A statement of duration; 
2.  A statement of non-transferability; 
3.  Applicable effluent limits based on categorical standards or local limits or both; 
4.  Applicable monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; 
5.  Requirements for notifying the POTW in the event of an accidental discharge and/or slug load as defined in subsection 21-27(1); 
6.  Requirements to implement a plan or other controls for prevention of accidental discharges and/or slug loads as defined in subsection 21-27(1) if determined by the director of water resources to be necessary for the users and 
7.  Requirements for immediately notifying the POTW of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental discharges, or slug load as defined in subsection 21-27(1). Also see sections 21-36.5 and 21-36.6 
8.  A statement of applicable civil and/or criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable compliance schedule. 
b.  In addition, permits may contain, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization. 
2.  Limits on the instantaneous, daily and/or monthly average and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater pollutants or properties. 
3.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or construction of appropriate containment devices, etc., designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works. 
4.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the municipal wastewater system. 
5.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the system. 
6.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment. 
7.  Specifications for monitoring programs that may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests, and reporting schedules. 
8.  Requirements for immediate reporting of any instance of noncompliance and for automatic resampling and reporting within thirty (30) days where self-monitoring indicates a violation(s). 
9.  Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment standards and requirements. 
10.  Requirements for submission of periodic self-monitoring or special notification reports. 
11.  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plans and records relating to wastewater discharges as specified in section 21-35.3 and affording the director of water resources, or his representatives, access thereto. 
12.  Requirements for prior notification and approval by the director of water resources of any new introduction of wastewater pollutants or of any significant change in the volume or character of the wastewater prior to introduction in the system. 
13.  Requirements for the prior notification and approval by the director of water resources of any change in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process used by the permittee. 
14.  A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those becoming effective during the terms of the permit. 
15.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director of water resources to ensure compliance with this section, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(10)  Permits duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. 
(11)  Permit transfer. Wastewater permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation. 
(12)  Permit reissuance. A significant industrial user shall apply for permit re-issuance by submitting a complete permit application in accordance with section 21-33.2 a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-33.3. - Contesting decisions involving permits and enforcement. 
(a)  Initial adjudicatory hearing. 
(1)  Right to a hearing. A user shall have the right to an adjudicatory hearing before the city manager if: 
a.  Its application for a permit is denied; 
b.  Its application for a permit is granted subject to conditions the user contends are unacceptable; 
c.  It is assessed a civil penalty pursuant to section 21-40.3; or 
d.  It is issued any administrative order, including an ex parte order pursuant to section 21-40.2. 
(2)  Request for a hearing. It is the policy of the city that all reasonable efforts should be made to attempt to settle any dispute arising between the city and a user through informal procedures. Nevertheless, any user wishing to exercise the right to an adjudicatory hearing must make written demand for the hearing to the director of water resources within thirty (30) days following receipt of notice of permit denial, the granting of a significant industrial user permit subject to conditions the user contends are unacceptable, a civil penalty assessment, or an administrative order it wishes to contest. The written request for a hearing must identify the specific issues to be contested, and must state whether the user contends that the director of water resources in taking the action at issue, has: 
a.  Exceeded his authority or jurisdiction; 
b.  Failed to use proper procedure; 
c.  Acted arbitrarily or capriciously; and/or 
d.  Failed to act as required by law. 
Unless such written demand is made within the time specified in this subsection, and contains the information specified in the subsection, the action of the director of water resources at issue shall constitute final city action, and shall be binding and further appeal is barred. For modified permits, only those parts of the permit being modified may be adjudicated. The terms and conditions of a permit under appeal shall be as written in Section 21-33.3(c). 
(3)  Conduct of the hearing. 
a.  All adjudicatory hearings shall take place at city hall. The city manager shall give the user at least ten (10) days prior written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing. 
b.  The user and the city's water resources department shall be allowed to introduce into evidence at the hearing any arguments on issues of law and policy, and any documentary evidence and testimony relevant to the action of the director of water resources which is at issue. All documentary evidence shall become part of the official record. Any testimony admitted must be given under oath. The user and the city's water resources department shall have the right to cross-examine any witness called by the other party. Both the user and the city's water resources department may offer rebuttal evidence. 
c.  The city manager may, in his discretion, issue notices requiring the attendance and testimony of any witness and the production of any evidence relative to any matter involved in the hearing. 
d.  The hearing shall be stenographically recorded. The city and the user shall equally bear the costs for such recording. The transcript from the hearing shall become part of the official record. 
(4)  City manager's decision. The city manager shall render his written decision with respect to the action of the director of water resources within forty-five (45) days of receipt by the director of a request for an adjudicatory hearing. The city manager may either uphold, overturn, or modify the director's action at issue. The director shall forward a copy of the city manager's written decision to the user by certified mail. 
(b)  Final appeal hearing. Any decision made by the city manager pursuant to subsection (4) may be appealed, to the city council by the user. In order to obtain such a final hearing, the user must serve upon the director of water resources a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days of receipt of notice of the city manager's written decision. If the user fails to give such notice, the user shall lose the right to further appeal, and the city's action, as set forth in the city manager's decision, shall become final. If such notice is properly given, the city council shall consider the record developed before the city manager and shall hear any arguments relevant to the city's action at issue. If the city council determines that further evidence is needed, it will remand the issue to the city manager for further fact-finding proceedings, to which the provisions of subsections (3) and (4) shall apply. The city council shall make a final, written decision after reviewing the city manager's decision within ninety (90) days from the date the appeal was received. The city council shall uphold, reverse or modify the decision of the city manager. A copy of the written decision of the city council shall be forwarded to the user by certified mail. The decision is a final decision for purposes of seeking judicial review. 
(c)  Status of permits pending administrative or judicial appeal. 
(1)  New permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in the general courts of justice, of the terms or conditions of a newly issued permit, the terms and conditions of the entire permit are stayed and the permit is not in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution. 
(2)  Renewed permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in the general courts of justice, of the terms or conditions of a renewed permit, the terms and conditions of the existing permit remain in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution. 
(3)  Terminated permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in the general courts of justice, of a terminated permit, no permit is in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution. 
(d)  Official record. When a final decision is issued under section 21-33.3(b), the city council shall have prepared an official record of the case that includes: 
(1)  All notices, motions, and other like pleadings; 
(2)  A copy of all documentary evidence introduced; 
(3)  A certified transcript of all testimony taken; and 
(4)  A copy of the final decision of city council. 
(e)  Judicial review. Any person against whom a final order or decision of the city council is entered, pursuant to subsection 21-33.3(b), may seek judicial review in the nature of certiorari of the order or decision by filing a written request for review within thirty (30) days after receipt of a copy of such order or decision, but not thereafter, with the Superior Court of Nash or Edgecombe County along with a copy of such notice to the city. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of the copy of the petition of judicial review by the court, the city council shall transmit to the reviewing court the original or a certified copy of the official record. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-33.4. - City resale customers. 
    Any city resale customer having or desiring to install a sewer system for the purpose of discharging domestic and/or industrial wastes into the sanitary sewers of the city or into a sewer system which ultimately discharges into the sanitary sewers of the city, may do so by complying with and adopting this section as its own and by securing a contract with the city. 
(1)  Any city resale customer as described above shall: 
a.  Require all new industries desiring to discharge industrial and/or domestic wastewater into that city resale customer's system, to obtain written permission and if necessary a discharge permit from the city before connecting to the sanitary sewers of that city resale customer. The city shall have access to the property of the discharger in accordance with the provisions of section 21-38 
b.  Require that all applications to the approval authority for non-discharge permits for sewer main extensions be issued by the city. 
c.  Show evidence as may be required by the city that the city resale customer is enforcing this section. 
d.  Construct and maintain, at its own expense, as may be required by the city, a metering station in accordance with the city's specifications and standards at each point of discharge of wastewater into the city's sanitary sewer system. Representatives of the city shall have access to the stations and control of actual meter readings. The sewer charges invoked by the city on the city resale customer shall be based on these meter readings. 
(2)  Technical services may be rendered by the city to the city resale customer under special agreement and with the approval of the director of water resources. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-34. - Reserved. 
Sec. 21-35. - Analytical requirements. 
Sec. 21-35.1. - Analytical techniques. 
    All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed by a laboratory certified by the state of North Carolina to perform the wastewater analyses in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard or unless otherwise performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA or the city. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA and city. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-35.2. - Sample collection. 
(a)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(b)  Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, volatile organic compounds, and any other pollutants as required by 40 CFR 136. The POTW shall determine the number of grabs necessary to be representative of the user's discharge. See 40 CFR 403.12(g)(5) for additional grab sample number requirements for BMR and 90-day compliance reports. Additionally, director of water resources or duly authorized personnel may allow collection of multiple grabs during a 24-hour period which are composited prior to analysis as allowed under 40 CFR 136. 
(c)  Composite samples. All wastewater composite samples shall be collected with a minimum of hourly aliquots or grabs for each hour that there is a discharge. All wastewater composite samples shall be collected using flow proportional composite collection techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the director of water resources or duly authorized personnel. When authorizing time-proportional composites or grabs, the samples must be representative and the decision to allow the alternative sampling must be documented. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-35.3. - Timing. 
    Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
    The director of water resources may develop procedures for the receipt of electronic reports for any reporting requirements of this section. Such procedures shall comply with 40 CFR Part 3. These procedures shall be enforceable under section 21-40. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-35.4. - Record keeping. 
    Users subject to the reporting requirements of this section shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this section and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director of water resources. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-35.5. - Special reporting requirements for industrial users in satellite users jurisdiction 
    In the case of an industrial user located in a satellite user's jurisdiction, all information required to be reported by the ordinance from which this article derives shall be reported to the satellite user and the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-36. - Reporting requirements. 
Sec. 21-36.1. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR Part 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director of water resources a report containing the information listed in subsection (b). At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard shall submit to the director of water resources a report that contains the information listed in subsection (b). A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram that indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR Part 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the director of water resources, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 21-35.1 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 21-35.2 and 40 CFR 403.12(b) and (g) including 40 CFR 403.12(g)(4). 
(6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's current authorized representative as defined in subsection 21-27(1) and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O and M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O and M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O and M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 21-36.2 
(8)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 21-33.2(3) 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-36.2. - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
    The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by section 21-36.1. 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the director of water resources no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the director of water resources. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-36.3. - Compliance reports for categorical pretreatment standard deadline report. 
    Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director of water resources a report containing the information described in subsections 21-36.1(b)(4)-(6). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR Part 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 21-33.2. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-36.4. - Periodic compliance reports. 
    The following conditions shall apply to all permittees that are required to submit periodic compliance reports: 
(1)  All significant industrial users, at a frequency determined by the director of water resources (but in such case, no less than twice per year in June and December), indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge that are limited by pretreatment standards and the applicable flows for the reporting period. Sampling and analysis must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in sections 21-35.1 and 21-35.2. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 21-33.2). 
(2)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are not representative of the user's discharge. 
(3)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this division monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director of water resources using the procedures prescribed in section 21-35.1, the results of that monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-36.5. - Reports of changed conditions. 
    Each user must notify the director of water resources of any planned significant changes to the user's operation or system that might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the change. The permittee shall not begin the changes until receiving written approval from the director of water resources. See subsection 21-36.6(d) for other reporting requirements. 
(1)  The director of water resources may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 21-33.2 
(2)  The director of water resources may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 21-33.2 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 21-33.2 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases or decreases of twenty (20) percent or greater, or the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, or any new introduction of wastewater pollutants or of any significant change in the volume or character of pollutants prior to discharge. Such changes might include: increases or decreases to production; increase in discharge of previously reported pollutants; discharge of pollutants not previously reported to the city; new or changed product lines; new or changed manufacturing processes or chemicals. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-36.6. - Reports of potential problems. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in subsection 21-27(1), that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the director of water resources of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the director of water resources, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability that may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability that may be imposed pursuant to this section. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (a). Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(d)  All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental discharge, discharge of non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in subsection 21-27(1). 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-36.7. - Reports from unpermitted users. 
    All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the director of water resources or duly authorized personnel as the director of water resources may require. 
    All users classified as non-significant categorical industrial users under Section 21-27 of this ordinance shall provide appropriate reports to the director of water resources as the director of water resources may require. At a minimum, this shall include the annual certification of continuing to meet the non-significant categorical industrial user criteria as required under 40 CFR 403.12(q). 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-36.8. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
(a)  If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the director of water resources or duly authorized personnel within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the director of water resources or duly authorized personnel within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if: 
(1)  The director of water resources or duly authorized personnel monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or 
(2)  If the director of water resources or duly authorized personnel samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(b)  If the director of water resources has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user and the director of water resources sampling of the user indicates a violation, the director of water resources shall repeat the sampling and obtain the results of the repeat analysis within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violations, unless one (1) of the following occurs: 
(1)  The director of water resources or duly authorized personnel monitors at the user's facility at least once a month; 
(2)  The director of water resources or duly authorized personnel samples the user between their initial sampling and when the POTW receives the results of this initial sampling; or 
(3)  The director of water or duly authorized personnel requires the user to perform sampling and submit the results to the director of water resources or duly authorized personnel within the 30-day deadline of the POTW becoming aware of the violation. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-36.9. - Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(a)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance that, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). 
(b)  If the user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: 
(1)  An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes. 
(2)  An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharge during the calendar month. 
(3)  An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. 
(c)  All notifications must take place no later than one hundred and eighty (180) days before the discharge commences. User shall not begin the discharge until receiving written approval from the city. Any notification under this paragraph needs to be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharge. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section 21-36.5 of this ordinance. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of sections 21-36.1, 21-36.2, 21-36.4 of this ordinance. 
(d)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (a), during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specific in 40 CFR Part 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR Part 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(e)  In the case of any new regulation under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as hazardous waste, the user must notify the director of water resources, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(f)  In the case of any notification made under this division, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(g)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this section, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-37. - Reserved. 
Sec. 21-38. - Compliance monitoring. 
Sec. 21-38.1. - Confidentiality. 
    Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director of water resources that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. 
    When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this section, the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, non-discharge permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
    All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the approval authority and EPA upon request. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-38.2. - Monitoring facilities. 
    The city may require users to provide and operate at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
    There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
    Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-38.3. - Inspection and sampling. 
    The city will inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this section is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city, approval authority and EPA or their representatives ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying or in the performance of any of their duties. The city, approval authority and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force that would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, approval authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. Denial of the city's, approval authorities, or EPA's access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this section. Unreasonable delays may constitute denial of access. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-38.4. - Search warrants. 
    If the city, approval authority, or EPA has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this section, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this section or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the city approval authority, or EPA may seek issuance of a search warrant from any magistrate of the general court of justice, judge, clerk, or assistant or deputy clerk of any court of record whose territorial jurisdiction encompasses the building, structure, or property to be inspected. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-39. - Reserved. 
Sec. 21-40. - Enforcement. 
Sec. 21-40.1. - Publication of significant noncompliance. 
    At least annually, the director of water resources shall publish in a daily newspaper with general circulation in the service jurisdiction served by the city, a list of those industrial users which were found to be in significant noncompliance, also referred to as reportable noncompliance in 15A NCAC 2H .0903(b)(34), with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, during the previous twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-40.2. - Administrative remedies. 
(a)  Notification of violation. Whenever the director of water resources finds that any industrial user has violated or is violating this section, wastewater permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained therein or any other pretreatment requirement, the director of water resources may serve upon such a person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, an explanation for the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the city by the user. Submission of this plan does not relieve the discharger of liability for any violation occurring before or after receipt of the notice of the violation. 
(b)  Consent orders. The director of water resources is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the discharger to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as an administrative order issued pursuant to subsection (d). 
(c)  Show cause hearing. 
(1)  The director of water resources may order any industrial user who causes or is responsible for an unauthorized discharge, has violated this section or is in noncompliance with a wastewater discharge permit to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. In the event the director of water resources determines that a show cause order should be issued, a notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
(2)  The director of water resources shall review the evidence presented at the hearing and determine whether the proposed enforcement action is appropriate. 
(3)  A show cause hearing under this section is not a prerequisite to the assessment of a civil penalty under section 21-40.3 nor is any action or inaction taken by the director of water resources under this section subject to an administrative appeal under section 21-33.3. 
(d)  Administrative orders. When the director of water resources finds that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate this section, permits, or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the director of water resources may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to do any of the following: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; 
(2)  Comply in accordance with a compliance time schedule set forth in the order; 
(3)  Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the event of a continuing or threatened violation; 
(4)  Disconnect unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated within a specified time period. 
(e)  Emergency suspensions. 
(1)  The director of water resources may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or wastewater permit when such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, interferes with the POTW or causes the POTW to violate any conditions of its NPDES or non-discharge permit. 
(2)  Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. A hearing will be held within fifteen (15) days of the notice of suspension to determine whether the suspension may be lifted or the user's waste discharge permit terminated. In the event of a failure to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director of water resources shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. 
(3)  The director of water resources shall reinstate the wastewater permit and the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncompliant discharge. The industrial user shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the director of water resources prior to the date of the above-described hearing. 
(f)  Termination of permit or permission to discharge. The director of water resources may revoke a wastewater discharge permit or permission to discharge for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(2)  Failure to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or 
(4)  Violation of conditions of the permit or permission to discharge, conditions of this article, or any applicable state of federal regulations. 
(g)  Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the proposed termination of their wastewater permit and will be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 21-40.2 why the proposed action should not be taken. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-40.3. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  Any user who is found to have failed to comply with any provision of this section, or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder, may be assessed a civil penalty of up to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per day per violation. 
(b)  In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the director of water resources shall consider the following: 
(1)  The degree and extent of the harm to the natural resources, to the public health, or to public or private property resulting from the violation; 
(2)  The duration and gravity of the violation; 
(3)  The effect on ground or surface water quantity or quality or on air quality; 
(4)  The cost of rectifying the damage; 
(5)  The amount of money saved by noncompliance; 
(6)  Whether the violation was committed willfully or intentionally; 
(7)  The prior record of the violator in complying or failing to comply with the pretreatment program; 
(8)  The costs of enforcement to the city. 
(c)  Appeals of civil penalties assessed in accordance with this section shall be provided in section 21-33.3 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-40.4. - Other available remedies. 
    Remedies, in addition to those previously mentioned in this section, are available to the director of water resources who may use any single one (1) or combination against a noncompliant user. Additional available remedies include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Criminal violations. The district attorney for the city's judicial district may, at the request of the city, prosecute noncompliant users who violate the provisions of G.S. 143-215.6B. Under state law, it is a crime to negligently violate any term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit, or negligently fail to apply for a pretreatment permit, issued by city (G.S. 143-215.6B(f)), to knowingly and willfully violate any term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit issued by city (G.S. 143-215.6B(g), to knowingly violate any term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit issued by city, or knowingly fail to apply for a pretreatment permit, knowing at the time that a person is placed in imminent danger of death or serious bodily injury, (G.S. 143-215.6B(h)), and to falsify information required under Section 21 of Chapter 143 of the General Statutes (G.S. 143-215.6B(i)). 
(2)  Injunctive relief. Whenever a user is in violation of the provisions of this section or an order or permit issued hereunder, the director of water resources, through the city attorney, may petition the superior court of justice for the issuance of a restraining order or preliminary and permanent injunction that restrains or compels the activities in question. 
(3)  Water supply severance. Whenever an industrial user is in violation of the provisions of this section or an order or permit issued hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated ability to comply. 
(4)  Public nuisances. Any violation of the prohibitions or effluent limitations of this section or of a permit or order issued hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the director of water resources. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the city's code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the POTW for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-40.5. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
    The remedies provided for in this section are not exclusive. The director of water resources may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the director of water resources may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the director of water resources is empowered to take more than one (1) enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-41. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
Sec. 21-41.1. - Upset. 
(a)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (b) are met. 
(b)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(3)  The user has submitted the following information to the director of water resources within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days): 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to be taken to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(c)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(d)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(e)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility fails, or is reduced or lost. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-41.2. - Prohibited discharge standards defense. 
    A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in subsection 21-30.1(a) or the specific prohibitions in subsections 21-30.1(b)(2), (3), (5)-(7) and (9)-(21) if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, whether alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to and during the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(3)  An upset means an exceptional incident in which there is an unintentional and temporary noncompliance with the limits contained in this ordinance or with permittee permit limits because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the permittee. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed or inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operations. 
    An upset may constitute an affirmative defense for action brought for the noncompliance. The permittee has the burden of proof to provide evidence and demonstrate that none of the factors specifically listed above were responsible for the noncompliance. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
Sec. 21-41.3. - Bypass. 
(a)  A user may allow any bypass to occur that does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections (b) and (c). 
(b)  Notice. 
(1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the director of water resources, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the director of water resources of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The director of water resources may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(c)  Prohibition of bypass. 
(1)  Bypass is prohibited, and the director of water resources may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass that occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (b). 
(2)  The director of water resources may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the director of water resources determines that it will meet the three (3) conditions listed in subsection (c)(1). 
(Ord. No. O-2013-71, § 1(Exh. A), 6-24-13) 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY 

Sec. 21-42. - Purpose. 
    This article establishes a stormwater management utility as an identified fiscal and accounting fund for the purpose of addressing and funding the overall stormwater management needs of the city from a comprehensive approach to meet applicable state and federal stormwater regulations and shall include (a) stormwater management programs designed to protect water quality by controlling the level of pollutants in, and flow of, stormwater and (b) structural and natural stormwater and drainage systems of all types. 
(Ord. No. 0-01-83, § 1, 11-12-01) 
Sec. 21-43. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings given to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Credits shall mean on-going reductions in the stormwater service charge applicable to a given property in recognition of on-site or off-site systems, facilities, measures, or other actions taken by customers to reduce or mitigate the impact of their properties or actions on the quantity or quality of stormwater run off that would otherwise be managed in the public system. Credits shall be conditioned on the continuing performance of the systems, facilities, measures, or other actions in reference to standards adopted by the city council upon which the credits are granted, and may be revised or rescinded. In no case shall credits exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the annual stormwater service charge. 
    Detached single-family/duplex residential shall mean developed land containing one (1) structure which is not attached to another dwelling unit and which contains one (1) or more rooms with a bathroom and kitchen facilities designed for occupancy by one (1) family and shall include single family houses, individual duplex units designed for occupancy by one (1) family in each unit, and manufactured homes and mobile homes located on individual lots or parcels of land. Developed land may be classified as "detached single-family/duplex residential" despite the presence of incidental structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports or small storage buildings. "Detached single-family/duplex residential" shall not include developed land containing: structures used primarily for non-residential purposes; manufactured homes and mobile homes located within manufactured home or mobile home parks; or other multiple unit properties. 
    Developed land shall mean property altered from a natural state that contains impervious or partially impervious cover, including buildings, pavement, gravel roads, recreation areas (e.g. tennis courts), etc. 
    Equivalent residential unit (ERU) shall mean two thousand, five hundred nineteen (2,519) square feet of impervious surface or any fraction thereof. Two thousand, five hundred nineteen (2,519) square feet is the statistical average for impervious area on a single-family lot in the City of Rocky Mount. 
    Impervious surface shall mean any built upon area that impedes the infiltration of water into the soil. This includes but is not limited to developed land areas covered by concrete, asphalt, rooftops, stone and other building materials. 
    Other properties shall mean any developed land not fitting the definition of detached single-family/duplex residential. "Other properties" shall include, but not be limited to, attached single-family houses with greater than two (2) units, townhouses and condominiums, apartments, boarding houses, hotels and motels, churches, commercial properties which include dwelling units, manufactured home or mobile home parks, commercial and office buildings, storage areas, parking lots and other impervious areas, parks, recreational properties, public and private schools and colleges, hospitals, nursing homes, assisted care homes, convalescent centers, office buildings, airports, agricultural uses involving impervious surfaces, and water and wastewater treatment plants. Real properties which are used for other than single-family residential use located in single-family residential structures or duplexes shall be deemed other properties for the purpose of calculating the stormwater service charge. The definition of "other properties" shall be broadly construed such that any property having areas of impervious coverage shall be subject to the stormwater service charge unless otherwise provided. 
    Service charge shall mean the stormwater service charges applicable to a parcel of developed land, which is generally reflective of a parcel's impact on the cost of providing services and facilities to properly control stormwater runoff quantity and/or quality. 
    Stormwater shall mean the runoff from precipitation that travels over natural or developed surfaces to the nearest stream, other conduit, or impoundment and appears in lakes, rivers, ponds, or other bodies of water. 
    Stormwater drainage system or storm sewer system shall mean the system of natural and constructed channels, swales, ditches, swamps, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainage ways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, headwalls, storm sewers, lakes, or other physical works, properties, and improvements which transfer, control, convey or otherwise influence the movement of stormwater runoff. 
    Stormwater management programs shall mean programs designed to protect water quality by monitoring and controlling the level of pollutants in, and the flow of, stormwater and shall include mapping, planning, review, construction, operation, cleaning, maintenance, inspection, regulation and administration of other programs related to structural and natural stormwater systems. 
    Stormwater utility shall mean a management structure that is responsible solely and specifically for the stormwater management program and system and that is supported through a rate structure that is based on the amount of stormwater generated by individual properties. 
    Undeveloped land shall mean land that does not meet the definition of developed lands. 
(Ord. No. 0-01-83, § 1, 11-12-01; Ord. No. 0-2003-51, § 1, 6-9-03) 
Sec. 21-44. - Establishment of a stormwater management utility and enterprise fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a stormwater management utility for the city which shall be responsible for stormwater management programs and which shall provide for the design, management, construction, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater and drainage systems. 
(b)  There is hereby established a stormwater management enterprise fund for the city for the purpose of dedicating, protecting and accounting for all funding applicable to and used for the purposes and responsibilities of the stormwater utility including but not limited to such rents, rates, fees, charges, and penalties as may be established, after notice and public hearing, by city council and shall include such additional funds as may be transferred or allocated to the stormwater management utility. All revenues and receipts of the stormwater management utility shall be placed in the stormwater enterprise fund. Additional funds not in the stormwater enterprise fund may be applied to stormwater management programs and stormwater drainage systems as authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 0-01-83, § 1, 11-12-01) 
Sec. 21-45. - Jurisdiction. 
    The boundaries and jurisdiction of the stormwater management utility shall extend to and include the corporate limits of the city, including noncontiguous portions of the city and shall include all areas hereinafter annexed into the city and such other areas outside the corporate limits as shall be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 0-01-83, § 1, 11-12-01) 
Sec. 21-46. - Impervious coverage and rate unit. 
(a)  Impervious coverage. The amount of impervious coverage of real property is a key factor in the peak rate of stormwater runoff and the pollutant loadings of stormwater runoff discharged into the structural and natural drainage systems and facilities. Therefore, the amount of impervious coverage shall be the primary parameter for establishing the rate structure to distribute the cost of systems and facilities through a schedule of rates, fees, charges, and penalties related to the use and operation of the stormwater utility and public enterprise as established in section 21-44. 
(b)  Establishment of the equivalent residential unit. The area of two thousand, five hundred nineteen (2,519) square feet of impervious surface shall be the basis of one equivalent residential unit. 
(Ord. No. 0-2003-51, § 2, 6-9-03) 
Sec. 21-47. - Schedule of fees and charges. 
(a)  Fee schedule adopted. The schedule of fees and charges set out in this section is hereby adopted and shall apply to all properties within the city except as altered by credits or exemptions. 
(1)  Detached single-family/duplex residential. Each developed detached single-family/duplex residential property shall be billed and shall pay the fee for one (1) equivalent residential unit per dwelling unit. There shall be no charge for detached single-family residential property with fewer than two hundred (200) square feet of impervious surface. 
(2)  Other properties. All other developed properties having impervious coverage, including but not limited to multi-family residential properties, commercial properties, industrial properties, public and institutional properties, church properties, public and private school properties, and publicly owned properties, unless specifically exempted, shall be billed for one (1) equivalent residential unit for each two thousand, five hundred nineteen (2,519) square feet or fraction thereof of impervious coverage on the subject property. There will be no service charge for other properties with fewer than two hundred (200) square feet of impervious surface. 
(b)  Monthly charge per equivalent residential unit (ERU). The monthly service charge per equivalent residential unit shall be the service charge set forth in the City of Rocky Mount Administrative Policy Manual, Fees and Charges Schedules. The monthly service charge per equivalent residential unit shall be set by the city council and may be amended by from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 0-2003-51, § 2, 6-9-03) 
Sec. 21-48. - Billing and collection. 
(a)  Method of billing. Billing and collection of the stormwater service charge and any other rents, rates, fees, charges, and penalties for stormwater management services and facilities shall be accomplished in the manner approved by the city manager. 
(b)  Delinquencies. A stormwater utility service charge billing or other billing for rents, rates, fees, charges, and penalties associated with the stormwater utility is delinquent if not paid in accordance with the customer service policy as set forth in the City of Rocky Mount Administrative Policy Manual. A delinquent billing shall accumulate additional late payment charges and penalties in accordance with the administrative policy, customer service policy and stormwater utility rate schedule. 
(c)  Appeal of disputed bills, adjustments. If any customer disputes the stormwater utility service charge or any other rents, rates, fees, charges, or penalties adopted pursuant to this article, that customer must appeal the billing within twenty-one (21) days of the date of the bill, stating the reasons for the appeal, and providing information pertinent to the calculation of the bill. An appeal of a disputed bill shall be filed with the public works director, who may direct that the appeal be reviewed and resolved by the stormwater utility staff. If the customer is not satisfied with the disposition of the appeal, the customer may further appeal the disputed charge to the city manager or his designee who shall make the final ruling on the validity of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 0-2003-51, § 2, 6-9-03) 
Sec. 21-49. - Disposition of service charges and fees. 
    Stormwater management utility service charge and fee revenues shall be assigned and dedicated solely to the stormwater management enterprise fund in the city budget and accounting system, which shall be and remain separate from other funds, and shall be used only to fund stormwater management programs and structural and natural stormwater and drainage systems. The services charges and fees paid to and collected by virtue of the provisions of this article shall not be used for general or other governmental or proprietary purposes of the city, except to pay for costs incurred by the city in rendering services to the stormwater management utility. 
(Ord. No. 0-2003-51, § 2, 6-9-03) 
Sec. 21-50. - Credits and exemptions. 
(a)  Credit for mitigation measures. Credits against stormwater management utility service charges are an appropriate means of adjusting service charges, fees, rates, rentals, fines, and penalties in certain cases. Crediting mechanisms may be established by the city council and, when established, a credit manual shall be issued that will set forth the appropriate process and documentation to obtain such credits. No exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in stormwater service charges shall be granted based on age, race, tax status, economic status, or religion of the customer, or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. 
(b)  Exemptions. Except as provided in this section, no public or private property shall be exempt from stormwater service charges. The following exemptions shall be allowed: 
(1)  Improved public road rights-of-way, which have been accepted for maintenance by the North Carolina Department of Transportation and are available for use in common for vehicular transportation by the general public, shall be exempt from stormwater service charge. 
(2)  Improved public road rights-of-way, which have been accepted for maintenance by the city and are available for use in common for vehicular transportation by the general public, shall be exempt from the stormwater service charge. 
(Ord. No. 0-2003-51, § 2, 6-9-03) 
Chapter 22 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1, adopted Aug. 28, 1989, amended Ch. 18 of the 1967 Code in its entirety and at the discretion of the editor said provisions have been included herein as a new Ch. 22. The provisions of former Ch. 22 specifically derived from Code 1967, §§ 18-1-18-19, 18-30-18-35, 18-46-18-53; Ord. No. 0-89-18, § 1 adopted Feb. 27, 1989; and Ord. No. 0-89-42, § 1, adopted June 26, 1989. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 13. 
State Law reference- Regulations of taxis, G.S. § 160A-304. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
    In all matters relating to the administration of this chapter whenever and wherever the following terms are used they shall be construed and defined as follows: 
    Certificate of convenience and necessity means a certification by the city council prior to the issuance of a permit to operate a taxicab that public convenience and necessity requires or will be served by the operation of such taxicab. 
    Driver's permit means a permit issued after examination authorizing a person to drive a taxicab or limousine operating under this chapter. 
    Limousine certificate means a permit or license issued to an individual who owns a motor vehicle to be used for hire in a passenger limousine service. Issuance of such license certifies that the owner has met all ordinance requirements for the operation of a limousine in the city. 
    Owner means any individual operating one (1) or more taxicabs or limousines. 
    Owner's permit means a license issued to an individual who owns a motor vehicle or taxicab to be used for hire and transporting passengers within the city. Issuance of such license constitutes a certificate of convenience and necessity. 
    Taxicab, limousine, or vehicle for hire means a passenger motor vehicle, other than motor buses operating along regular routes and upon regular schedules, which shall be used for the purpose of carrying or transporting any person or persons from one place to another for which service a charge or a fee is made. 
    Taximeter means a mechanical instrument or device attached to a taxicab by which the charge for the hire of a taxicab and its corresponding waiting time at a predetermined rate is mechanically calculated and registered for the distance traveled and the period of time awaited and upon which such charges shall be identified by means of figures clearly visible for the passenger's information. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-1), 8-28-89; Ord. No. 0-92-50, § 1, 6-22-92) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-2. - Licensing required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab on the streets, alleys or highways of the city until the city council shall establish that the public convenience and necessity will be served by the operation of such taxicab. An application for such consideration shall be filed with the chief of police and shall contain the following: Full name and address of the owners, the place of business from which it will be operated and such other information as the chief of police, the city manager or the city council may direct. 
(b)  The chief of police shall make investigations as to the fitness of the applicant to operate a taxicab. If the results of the investigations are favorable to the applicant, he shall submit the application to the city manager or his designee. The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish the existence of convenience and necessity to be served by the taxicab. 
    In determining whether or not public convenience and necessity requires or will be promoted by the operation of such taxicab, the city council shall among other things take into consideration the following factors: 
(a)  Whether or not the public convenience and necessity requires such proposed or additional taxicab service within the city. 
(b)  The financial responsibility of the applicant and the likelihood of the proposed service being permanent, responsible and satisfactory. 
(c)  The number and condition of equipment. 
(d)  The schedule of proposed rates to be charged. 
(e)  The number of taxicabs now operated and the demand for increased service, if any, and whether or not the safe use of the streets by the public, both vehicular and pedestrian, will be preserved, and whether or not adequate provision has been made for off-street parking of said taxicabs. 
(f)  The experience of applicant in the taxicab business. 
(g)  Location and method of dispatch. 
(h)  Such other relative facts as may be deemed necessary and advisable. 
    If, after such investigations, the city council is of the opinion that the applicant is a suitable person to operate such taxicab and will use due diligence in safeguarding and protecting its passengers and the interest of the public will be promoted by permitting its operation, the application shall be approved and the chief of police shall issue to the applicant an owner's permit which constitutes a certificate of convenience and necessity. 
    The council shall have the power and it shall be its duty to order certain certificates issued, or to refuse to issue certain certificates, or to issue certificates for a partial exercise only of the privileges sought, and may attach to the exercise of the rights granted only by such certificates such terms and conditions as in their judgment the public convenience and necessity may require. 
    If the council is of the opinion either that the applicant is not a suitable person to engage in the business of operating taxicabs in the city or that the public convenience and necessity does not require and will not be promoted by the licensing of an additional taxicab, the application shall be denied and one (1) or more of the following factors shall be deemed sufficient grounds: 
(1)  Failure of the applicant (owner) to comply with all the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Unpaid or unbonded judgments of record against the applicant (owner). 
(3)  The applicant, from a standpoint of experience and financial responsibility, is not sufficiently qualified and able to render satisfactory taxicab service to the public as the public safety, convenience, and welfare requires. 
(4)  The criminal record of the applicant, if any, is such that it would be against the public interest and welfare for such application to be granted. In addition to felony convictions, misdemeanors of a serious nature may be considered. 
(5)  The applicant has made false or misleading statements in his application. 
(6)  Noncitizenship in the United States; 
(7)  Habitual violation of traffic laws or ordinances. 
(c)  The chief of police may refuse to issue an owner's permit to any person who has been convicted of a felony, or of a violation of any federal or state statute relating to the use, possession, or sale of intoxicating liquors, or of any federal or state statute relating to the use, possession or sale of habit-forming drugs; or to any person who is an habitual user of intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs. 
    The applicant shall be notified when the application will be considered by the council and given an opportunity to attend and be heard. 
(d)  If approved, the applicant shall be granted sixty (60) days from the date of approval to obtain a vehicle to be used in the exercise of the permit, certificates of insurance as required by section 22-9, and a permanent means of twenty-four-hour radio dispatch. Proof that the above requirements have been met shall be submitted to the chief of police or his designee within the sixty-day period. The applicant shall submit, for approval, information on the vehicle to be used. The chief of police, or his designee, shall have the authority to approve such vehicle after considering age, type, mechanical condition, appearance and general suitability of the vehicle to be used as a taxicab. 
    The applicant may appeal disapproval of a vehicle to the city council for review within thirty (30) days of such disapproval. Any such appeal shall be in writing and set forth the reasons for the appeal. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a limousine on the streets or highways of the city until he shall have obtained a certificate for its operation approved by the city council. An application shall be filed with the chief of police and shall contain the following: Full name and address of the owner(s), the place of business from which it will be operated, and documentation of the attainment of public liability and property damage insurance. If the chief of police determines that the applicant is a suitable person to operate such limousine and will use due diligence in safeguarding and protecting its passengers and the interest of the public will be promoted by permitting its operation, he shall recommend to the city council issuance of the limousine certificate. Factors listed in the foregoing portions of section 22-2 shall be considered in making this determination. 
(f)  The issuance of an owner's permit shall constitute a franchise from the city subject to the provisions of this chapter for one (1) year ending on December 31 of each year unless a shorter period of time is specified. Each permit holder shall maintain vehicles, a regular place of business, and a radio dispatch location within the corporate limits of the City of Rocky Mount. Applications for renewal shall be filed annually prior to January 31. Failure to apply for renewal shall constitute surrender of the permit. 
(g)  A limousine certificate shall be valid for one (1) year ending December 31 of each year. Applications for renewal shall be filed annually prior to January 31. 
(h)  Permits are not transferable. 
(i)  In the event that a taxicab owner dies or becomes permanently disabled, the council, at its option, may give priority consideration for reissue of the permit to the spouse of such owner or a member of the owner's family; provided, however, such priority consideration shall not be given unless the spouse or family member has been actively involved with such owner in the taxi business for at least three (3) years prior to the reissuance. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-2), 8-28-89; Ord. No. 0-92-50, § 2, 6-22-92; Ord. No. 0-96-40, § 1, 6-24-96) 
Sec. 22-3. - Revocation and penalties. 
(a)  The required permit and certificate shall be subject to revocation by any court of competent jurisdiction or by the city council for violations of the conditions of issuance specified in this chapter. Pending action by the court or the city council, such permits and certificates shall be subject to revocation by the chief of police. The operator shall be notified when the revocation of his permit will be considered by the city council and he shall be given an opportunity to attend and be heard. 
    An owner's permit may be suspended or revoked by the council at any time the council finds and determines: 
(1)  That the past record of the holder of the owner's permit is unsatisfactory and that it is detrimental to and not in the public interest to permit the continued operation of a taxicab business by such person; or 
(2)  That the owner has failed to operate the taxicab or taxicabs in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; or 
(3)  That the taxicab or taxicabs of the owner have been operated at a rate of fare other than that provided by this chapter; or 
(4)  That the holder of a permit has failed to register properly with the state, in the correct and true owner's name, any taxicab covered by the owner's permit; or 
(5)  That the holder of an owner's permit has been convicted of a felony; or violation of any federal or state statute or city ordinance relating to the possession or sale of intoxicating liquors; or violation of any federal or state statute or city ordinance relating to prostitution; or any federal or state statute or city ordinance relating to the use, possession or sale of narcotic drugs; or repeated violations of traffic laws or ordinances; or becomes a habitual user of intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs; or 
(6)  That the holder of any owner's permit has made a false or misleading statement on his application. 
    No owner's permit shall be suspended or revoked unless and until at least five (5) days' written notice of the time and place of a hearing shall have been given to the holder of such permit and such hearing by and before the council is duly had thereon. 
(b)  In addition to other remedies and sanctions imposed, there is hereby imposed a civil penalty of twenty dollars ($20.00) for failure to observe the standards established, and requirements and restrictions imposed, under this chapter. 
(1)  The levying of civil penalties shall be initiated by any police officer or the taxicab and limousine inspector giving written notice of the infraction committed to the owner or driver, along with a statement that a civil penalty is being imposed. The notice shall inform the owner or driver that he may appeal the civil penalty within ten (10) days to the taxicab inspector. If an appeal is made, a hearing shall be held before the chief of police or his designee, who, following the hearing, shall affirm or reverse the imposition of the penalty. 
(2)  For the second, and successive violations during a single calendar year, the civil penalty shall be double that imposed for the first violation. 
(3)  Civil penalties shall be paid within thirty (30) days to the office of the revenue collector. If not paid, the city may initiate a civil action to collect the unpaid penalties. 
(4)  Permits shall not be issued nor renewed for applicants or their employees having unpaid penalties for violations. 
(5)  In addition to the levying of civil penalties for violations of this chapter, violations shall also be punishable as a misdemeanor offense under section 14-4 of the General Statutes, each day's continuing violation constituting a separate offense. 
(c)  Any change in the ownership of a taxicab, in whole or in part, direct or indirect, regardless of how such change in ownership is effected, shall automatically terminate any owner's permit issued for such taxicab. In addition, a change of ownership shall be deemed to have taken place on the date that the owner of a taxicab enters into a lease, rental agreement, use agreement, option to purchase, or any other agreement, which grants to another the right to acquire the taxicab at some future date upon the payment of money or the providing of some other consideration to the taxicab owner or his designee. No person, regardless of how he acquires title to the vehicle, shall acquire any right to operate the taxicab in the city unless or until he has applied for and been granted an owner's permit in the manner provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-3), 8-28-89; Ord. No. 0-92-50, § 3, 6-22-92; Ord. No. 0-96-40, § 2, 6-24-96) 
Sec. 22-4. - Failure to operate with regularity. 
    Every person having obtained a permit to operate a taxicab shall be required to operate such taxicab in such business with reasonable regularity. Reasonable regularity shall be defined as a minimum of seventy-two (72) hours per week that the vehicle used in the operation of the permit must be available for service. The permit of every taxicab operator shall be subject to revocation if such operator fails to operate such taxicab with reasonable regularity. Every operator of a taxicab who fails to operate with reasonable regularity shall be given ten (10) days' notice to appear before the city council to show just cause why such permit should not be revoked. Such notice shall be made by certified mail to the permit holder. If delivery is refused, no further notice is required. The operator may request an automatic fourteen (14) day continuance before the matter is heard. If, upon such hearing, it shall appear that such taxicab is not being operated in the interest or the convenience and necessity of the public and not being operated with reasonable regularity the city council is authorized to revoke said permit. 
    Hours and days of operation of every valid permit shall be a consideration in the decision to issue or not issue additional certificates as provided in section 22-21. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-4), 8-28-89; Ord. No. 0-89-98, § 1, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 0-92-50, § 4, 6-22-92; Ord. No. 0-92-71, § 1, 9-14-92) 
Sec. 22-5. - Inspection of safety devices and taximeters. 
    Before any vehicle shall be operated as a taxicab or limousine in the city, the owner thereof shall submit the same to the chief of police or his designated assistant at a time and place to be fixed by the chief of police for the inspection of the taximeter and brakes, lights, horns, tires and all other features of said vehicle. If, upon examination of the vehicle by the chief of police or his designated assistant, it is found to be in proper condition, he shall approve the same and issue to the owner a certificate of approval and if found unsafe or unfit for operation or if the vehicle otherwise fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the chief of police shall notify the owner thereof and such vehicle shall not be operated thereafter until it has been put in safe and proper condition. Every taxicab and limousine shall be submitted to the chief of police or his designated assistant for an examination as herein set forth not less than once each ninety (90) days and at such other intervening periods as deemed necessary. Such inspections may be scheduled in advance or unannounced. It shall be the responsibility of each owner to regularly inspect the vehicle(s) for which he is permitted to ensure its safe and proper operating condition. Such inspections by each owner to be provided to the taxicab inspector upon request. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-5), 8-28-89) 
Sec. 22-6. - Ownership designation. 
    Every taxicab operated upon the streets of the city shall have the name of the owner and, at his option, the address and telephone number painted in letters at least two (2) inches in height upon each side of the main portion of the body in a manner plainly visible at all times, and in addition thereto the owner's identifying number shall be painted on each side of the body and on the rear in a conspicuous place in numerals at least three (3) inches high. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-6), 8-28-89) 
Sec. 22-7. - Substitution of vehicles. 
    The person to whom a certificate has been issued may, by appropriate endorsement thereon by the chief of police, or his designee, substitute other vehicles for the vehicles for which certificates were granted. In such instance, the liability insurance or bonds shall also be transferred to such substitute vehicles. Failure to responsibly and lawfully report and maintain liability insurance records and vehicle registrations may render a permit subject to revocation. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-7), 8-28-89) 
Sec. 22-8. - Appearance and cleanliness standards for vehicles and drivers. 
    Each taxicab and limousine owner shall at all times maintain the taxicab he is driving in a clean, sanitary and good mechanical condition to the standard determined by the taxi inspector to be satisfactory. Each taxicab driver shall adhere to the following code of dress and behavior which shall be considered by the taxi inspector at each inspection: 
(a)  T-shirts, shorts and sandals are not permitted attire. 
(b)  Shirts must have collars. 
(c)  Cigarette smoking is permitted only with the passenger's express permission; cigar smoking is never permitted. 
(d)  Daily personal hygiene is required. 
(e)  Hair must be combined neatly. 
(f)  Shirts must be buttoned and shirt tails tucked in. 
(g)  Socks must be worn with shoes. 
The following are recommended standards for taxi drivers: 
(a)  Offering patrons a friendly and courteous greeting and avoiding profanity or offensive language. 
(b)  Opening car doors for passengers when feasible and offering assistance to handicapped and elderly patrons. 
(c)  Playing radios and tape players only with the passenger's permission. 
(d)  Thanking patrons for their business. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-8), 8-28-89) 
Sec. 22-9. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  The owner of every bus, taxicab, limousine, or other motor vehicle engaged in the business of transporting passengers for hire over the public streets of the city shall furnish to the chief of police, to be filed by the city clerk, and keep in effect for each such bus, taxicab or other such vehicle so operated, a policy of insurance or surety bonds, in the forms and issued by such company or executed by such sureties as shall be approved by the city manager, to insure the payment of damages incurred in any one (1) accident for person injuries resulting from the negligent operation of said vehicle to any one person to the extent of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) and to more than one (1) person to the extent of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) and for property damage to the extent of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle for hire within the city and unlawful for the owner thereof to permit the same to be operated unless and until such a public liability insurance policy or surety bond is filed with the chief of police and unless such policy or surety bond is in full force and effect at the time of the operation of said motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-9), 8-28-89) 
State Law reference- Taxicabs proof of financial responsibility to be filed with city, G.S. § 20-280. 
Sec. 22-10. - Fare regulated. 
(a)  Effective June 30, 1992, all taxicabs shall be equipped with taximeters meeting the standards of section 22-18 of this chapter, and it shall be unlawful for an operator of any taxicab or vehicle for hire to charge for transporting any passenger from or to any place inside the corporate limits of the city, taxi fares in excess of the following rates determined by the taximeter, provided that drivers or operators may require payment in advance of the estimated cost of each trip prior to transport. 
(1)  For the first 1/6 th of a mile or fraction thereof ..... $ 2.00 
(2)  For each succeeding 1/6 th of a mile or fraction thereof ..... 0.35 
(3)  Waiting time, per minute ..... 0.30 
Waiting time, per hour ..... 18.00 
To be charged only as provided in subsection (e). 
(b)  In addition to the charges set forth in paragraph (a) of this section, the following handling charges may be charged to transport, load and unload the following if requested by the passenger: 
(1)  Each suitcase, traveling bag or bundles exceeding one in number ..... $ 0.25 
(2)  Each footlocker or other package or article of similar size ..... 0.50 
(3)  Each steamer trunk or other package of similar size ..... 1.00 
(4)  Groceries in bags in excess of one per passenger ..... 0.10 
(5)  Groceries in cartons, boxes or crates, each ..... 0.10 
(6)  Bulky items which weigh more than fifty pounds (such as, but not limited to, bags, cartons, boxes of coal, feed, fertilizer, rolls of paper) ..... 0.50 
(c)  There shall be no additional charge for groups whose trips originate at the same location and whose destination is the same. The maximum number of passengers which may be transported in a taxicab is five (5). 
(d)  For multiple passengers boarding at different locations and traveling to different destinations, the first passenger leaving the taxicab shall be chargeable for the amount of the fare shown on the taximeter and before proceeding to transport the remaining passenger(s), the flag shall again be placed in the earning position so as to designate the beginning of a new and separate trip as to the remaining passenger(s) in such taxicab and such process shall be repeated each time a passenger reaches his/her destination and alights from the taxicab so that the last passenger(s) leaving the taxicab shall be chargeable with such fare appearing upon the taximeter upon leaving the taxicab unless otherwise arranged between the taxicab operator and the passengers. Provided that for taxicabs equipped with taximeters capable of multiple flag drops so that each passenger's fare is calculated separately from the point of pickup to his/her destination, this method 
shall be employed to charge each passenger unless otherwise arranged between the taxicab operator and the passengers. 
    In no case, however, shall the fares charged exceed the amount as calculated by one (1) of the above methods or as provided in subsection (c). 
(e)  Waiting time shall be defined as the period of time consumed when a taxicab is not in motion at the direction of a passenger from the time of acceptance of a passenger(s) to the time of discharge and also the time consumed while a driver is waiting for a passenger after having responded to a call but does not include the time consumed by a premature response or for the first three (3) minutes following the timely arrival in response to a call or for delay caused by traffic interruption, the inefficiency of the taxicab or its driver or due to any cause other than the request, act or fault of the passenger(s). 
(f)  Although not regulated by this chapter, all fare schedules and related charges for limousine services must be submitted to the chief of police and updated as needed. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-10), 8-28-89; Ord. No. 0-89-98, § 2, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 0-90-75, § 1, 10-8-90; Ord. No. 0-92-50, § 5, 6-22-92; Ord. No. 0-92-71, § 2, 9-14-92; Ord. No. 0-92-80, § 1, 11-9-92; Ord. No. 0-95-9, § 1, 2-13-95; Ord. No. 0-97-72, § 1, 12-1-97; Ord. No. 0-01-3, § 1, 1-8-01; Ord. No. O-2005-85, § 1, 09-12-05; Ord. No. O-08-106, § 1, 7-28-08) 
Sec. 22-11. - Display of rates and map. 
    A copy of the rates and charges authorized by this chapter shall be conspicuously displayed on the inside of the taxicab where the same can be clearly seen by occupants of the back seat on every taxicab operated in the city; and it shall be unlawful for any driver to operate a taxicab unless such rates are displayed therein. 
    If it is determined that an owner or driver charges a passenger in excess of the metered fare or attempts to overcharge in any manner, the permit for that cab is subject to revocation. In no event shall any operator take a longer route to the destination than necessary, unless so requested by the passenger or unless an alternate route is known by the driver to be the most efficient route due to traffic conditions, road construction, trains and similar obstacles. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-50, § 6, 6-22-92) 
Sec. 22-12. - Evasion of fare. 
    Any person who obtains transportation from a licensed taxicab or limousine driver without paying therefor with intent to defraud said driver, or who after obtaining said transportation refuses or knowingly and willfully fails to pay for same shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-12), 8-28-89) 
Sec. 22-13. - Soliciting taxi patronage. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating or in charge of a taxicab or other public vehicle for hire to go upon the premises of any place of public accommodation to solicit patronage from travelers or other persons, or to take hold of any passenger's clothing, baggage or other property, unless requested to do so, or to, in any manner, disturb or annoy passengers or other persons on the premises or on the streets in the vicinity thereof; provided, that this section shall not be construed or forbid any person in charge of a taxi or other public vehicle from calling the word "taxi," or courteously soliciting patronage while the operator is standing near and not exceeding ten (10) feet from his taxi, nor to forbid any taxi operator in possession of a check for baggage from going upon the premises to secure the checked baggage. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-13), 8-28-89) 
Sec. 22-14. - Refusal of passengers restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any taxicab operator to refuse to carry or transport any orderly person anywhere in the city, unless previously engaged or unable to do so, or to select and reject fares by points of origination based on their comparative profit margins. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-14), 8-28-89) 
Sec. 22-15. - Acceptance of additional passengers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any taxicab or limousine operator, driver or owner of any vehicle carrying passengers for hire within the corporate limits to allow any person from the general public to ride when transporting in said vehicle for hire a paying passenger or passengers. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for additional passengers to be picked up if the original passenger is under sixteen (16) years of age. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for additional passenger(s) to be picked up without the prior permission of the first paying passenger(s). 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for additional passenger(s) to be picked up unknowing that the taxicab carries previous passengers. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-15), 8-28-89; Ord. No. 0-92-50, § 7, 6-22-92) 
Sec. 22-16. - Accident report. 
    It shall be the duty of any taxicab limousine operator, owner or driver to report any and all accidents of any taxicabs including incidents of passenger injury operated by him to the chief of police or his designee immediately after such accident. Failure to report as required within one (1) week shall constitute cause for revocation of the permit. If, following an investigation, a determination is made by the chief of police that the number of accidents for an owner or driver is excessive, he shall recommend to the city council that the owner or driver's permit be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-16), 8-28-89) 
Sec. 22-17. - Transporting persons for immoral or unlawful purposes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly drive any vehicle for hire or permit the same to be driven for the purpose of conveying any person to or from any place or point for the purpose of indulging in any act of illicit sexual intercourse or any other immoral or unlawful act. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-17), 8-28-89) 
Sec. 22-18. - Taximeter required; definition, specifications, operation, inspection. 
    Every taxicab shall have affixed thereto and must use a taximeter the size, design and contents of which have been approved by the chief of police or his designee and which conforms substantially to the following specifications: 
(a)  A taximeter is a mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire of a taxicab is mechanically calculated either for distance traveled or for waiting time or both and upon which such charge shall be indicated by means of legible figures which are electrically lighted each time the taximeter flag is thrown from nonearning to earning position. 
(b)  Each taximeter must be driven direct from the taxicab transmission (instead of merely connecting with the speedometer driving shaft) to the taximeter head itself, using a flexible shaft and a flexible housing so connected and sealed as to be nontamperable. 
(c)  No person shall use or permit to be used upon any taxicab a taximeter which shall be in such a condition as to be over five (5) percent incorrect to the prejudice of any passenger. 
(d)  No person shall use or permit to be used or driven for hire a taxicab equipped with a taximeter the case of which does not have its cover and gear intact. 
(e)  If demanded by the passenger, the driver in charge of a taxicab shall deliver to the person paying for the hiring of the same at the time of such payment a receipt therefor in legible type or writing containing the name of the owner, the city license number of the driver's city license number or the taximeter number and any items for which a charge if made, the total amount paid, and the day of payment. 
(f)  No person shall drive a taxicab equipped with a taximeter that has not been duly inspected and approved pursuant to section 22-5 of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to change the size of the wheels or tires of a taxicab or the gears operating the taximeter or to change a taximeter from one (1) taxicab to another unless the taximeter is retested and approved by the chief of police or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-18), 8-28-89; Ord. No. 0-89-98, § 3, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 0-90-75, § 2, 10-8-90; Ord. No. 0-92-50, § 7, 6-22-92) 
Sec. 22-19. - Suspension of operating rights for failure to comply. 
    If the chief of police, or his designee, shall determine that any owner or driver has failed to comply with any provisions of this chapter, he is hereby authorized to temporarily suspend the owner's permit and require the vehicle to be taken out of service until the vehicle and/or owner is in compliance, with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-19), 8-28-89; Ord. No. 0-92-50, § 9, 6-22-92) 
Sec. 22-20. - Driver's manifests. 
(a)  Every driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which is recorded all trips made each day, showing time and place of origin and destination of each trip, the number of passengers and amount of fare, in the case of shared taxi service trips, time the request was made for the taxicabs, estimated time of arrival at origin, estimated time of arrival at destination, and whether any of the passengers were blind and/or handicapped and/or confined to a wheelchair and/or required assistance by the driver. All such completed manifests shall be returned to the owner by the driver at the conclusion of his tour of duty. The forms for such records shall be furnished to the driver by the owner and shall be of a character approved by the city manager. 
(b)  Every owner shall retain and preserve all drivers' manifests in a safe place for at least one hundred eighty (180) days and the same shall be made available upon demand for inspection by the police department taxicab inspector, and as requested by the taxicab inspector, information on the driver's manifests shall be tabulated and forwarded to him. 
(c)  Enforcement of the above section shall be held in abeyance until such time as a request is made for an increase in the number of certificates of convenience and necessity allowed in the city. Accompanying such a request shall be a minimum of six (6) months of manifests for each cab for the preceding period kept in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-20), 8-28-89; Ord. No. 0-89-98, § 4, 12-18-89) 
Sec. 22-21. - Determination of increased need for certificates of convenience and necessity. 
    For the purpose of determining the need for increased taxi service, the following shall be considered: 
(1)  The number of filled and unfilled telephone requests for taxi service made on average days; 
(2)  The average response time for cabs after being dispatched; 
(3)  The percentage of instances in which the time of arrival at origin followed the estimated time of arrival at origin by more than five (5) minutes; 
(4)  The average travel time for fares; 
(5)  The percentage of instances in which the time of arrival at destination followed the estimated time of arrival at destination by more than ten (10) minutes. 
(6)  The number of permits not being operated with reasonable regularity as defined in section 22-4. 
(7)  The extent to which the number of outstanding permits is less than one (1) per one thousand (1,000) population of the city. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-37), 8-28-89; Ord. No. 0-92-50, § 10(a), (b), 6-22-92; Ord. No. 0-96-40, § 3, 6-24-96) 
Secs. 22-22-22-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- The provisions of Former Art. II, §§ 22-41-22-48, relative to certificates of convenience and necessity for taxicabs and certificates for limousines, and derived from Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-30-18-37), adopted Aug. 28, 1989, have been combined and incorporated within Art. I, §§ 22-2, 22-3 and 22-21. See the Code Comparative Table for a specific derivation of these provisions. 

Secs. 22-41-22-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DRIVER'S PERMIT 

Sec. 22-61. - Required. 
    No person shall drive a taxicab or limousine in the city, nor shall any owner permit any person to drive a taxicab or limousine, until such person shall have been granted a driver's permit by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-46), 8-28-89) 
Sec. 22-62. - Application. 
    Application for a driver's permit shall be made in writing to the chief of police, which application shall contain the name, age and address of the applicant and the name of his employer, and shall contain a statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance rule or regulation. The application shall be signed by the owner who shall have made reasonable determination that the driver meets the requirements of this ordinance and is recommended for approval by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-47), 8-28-89) 
Sec. 22-63. - Investigation of applicant. 
    The chief of police shall make such investigation as he may deem necessary of the applicant to determine whether the applicant is of good character, morals, dependable, may be relied upon to transport passengers with reasonable safety and is knowledgeable of the ordinance regulating taxicabs. Refusal to grant or renew a permit shall be made for any person: 
(1)  Whose state driver's license or chauffeur's license has been suspended or revoked. 
(2)  Who has accumulated a sufficient number of points against his driving record to justify a suspension or revocation in accordance with Chapter 20 of the General Statutes. 
(3)  Who, within a period of five (5) years, has been convicted of a felony. 
(4)  Who, within a period of three (3) years, has been convicted of any crime involving the driving of an automobile resulting in death to any person. 
(5)  Who, within a period of three (3) years, has been convicted of driving a motor vehicle while impaired. 
(6)  Who, within a period of three (3) years, has been convicted of a violation of any city, county, state, or federal law relating to the use, possession, or sale of intoxicating liquors, alcoholic beverages, beer or wine, narcotic or barbituric or other habit-forming drugs. 
(7)  Who, within a period of three (3) years, has been convicted of any city, state, county, or federal law relating to prostitution or lotteries. 
(8)  Who, within a period of three (3) years has been a habitual user of intoxicating liquors, alcoholic beverages, narcotic, barbituric or other habit-forming drugs. 
(9)  Who, in the opinion of the chief of police, is a person of such character and reputation that it would clearly be contrary to the public interest, safety and welfare to permit such applicant to drive a vehicle for hire. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-48), 8-28-89) 
Sec. 22-64. - Issuance. 
    If the result of the investigation is satisfactory, the chief of police shall issue to the applicant for a driver's permit an identification card which will bear the name, age and residence of the person to whom it is issued, the date of the issuance and the expiration date, and the name of the owner of the vehicle to be operated. A small photograph of the applicant shall be posted on the permit in a place to be provided therefor. A fee shall be required of the applicant for the permit. This fee shall be determined by the city council and published in the Manual of City Policies. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-49), 8-28-89; Ord. No. 0-90-18, § 1, 6-4-90) 
Sec. 22-65. - Appeal from denial. 
    In the event that the applicant is denied a driver's permit by the chief of police, the applicant may appeal such denial to the city council in accordance with the following: 
(a)  The applicant shall appeal, in writing, to the chief of police. If such appeal is denied by the chief of police, the applicant may then appeal in writing, within ten (10) days, to the city manager. 
(b)  Within ten (10) days after the refusal of the city manager he may appeal, in writing, to and be heard by the city council. 
(c)  The council's decision on the question of the granting or refusing the permit shall be final and conclusive. 
(d)  The council may attach conditions to any appeal it sustains. 
(e)  After refusal by the administration or council, the applicant shall make no new application within twelve (12) months from the date of the original application. 
(f)  During pendency of an appeal from a decision to revoke a driver's permit, it shall be unlawful for such applicant to drive a vehicle for hire. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-50), 8-28-89) 
Sec. 22-66. - Duration and renewal. 
    Every permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be valid for a period of one (1) year, except as noted. The applicant shall file with the chief of police a renewal application. Permits are renewable on January 1 of each year. Upon the expiration of any permit issued under the provisions of this article, the chief of police may, upon application filed in the form and giving the information required in the original application, renew and extend such permit for an additional period of twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-51), 8-28-89) 
Sec. 22-67. - Revocation. 
    The driver's permit shall be subject to revocation by the chief of police for the violation of provisions of this chapter, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation governing or regulating the operation of taxicabs or motor vehicles or relating to alcoholic beverages or prostitution. The permit may be revoked by the city council upon a finding by council that the driver is not a suitable person to operate a taxicab in the city. The driver shall be notified when the revocation of this permit will be considered by the city council and he shall be given an opportunity to attend and be heard. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-52), 8-28-89) 
Sec. 22-68. - Display. 
    The driver's permit shall be conspicuously displayed where the same may be seen by occupants of the rear seat in any taxicab operated by the permittee and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or for any owner to permit to be operated, any taxicab by any person other than the operator designated in the permit displayed in the taxicab. 
    Permits for limousine drivers must be available in the vehicle the driver is operating and be submitted for inspection upon request of any passenger or police official. Failure to have a valid permit in the vehicle shall constitute cause for suspension of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 0-89-74, § 1(18-53), 8-28-89) 
Secs. 22-69-22-93. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TAXICAB COMMITTEE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 0-90-14, § 1, adopted Feb. 26, 1990, amended former Ch. 22 by the addition to Art. II of Div. 4, §§ 22-94-22-96, and at the discretion of the editor said provisions have been included herein as Art. IV, §§ 22-94-22-96. See editor's note to Ch. 22. 
Cross reference- Boards, committees, commissions, authorities, § 2-46 et seq. 

Sec. 22-94. - Established. 
    A seven-member advisory group known as the taxicab committee shall be created as an advisory body with authority only to make recommendations to the city council on taxicab matters. Members shall be appointed as follows: 
(a)  Two (2) representatives of the cab companies in Rocky Mount who shall be selected by the companies and appointed by the council. 
(b)  Two (2) members of the city council who shall be appointed by the council. 
(c)  One (1) citizen representative who shall be appointed by the council. 
(d)  One (1) representative of the police department who shall be appointed by the chief of police. 
(e)  One (1) representative of the city manager's office appointed by the city manager shall be designated as the staff committee member. 
(Ord. No. 0-90-14, § 1, 2-26-90; Ord. No. 0-95-42, § 1, 8-14-95) 
Sec. 22-95. - Term of appointment. 
    Each member shall be appointed for a two-year term commencing on July 1 and ending on June 30. The number of reappointments which can be made by an appointing body or individual shall be unlimited. 
(Ord. No. 0-90-14, § 1, 2-26-90; Ord. No. O-2005-104, § 1a, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 22-96. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  Any issue or problem concerning the taxicab industry in the city submitted by or to a committee member shall be considered appropriate for committee discussion. Items needing consideration shall be submitted to staff for research and placement on the agenda as specified in (e). 
(b)  Decisions shall be made by consensus, but failing that, each member shall have one (1) vote with a simple majority rule. 
(c)  The committee shall meet on an as needed basis, but at least one (1) time annually. The day and time of meetings shall be determined by the committee chairperson, and all members shall receive advance notice of all meetings in accordance with state law. 
(d)  At the annual meeting the committee shall select a chairperson to serve for one (1) year who shall retain voting rights. 
(e)  An agenda, with supporting information, shall be prepared by the staff committee member and distributed to the members prior to each scheduled meeting. The chairperson shall follow this agenda. Each agenda shall provide an opportunity for committee members to submit items for consideration at the next meeting. Such items shall not be discussed at the current meeting unless deemed an emergency by a majority vote of the committee. 
(f)  Minutes of each meeting shall be kept by the staff committee member and sent promptly to each committee member following meetings. 
(g)  Recommendations to the city council from the committee shall be prepared by staff and submitted to the city manager for consideration by the city council or a meeting of the committee of the whole if appropriate. Staff shall also prepare a minority opinion, if requested, which shall then be approved by the appropriate committee members and presented along with the recommendation of the majority. 
(Ord. No. 0-90-14, § 1, 2-26-90; Ord. No. O-2005-104, § 1b, 11-14-05) 
APPENDIX A - LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Land Development Code of the City of Rocky Mount, Ordinance No. 0-2004-57, as adopted by the City Council on July 12, 2004. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Prior to enactment of Ord. No. 0-2004-57 Appendix A pertained to Subdivisions. Similar provisions are now included in this Appendix A-Land Development Code. 

CHAPTER 1. - DEFINITIONS AND CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 101. - Rules of construction. 
    For the purposes of interpreting this Land Development Code, certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as defined in this appendix. Except as defined herein, all other words used in this LDC shall have their customary dictionary definition. Certain zoning categories and the uses encompassed therein shall be construed and interpreted as set forth herein. All words used in present terms [tense] include the future tense; words used in the plural number include the singular; the word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, corporation, trust and company, as well as an individual; the word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel"; the word "building" includes the word "structure" or "dwelling unit"; and the word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory; the words "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied"; the word "map," "zoning map" or "Rocky Mount Zoning Map" shall mean the "Official Zoning Map of the City of Rocky Mount, North Carolina." The position titles in this LDC are intended to be gender neutral; for example, the word his shall refer to either the male or the female gender. 
Sec. 102. - Terms and uses defined. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this appendix, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Abandoned. The intentional or unintentional cessation of use, or maintenance of a building, structure or lot. 
    Accessory. A use, building, structure, part of a building, or part of a structure which is subordinate to and the use of which is incidental to that of the main building, structure, or use on the same lot, including a private garage. If a building otherwise qualified as an accessory building is attached to the main building by a common wall or roof, such building shall be considered a part of the main building. 
    Accessory apartment. A self-contained apartment created either by converting part of or adding on to an existing detached single-family home, or by building a separate apartment into a new home on a single-family lot. Both the apartment and the principal residence must have a separate outside entrance or entrance off a common entryway. 
    Accelerated erosion. Any increase over the rate of natural erosion as a result of land-disturbing activity. 
    Addition (to an existing building). An extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building or structure. 
    Adequate erosion control measure, structure, or device. One which controls the soil material within the land area under responsible control of the person conducting the land-disturbing activity. 
    Adult bookstore. A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one (1) of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, movies, video tapes, or photographs or other visual representations, offered in photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital, or other imaging medium, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Any of the following shall be indicia that an establishment has as one of its principal business purposes the sale and rental of publications, movies, or other visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section: 
A.  The business advertises the sale and rental of adult publications and/or sexually oriented devices; 
B.  Access by persons under eighteen (18) years of age to the business establishment or portions of the business establishment is restricted; 
C.  Signs or notices are posted outside and/or inside the business establishment indicating that the material offered for sale or rental might be offensive; 
D.  The building or portion of the building containing the business establishment does not have windows or has windows that are screened or otherwise obstructed or are situated in a manner that restricts visual access from outside the building to materials displayed within for sale or rental. 
Such indicia shall be considered along with all other factors and available information. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a general circulation video store that does not offer for sale any sexually oriented devices shall not constitute an "adult bookstore" even though it offers for sale and/or rental video tapes which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, as defined in this section, so long as: 
A.  Such described video tapes are stocked and displayed in a room separate from the area of the business establishment where general circulation video tapes are stocked and displayed; 
B.  Access by persons under eighteen (18) years of age to the room where such described videotapes are stocked and displayed is restricted; 
C.  The square footage of the separate room where such described video tapes are stocked and displayed is no more than twenty (20) percent of the square footage of the area where general circulation video tapes are stocked and displayed; and 
D.  The general circulation video tape portion of the business establishment offers a quantity and selection of new release general circulation video tapes that is typical of a general circulation video store and offers a quantity and selection of other general circulation video tapes that are organized and displayed in a manner that is typical of a general circulation video store. 
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve offering the sale or rental of material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult bookstore. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult cabaret. A retail business or private club as defined in N.C.G.S. § 18B-1000 which (a) serves food or beverages, or permits the consumption of food or beverages, and (b) regularly provides or has available for viewing by its patrons or members adult live entertainment. 
    Adult day center. Community-based group program designed to meet the needs of functionally and/or cognitively impaired adults. Adult day centers provide a caring, home-like setting for individuals who, for their own safety and well-being, can no longer be left at home alone. 
    Adult care (home occupation). A permitted home occupation meeting LDC requirements in which eight (8) or fewer adults requiring supervision. 
    Adult entertainer. Any person who requests or accepts payment, tips or other compensation to provide entertainment by dancing, posing or otherwise appearing within an adult cabaret with (i) a less than fully opaque covering over any part of the genitals, pubic region, buttocks or any part of the areola of the female breast, or (ii) the covered male organ in a visibly turgid state. 
    Adult establishment. An adult bookstore, adult motion picture theatre, adult mini motion picture theatre, adult cabaret, or clothing-modeling studio as defined in this LDC. 
    Adult live entertainment. Any performance of or involving the actual presence of real people which exhibits specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this LDC. 
    Adult mini motion picture theatre. An enclosed building with viewing booths designed to hold patrons which, for any form of consideration, regularly presents still or motion pictures, films, slides, or similar photographic reproductions, a preponderance of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this LDC, for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult motion picture theatre. An enclosed building or premises where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown, a preponderance of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, or describing, specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this LDC for observation by patrons therein. "Adult motion picture theatre" does not include any adult mini motion picture theatre as defined in this LDC. 
    Affiliate. A person that directly, or indirectly through one (1) or more intermediaries, controls, is controlled by, or is under common control of another person. 
    Agricultural uses (bona fide farm exemption). Land used as pasture or in the commercial production of crops, horticultural products, fish hatcheries or aquaculture. Also for the purposes of this LDC, the keeping of livestock for commercial or noncommercial purposes is defined as an agricultural use. Livestock includes but is not limited to poultry and hoofed animals such as cattle, horses, swine, goats, and sheep. Also included in this definition of agricultural uses are agricultural accessory buildings, and sales of agricultural products grown or raised on the premises. Not included in this definition is the commercial slaughtering of animals for marketing and farm tenant dwellings. 
    Alley. A roadway easement which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Alter. To make any structural changes in the supporting or load-bearing portions of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or floor joists. 
    Apartment. See dwelling, apartment. 
    Architect. A registered architect licensed to practice in North Carolina. 
    Architectural feature. A prominent or significant part or element of a building, structure or site. 
    Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one (1) to three (3) feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and, velocity flow may be evident. 
    Area of special flood hazard. Areas of special flood hazard means and include the land area located within the 100-year floodplain as shown on the flood boundary and floodway map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Assembly. The use of a building or a structure, or portion thereof, for the gathering together of persons for the purposes such as civic, social, recreation, food or drink consumption, or similar activities. 
    Attached dwelling unit for individual ownership. A dwelling unit having a common or party wall with another dwelling unit. Each attached dwelling unit is characterized by its own subdivided lot of record which is conveyed with the dwelling unit when purchased. 
    Automobile off-street parking (commercial lot). Any building or premises, except [a building or premises] described as a private garage, used for the storage of motor vehicles for the public or private business. 
    Automobile off-street parking (parking deck). A multilevel building/structure designed and used for the parking of motor vehicles. 
    Bar, tavern or nightclub. Any establishment that that has been issued a permit or permits to sell or possess alcoholic beverages by the North Carolina Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission and which has available for its patrons, guests, or members amusements or entertainment such as, by way of illustration and not limitation, live or recorded music, dancing, table games, pinball or video machines, or television and which has gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages that exceed its gross receipts from the sale of food. 
    Base district. The zoning district of a residential, commercial, or industrial nature applied to a property on the official zoning map of the city which provides for the permitted and special uses for which the property or structures thereon may be lawfully used. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE). The highest height, expressed in feet above sea level of floodwaters occurring in the 100-year floodplain, otherwise known as the regulatory floodplain. Flood elevations are calculated by engineering techniques, and observed experiences may be used to verify reliability. 
    Basement. For floodplain purposes, any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. For purposes of height measurement, a basement shall be counted as a story when more than one-half (1/2) of its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground or when subdivided and used for commercial or dwelling purposes by other than a janitor employed on the premises. 
    Bed and breakfast. A single-family dwelling that offers overnight accommodation in no more than six (6) guest bedrooms, has no cooking facilities in guest bedrooms, and offers only one (1) daily meal for guests only. 
    Best management practices (BMP). A structural or nonstructural management-based practice used singularly or in combination to reduce non-point source inputs to receiving waters in order to achieve water quality protection goals. 
    BFE. See base flood elevation. 
    Block. A parcel of land, intended for urban purposes which has definite boundaries formed by being surrounded by such features as public streets, highways, railroad rights-of-way, public walks, parks or green strips, rural land or drainage channels or combinations thereof. 
    Board of adjustment. A quasi-judicial body composed of representatives from the planning area, which is given certain powers under and relative to this LDC. 
    Boardinghouse. A rooming house or a structure which contains four (4) or more rooms, each of which has no kitchen facilities and is designed or intended to be used for residential occupancy on a rental basis. 
    Bond. A type of security including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property, or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the city council as a surety for performance of improvements or maintenance. 
    Borrow. Fill material which is required for on-site construction and is obtained from other locations. 
    Buffer. An area of natural or planted vegetation through which stormwater run-off flows in a diffuse manner so that the run-off does not become canalized and which provides for filtration of the run-off and filtering of pollutants. The buffer is measured landward from the normal pool elevation of impounded structures and from the bank of each side of streams or rivers. It is also a portion of property designated to mitigate impacts as well as to protect water features from pollutants. 
    Bufferyard. An area of land located adjacent to lot lines, but not right-of-way lines, in which landscaping and in some instances other barriers (such as fencing and/or earthen berms) have been provided. 
    Building. Any structure, permanent/stationary or portable, intended for support, shelter, housing or enclosure for occupancy or storage. When separated by dividing walls without openings, each portion of such structure so separated, shall be deemed a separate structure. The word "building" shall include the word "structure." 
    Building, accessory. Any detached, subordinate structure, residential apartment, operated and maintained in the same ownership and located on the same lot as the main building. No such building may be used by other than the owners, lessees or tenants of the premises or their employees. 
    Building, commercial. Any building used for business purposes. 
    Building, detached. A building having no party or common wall with another building except an accessory building. 
    Building height. The vertical distance from the average sidewalk or street grade, or finished grade of the building line, whichever is the highest, to the highest point of the building. 
    Building, industrial. Any building used for industrial purposes. 
    Building, main or principal. A building in which the principal use of the lot on which the building is situated is conducted. 
    Building, residential accessory. A detached, subordinate building that is maintained in the same ownership and located on the same lot as the main dwelling unit. A residential accessory building may be used or occupied by anyone including the owner, members of the owner's immediate family, or a renter. Accessory buildings must meet "appearance and design guidelines" appropriate to specific zoning districts. 
    Building site. Any lot, or portion thereof, or two (2) or more contiguous lots, or portions thereof, of a parcel of land upon which a building or buildings may be erected in conformance with the provisions contained herein. 
    Built-upon area. Built-upon areas shall include that portion of a development project that is covered by impervious or partially impervious cover including buildings, pavement, gravel roads, recreation facilities (e.g. tennis court), etc. (Note: Wooden slatted decks and the water area of a swimming pool are considered pervious). 
    Calendar day. A day shown on the calendar beginning and ending at midnight and being twenty-four (24) hours in length. 
    Caliper. Tree trunk diameter measured six (6) inches above ground level up to and including four (4) inch caliper size and twelve (12) inches above ground level for larger sizes. 
    Caregiver. A person or persons who reside in an accessory dwelling and are responsible for assisting or attending to the needs of someone who resides in the primary/principal structure. 
    Cemetery. A place used or to be used and dedicated or designated for earth interments of human remains or pet animal remains. 
    Central business district or CBD. Central business district of CBD means that portion of the commercially oriented downtown area which is identical to the fire limits as defined in section 6-5 of the City Code. 
    Central city area. Description on file with city clerk. 
    Central city historic district. Description on file with city clerk. 
    Certificate of appropriateness. The official document issued by the historic preservation commission approving and/or concurring in any application for permit for erection, demolition, moving, restoration or alteration of any structure designated historic property. 
    Certificate of occupancy/compliance. A statement, signed by the inspections services administrator, or authorized designee, setting forth that the building, structure or use complies with the zoning ordinance and/or construction codes, and that the same may be used for the purpose stated herein. 
    Certificate of economic hardship. The official document issued by the historic preservation commission certifying that an economic hardship would occur if a certificate of appropriateness for a specific structure designated historic property was denied. 
    Childcare center. Any center which provides supervisory care for six (6) or more children, not of common parentage, apart from their natural parents, legal guardians or custodians, when received for regular periods of time for compensation. Provided, however, this definition shall not include public and private schools organized, operated or approved under the laws of this state, custody of children fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction, children related by blood or marriage within the third degree to the custodial persons, or to churches or other religious or public institutions caring for children within the institutional building while their parents or legal guardians are attending services of meetings or classes or engaged in church activities. 
    Childcare (home occupation): An operation providing supervisory care for no more than five (5) preschool children and three (3) school-aged children at any one time (including preschool children who reside in the home and not including the provider's own school-aged children). 
    Christmas tree sales. Sale of live cut or live balled and burlapped Christmas trees and products made from such trees. This definition shall include roping and other materials needed to support the business. 
    City. The City of Rocky Mount, North Carolina. 
    City attorney. Means the legal counsel appointed by the city council for legal representation of the city. 
    City clerk. The city clerk of the city, or designated representative. 
    City council. Refers to the elected, governing body of the city. 
    City manager. Refers to the city manager of the city as appointed by the city council. 
    Clinic. Establishments where humans receive treatment of illnesses or pregnancy, or examinations by a doctor, dentist, optician, psychologist, or other similar medical professional on an out-patient basis. 
    Clothing modeling studio. Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, a person agrees or offers to privately model clothing, including, but not limited to lingerie, for an individual patron. 
    Cluster development, residential. A specific design of residential land use which permits variation in lot size, shape and orientation without an increase in overall density of the development. Buildings are typically grouped on the most buildable part of the tract leaving the remaining area as common open space. 
    College or university. Academic institution of higher education characterized by ability of the institution to confer upon its graduates associate, bachelor, master and doctorate degrees of arts and science. 
    Co-location. The use of a single wireless communications tower by more than one (1) wireless communications provider. 
    Columbarium. A structure or building substantially exposed above ground intended to be used for the interment of the cremated remains of a deceased person or animal. 
    Commercial recreation. Any establishment whose main purpose is to provide the general public with an amusing or entertaining activity and where tickets are sold or fees are collected for the activity. Commercial recreation establishments include but are not limited to: skating rinks, water slides, miniature golf courses, arcades, bowling alleys, billiard halls, but do not include movie theaters. 
    Community center, private. A facility opens to members of an organization for gathering, meeting, recreation and other similar activities. A facility located within a residential development or complex which is used strictly by residents of that development and their guest is included within this definition. 
    Community center, public. A facility opens to the public or to members of an organization for gathering, meeting, recreation and other similar activities. A facility located within a residential development or complex which is used strictly by residents of that development and their guest is not included within this definition. 
    Community enterprise district (CED). 2000 U.S. Census Blocks 202.1, 202.2 and 202.5 located within the corporate limits, as of March 25, 2002, and not within any national, state or local designated historic districts. 
    Community facility. Any parcel of land, whether improved or unimproved, which renders a public service and which is owned and maintained by the city or any other public or quasi-public organization with authority to condemn property for use under right of eminent domain, including but not limited to, parks and open spaces, school sites, fire station sites and utility substations or main stations. 
    Completion of construction or development. Means that no further land-disturbing activity is required on a phase of a project except that which is necessary for establishing a permanent ground cover. 
    Composting facility. A solid waste facility which utilized a controlled biological process of degrading non-hazardous solid waste. A facility may include materials processing and hauling equipment, structures to control drainage, and structures to collect and treat leachate, and storage areas for the incoming waste, the final products and residual materials. 
    Comprehensive plan. The comprehensive plan, or any of its parts, for the development of all or part of the territorial jurisdiction area, as adopted by the city as is now or may be hereafter in effect. 
    Condominium. A dwelling unit in which the ownership of the occupancy rights to the dwelling unit is individually owned or for sale to an individual and such ownership is not inclusive of any land. 
    Construction in process. A land-disturbing activity has been initiated and permanent stabilization of the site has not been completed. 
    Continuing care retirement community (CCRC). A specialized living community that provides a high level of comprehensive assisted living care. CCRCs may offer three basic levels of care: independent living, assisted living, and skilled nursing care - all within the same community. CCRCs offer several housing options - independent living facilities for individuals who need little or no assistance, assisted living facilities for those who require some help with the activities of daily living (e.g., eating, bathing, medication management); skilled nursing care offers residents access to both short-term and long-term nursing care, rehabilitative services and memory support care. A health care center may be located on site to provide routine medical care as well as speech, physical or occupational therapy. The health care center offers convenience by centralizing a variety of health care services. CCRC's include dining and food preparation facilities, age appropriate social and recreational facilities, and medical and physical therapy facilities. The CCRC features a full service building offering two or three levels of care, including the above facilities, within the building or connecting buildings. The CCRC may also feature independent living buildings in single family, multiplex, and apartment style structures. 
    Contractors. General contractors and builders engaged in the construction of buildings and associated trades, either residences or commercial structures as well as heavy construction contractors engaged in activities such as paving, highway construction, and utility construction. 
    Convalescent center or nursing home. A facility that provides nursing services and custodial care on a twenty-four (24) hour basis for three (3) or more unrelated individuals who for reasons of illness, physical infirmity, or advanced age require such services. 
    Convenience store. A retail store that sells groceries and may also sell gasoline but not including automotive service stations, or vehicle repair shops. The sale of alcoholic beverages is a separate use and is not included in the definition of convenience store. 
    County. County means Nash or Edgecombe County, North Carolina, as appropriate. 
    Coverage. The lot area covered by the building, including all overhanging roofs except where otherwise specifically designated. 
    Crematory. A facility used to incinerate corpses for the purpose of final disposal. 
    Critical area. The area adjacent to a water supply intake or reservoir where a risk associated with pollution is greater than from the remaining portions of the watershed. The critical area is defined as extending one-half (1/2) mile upstream from the intake located directly in the Tar River, or the ridgeline of the watershed (whichever comes first.) 
    Critical facilities. A critical facility is any property that, if flooded, would result in severe consequences to public health and safety. This includes, but is not limited to, structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, and/or water-reactive materials; hospitals, nursing homes, child and adult day center, schools, and housing likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid death or injury during a flood; police stations, fire stations, vehicle and equipment storage facilities, and emergency operations that are needed for flood response activities before, during, and after a flood; and public and private utility facilities that are vital to maintaining or restoring normal services to flooded areas before, during, and after a flood. 
    Dedication. A grant by the owner of his property to another party, without any consideration being given for the transfer; such transfer is conveyed by written instrument and is completed with an acceptance. 
    Density. The number of dwelling units per acre. 
    Development. Any built or constructed change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. It also includes any land disturbing activity which adds to or changes the amount of impervious or partially impervious cover on a land area or which otherwise decreases the infiltration of precipitation into the soil. 
    Development, nonresidential. All development other than residential development, agriculture and silviculture. 
    Development plan. A type of plan which becomes part of the zoning for a property. The plan depicts site characteristics and development information as specified in this LDC. The development plan provides guidance for site plans. 
    Development review committee (DRC). A committee of designated representatives as specified in chapter 3 of this LDC, which meets on a regular basis for the purpose of reviewing land development plans, zoning or subdivision applications, and any other regulatory permits that have been submitted according to the standards within the city's LDC. 
    Director of engineering. Refers to the director or department head for the department of engineering for the city. Also referred to as the city engineer. 
    Director of development services. The director or department head for the department of development services for the city, (also referred to as the director). 
    Discharge point. That point at which storm water runoff leaves a tract of land. 
    Discharging landfill. A facility with liners, monitoring equipment and other measures to detect and/or prevent leachate from entering the environment and in which the leachate is treated on site and discharged to a receiving stream. 
    Dish antenna. A dish antenna, or earth station, is any accessory structure capable of receiving radio, television or other signals from a transmitter, transmitter relay or reflector. 
    District. Land use sections as defined in this LDC and established on the city's official zoning map. 
    Ditch. An open channel that transports stormwater runoff. 
    Dormitory. A residence hall providing rooms for individuals or groups on a temporary basis. 
    Dwelling, apartment. A room or suite of one (1) or more rooms, each of which has kitchen facilities and is designed or intended to be used as an independent unit on a rental basis. 
    Dwelling, multifamily. A single detached dwelling designed for and occupied by three (3) or more families living independently of each other as separate housekeeping units, including apartments and condominiums, but not including trailer courts, hotels or resort-type hotels. 
    Dwelling, single-family. A detached building designed for or occupied exclusively by one (1) family. 
    Dwelling, two-family. A dwelling on a single lot designed to be occupied by two (2) families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling unit. A residential structure or that portion of a residential structure used or designed as a residence for one (1) family. 
    Educational facilities, public, private or parochial. A building or group of buildings, the use of which meets State of North Carolina requirements for elementary, junior high, middle school, high school. This definition does not include colleges, trade or business schools. 
    Easement. A grant by the property owner for use by the public, a utility, a corporation, or other designated person(s) of a strip of land for specific purpose(s). 
    Elevated building. A non-basement building that has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings or columns. 
    Enclosed retail shopping mall. An enclosed complex consisting of primarily a one-story or two-story building or buildings containing not less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet and not less than five (5) independently operated stores or shops engaged in the sale of commodities or goods to individual consumers for personal use rather than resale, developed under a comprehensive plan where a majority of the stores or shops have their public entrance and signage fronting upon the interior of the complex, and where all stores or shops are served by a common parking lot. 
    Energy dissipator. A structure or a shaped channel section with mechanical armoring placed at the outlet of pipes or conduits to receive and break down the energy from high velocity flow. 
    Environmental Management Commission (EMC). Refers to the North Carolina Environmental Management Commission. 
    Equipment cabinet. A cabinet or building used to house equipment used by telecommunications providers at a wireless communications facility. 
    Engineer. A North Carolina registered engineer. 
    Erect. Build, construct, rebuild, or reconstruct, as the same are commonly defined. 
    Erosion. The wearing away of land surfaces by the action of wind, water, gravity, or any combination thereof. 
    Existing construction. Structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the zoning overlay. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing development. Those projects that are built or those projects that at a minimum have established a vested right under North Carolina zoning law as of the effective date of this section based on at least one (1) of the following criteria: 
A.  Substantial expenditures of resources (time, labor, money) based on a good faith reliance upon having received valid city approval to proceed with the project; or 
B.  Having an outstanding valid building permit as authorized by N.C.G.S. § 160A-385.1; or 
C.  Having expended substantial resources (time, labor, money) and having an approved site specific or phased development plan as authorized by N.C.G.S. § 60A-385.1. 
    Extraterritorial jurisdiction. Those Nash and Edgecombe County lands adjacent to the city corporate limits and boundaries of the city within a distance not to exceed three (3) miles as provided by statute wherein the city may exercise zoning and subdivision or other municipal regulations or powers. 
    FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration established pursuant to the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, as amended. 
    Fabrication. The processing and/or assemblage of various components into a complete or partially completed commodity. Fabrication relates to stamping, cutting or otherwise shaping the processed materials into useful objects. The refining aspects of manufacturing and other initial processing of basic raw materials such as metal ores, lumber and rubber, etc., are excluded. 
    Family. One (1) or more persons related by blood, adoption or marriage, or a group of not more than five (5) persons not related by blood, adoption or marriage occupying a premises and living together as a single nonprofit housekeeping group in a dwelling unit as distinguished from a group occupying a hotel, club or similar dwelling for group use. 
    Family care home. A home with support and supervisory personnel that provides room and board, personal care and habilitation services in a family environment for not more than six (6) resident handicapped persons. 
    Family member. For purposes of this definition the term "persons related by blood, adoption or marriage" shall constitute the following: 
(1)  Blood relations: 
a.  Parents (including grandparents); 
b.  Sons and daughters; 
c.  Siblings; 
d.  Uncles and Aunts (including great uncles and aunts); 
e.  Nephews and nieces (children of a brother or sister); 
f.  First cousins (children of brothers and/or sisters). 
(2)  Marriage relations: 
a.  Spouse; 
b.  Step relations (mothers/father, son/daughter, brother/sister); 
c.  Half relations (brother/sister); 
d.  In-laws (mother/father, son/daughter, brother/sister). 
(3)  Adoption: 
a.  As provided by law. 
b.  Foster parent/child, custody consent order, or other legally recognized form of guardianship. 
    Farm. The production and activities relating or incidental to the production of crops, fruits, vegetables, ornamental or flowering plants, dairy, livestock, poultry, and all other forms of agricultural products having a domestic or foreign market. For the purpose of this definition, farm buildings are defined as structures, other than residences and structures appurtenant there to, for farm use. 
    FCC. The Federal Communications Commission established pursuant to the Communications Act of 1934, as amended. 
    Fence. A continuous barrier constructed of wood, stone, steel, wire or other similar material. 
    Fence, closed. A continuous barrier that has less then fifty (50) percent of its surface space open for clear and continuous view to and from all sides. 
    Fence, open. A continuous barrier that has a minimum of fifty (50) percent of its surface space open for clear and continuous view to and from all sides. 
    Fence, screen. A continuous, opaque, unperforated barrier extending from the surface of the ground to a uniform height constructed of wood, stone, steel or similar material. 
    Fence, security. A continuous barrier which may be electrified in accordance with this LDC that is constructed of wood, stone, steel, wire or other similar material extending from the surface of the ground to a height allowed by this LDC. 
    Fill. Any approved material placed or deposited on a parcel of land for purposes of erecting structures or placed on the surface thereof resulting in the increase the existing or excavated surface elevation. 
    Fine arts. Individual art pieces, not mass-produced, consisting of one (1) or more of the following: paintings, drawings, etchings, sculptures, ceramics, inlays, needlework, knitting, weaving and/or craftwork of leather, wood, metal or glass. 
    Finished floor. The lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest finished floor, provided that such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of the floodplain protection zoning overlay. 
    Flea market. A commercial operation held on a regular periodic basis and patronized by individual entrepreneurs who transport a variety of merchandise to a common geographical area for the purpose of sale or trade to the general public. This definition does not include sporadic and infrequent yard sales held in residential areas. 
    Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from a) the overflow of inland or tidal waters and b) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters, from any source. 
    Flood, 100-year (also referred to as Subdistrict B). Floods that have a one (1) percent (one (1) in one hundred (100)) chance of occurring in any given year. Also known as the "base flood". The 100-year floodplain is the area of land that would be inundated by the 100-year flood. Also known as the special flood hazard area or regulatory base flood. 
    Flood, 500-year (also referred to as Subdistrict C, all other watercourses). Floods that have a 0.2 percent (one (1) in five hundred (500)) of being equaled or exceeded in any year are referred to as the 500-year flood. The 500-year floodplain is the area of land that would be inundated by the 500-year flood. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the city. 
    Flood insurance study. The engineering study performed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency to identify flood hazard areas, flood insurance risk zones, and other flood data in a community. The study includes flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), flood hazard boundary maps (FHBMs), and/or flood insurance rate map (FIRMs). The flood insurance study also includes preliminary or draft flood data released by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that is not yet final. 
    Flood protection elevation (FPE). Elevation of the highest flood, including freeboard that a retrofitting method is intended to protect against. 
    Flood zone. A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or a flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area. 
    Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by flood waters from any source. 
    Flood proofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate risk of flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities, or structures with their contents. 
    Floodway. The channel of a natural stream or river and portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the floodwater or flood flow of any natural stream or river. The floodway is a portion of the 100-year floodplain. 
    Floodway, regulatory (also referred to as Subdistrict A). The channel and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the 100-year flood (base flood) without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than two-tenths ( 2/10 ) of one (1) foot. 
    Freeboard. Additional amount of height incorporated into the flood protection elevation (FPE) to account for uncertainties in the determination of flood elevations. This additional amount of building elevation is in addition to the base flood elevation. 
    Floor area. The total floor area of a building or group of buildings used for residential purposes shall be the cumulative total of all floor areas used for residential purposes exclusive of garage, basement and attic areas that are not equipped for human occupancy. For the purpose of applying requirements for off-street parking, the term "floor area" shall mean the gross floor area within the outside dimensions of a building including each floor level, halls, lobbies and stairways. It shall not include floor space within the building reserved for parking or loading vehicles and unimproved basement space or separate spaces used only for building maintenance and utilities or exterior features for the building, such as stairs, porches, walkways and other similar exterior features. 
    Floor area ratio (FAR). The ratio of building area to parcel area. Floor area ratio is a measure of non-residential land use intensity. 
    Forest. A woodland area used for growing trees, harvesting timber or replanting trees in accordance with a management plan endorsed by the N.C. Division of Forest Resources. 
    Fortune telling, clairvoyant, psychic. A use involving the foretelling of the future in exchange for financial or other valuable consideration. It includes the foretelling through astrology, augury, card or tea reading, cartomancy, clairvoyance, clairaudience, crystal gazing, divination, magic mediumship, necromancy, palmistry, psychometry, phrenology, prophecy, spiritual reading or similar means. It does not include forecasting based upon historical trends or patterns, religious dogma or patterns or any previously listed arts when presented in an assembly of people who purchase tickets or means in exchange for the purpose of the presentation at a site licensed for such purpose. For the purposes of regulating this LDC, this use is only permitted in the areas of the ETJ, which are in Edgecombe County; this use is prohibited in the city limits and in the areas of the ETJ which are in Nash County. 
    Frontage. See definition of lot frontage. 
    Frontage road. A street, parallel to and adjacent to a major highway or arterial that provides access to abutting properties. 
    Funeral home. A building used in the preparation of the deceased for burial or cremation. Also a facility where funeral services are held, funeral vehicles are stored, and caskets and other funeral supplies are sold. 
    Functionally dependent facility. A facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to waters, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading or unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities. This definition relates to the flood protection overlay regulations in chapter 9 of this LDC. 
    Garage apartment. A dwelling unit for one (1) family erected in or above a private garage. 
    Garage, private. A building or space, used as an accessory to or a part of the main building permitted in any residential district, that provides storage space for motor vehicles and in which no business, occupation or services for profit is in any way conducted. 
    Garage, public. Any garage other than a private garage, available to the public, used for the care, servicing, repair or equipping of automobiles or where such vehicles are parked or stored for remuneration, hire or sale. 
    Garage sale (also referred to as yard sale). The temporary, occasional sale of tangible personal property at retail from a private residence or other permitted location. 
    Gasoline or filling stations. That portion of any land, including structures, where flammable and combustible liquids used as motor fuels are stored and dispensed from fixed equipment into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles and that may include facilities for lubricating, washing, cleaning or servicing motor vehicles, including the sale of minor automotive accessories. Major vehicle repair including the painting of motor vehicles is prohibited. 
    Gate. A door or other device attached to a fence which, when opened, provides a means of ingress and egress of persons and things for which it was intended, and which, when closed, forms a continuous barrier and screen as a part of the fence in which it is attached. 
    Gated community. A development with a gated entryway approved and permitted by this LDC. 
    General distress. An array of socioeconomic conditions, other than poverty and unemployment that support the conclusion of adverse trends or declining stability of an area. Distress indicators may include deteriorating and/or abandoned housing stock, high or rising crime rates, low level of investment/reinvestment, lower property tax rate per capita, and others. 
    Grade. Grade may have either of the following meanings. 
A.  The top surface elevation of lawns, walks, drives or other improved surface after completion of construction or grading operation. 
B.  The slope of a street, drainage facility, sanitary sewer, etc., expressed in terms of percent. 
    Gross floor area. The area within the inside perimeter of the exterior walls with no deduction for corridors, stairs, closets, thickness of walls, columns or other features, exclusive of areas open and unobstructed to the sky. 
    Gross tract area or gross acreage. The total area of a project including rights-of-way, open space, and dedicated public properties. 
    Ground cover. Any natural vegetative growth or other material which renders the soil surface stable against accelerated erosion. 
    Group care facility. An establishment qualified for a license by the State of North Carolina for provision of resident services to more than six (6) but not more than twenty-five (25) residents who are physically disabled, mentally retarded, developmentally disabled, persons recuperating from alcohol or drug related problems, persons adjusting to society as an alternative to imprisonment and persons recuperating from mental or emotional illness. This definition shall not include mentally ill persons who are dangerous to others. "Dangerous to others" means that within the recent past, the individual has inflicted, or attempted to inflict, or threatened to inflict serious bodily harm on another, or has acted in such a way as to create a substantial risk of serious bodily harm to another, or has engaged in extreme destruction of property; and that there is a reasonable probability that the conduct will be repeated. Previous episodes of dangerousness to others, when applicable, may be considered when determining reasonable probability of future dangerous conduct. Professionals or paraprofessionals providing assistance to the occupants shall be allowed in addition to the maximum occupancy. 
    Group home for developmentally disabled adults. A home with support and supervisory personnel that provides room and board, personal care and habilitation services in a family environment for two (2) to nine (9) adults who are developmentally disabled and who have or can develop self-help skills, are ambulatory, and are able to participate in activities in the community. 
    Habitable floor. Any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking, or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used only for storage is not a "habitable floor." 
    Handicapped person. A person with a temporary or permanent physical, emotional or mental disability, including, but not limited to, mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, hearing and sight impairment, emotional disturbance and orthopedic impairments, but not including mentally ill persons who are dangerous to others as defined in state law (N.C.G.S. § 122-58.2(1) b.). 
    Hazardous material or hazardous waste. Materials, or mixtures containing those materials, which pose a physical, environmental or health hazard by virtue of their carcinogenic, corrosive, highly toxic, irritant, sensitizing or toxic properties as defined in 29 CFR 1910.1200. Included in this definition are materials included in EPA's most recent priority pollutants list and substances which are regulated, or caused to be regulated, under provisions of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); the Comprehensive Emergency Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA); the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA); or any subsequent amendments of these Acts. For the purposes of this LDC, hazardous materials shall include hazardous wastes, which are the byproducts resulting from the use of hazardous materials, materials which have been used to clean up spills of hazardous materials, and hazardous materials which have reached their shelf-life or have been used or contaminated. Also included in this definition are hazardous wastes regulated, or caused to be regulated by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (40 CFR 261, Subpart C and Subpart B). 
    Helistop. An area of land, water, or structural surface designed for discharge or pickup of passengers or cargo from or by helicopters, but excluding field service or maintenance. 
    High quality waters. Those classified as such in 15A NCAC 2B.0101(e)(5)-General Procedures, which is incorporated herein by reference to include further amendments pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 150B-14(c). 
    High quality water (HQW) zones. Areas that are within one (1) mile and drain to HQW's. 
    Highest adjacent grade. The highest elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of the structure. 
    Historic district. Refers to a contiguous locally designated zoning overlay district as adopted by city council. Such a district must have a concentration of properties that are historically, visually, or culturally related by plan or development and significant to the history of the city. 
    Historic Landmark. Refers to a locally designated building, structure, site, or area as adopted by city council. Such a landmark must represent important aspect to the heritage and character of the community and that its protection enriches all the community's residents. 
    Historic preservation planner. Refers to the city's historic preservation planner. 
    Historic structure. A structure that is: (1) listed individually in the national register of historic places of preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register; (2) certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (3) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or (4) individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the state or locality. 
    Home for the aged. A boardinghouse with more than six (6) beds meeting all of the requirements of the State of North Carolina for the boarding and care of persons who are not critically ill and who do not need regular professional medical attention. 
    Home occupation. Any occupation, profession, trade, or business carried on by the permanent inhabitants of their residential dwelling which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes; which does not change the character or visual appearance of the outside of the building or premises; and which is conducted entirely within the primary dwelling. 
    Hospital. An institution providing health services, primarily for in-patients, and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, including as an integral part of the institution such related facilities as laboratories, out-patient department, training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices. 
    Hotel. A building or group of buildings under one (1) ownership containing six (6) or more sleeping rooms occupied, intended or designed to be occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of persons who are lodged with or without meals for compensation. 
    Improvements. Includes but is not limited to the following: addition of any building, accessory building, parking area, loading area, installation of utilities, fence, wall, hedge, lawn or mass planting (except to prevent soil erosion) to a lot or parcel of property. 
    Industrial development. Any nonresidential development for the purpose of manufacturing, assembly, finishing, cleaning or developing any product or commodity. 
    Industry. A use engaged in the processing of raw materials or the manufacture of materials or products. 
    Institutional structure. A building or use owned and operated by a government unit or federally designated nonprofit organization for the purpose of providing community support activities. This institutional structure must meet the North Carolina Building Code regulations. 
    Intermittent stream. A watercourse that collects surface runoff and a) is shown as a dashed blue line on the most recent USGS 7.5 minute quadrangle topographic maps or is shown as an intermittent stream on maps in the most recent US Department of Agriculture Soil Survey of Edgecombe or Nash County, North Carolina, as applicable; and b) drains an area greater than twenty-five (25) acres. Where a USGS topographic map and the Soil Survey map show a difference in stream type for a particular reach of stream, the map that offers the greater stream protection shall apply. 
    Junk. Pre-used or unusable metallic parts and other nonmetallic manufactured products that are worn, deteriorated or obsolete, making them unusable in their existing condition, but are subject to being dismantled and salvaged. 
    Junkyard, including automobile wrecking. See definition of salvage yard. 
    Kennel, commercial. Any lot or premises on which four (4) or more dogs, cats, or other domestic animals, more than six (6) months of age, are kept and/or any commercial establishment engaged in boarding, breeding, buying, selling, grooming or training of pet animals. 
    Kennel operations, care. A commercial operation in which dogs, cats or other domestic animals are raised and/or maintained. This definition is not intended to include operations in which the primary function is veterinary care (animal medical care), nor is it intended to include the housing of animals for recreation or sporting use. 
    Laboratory. A building or part of a building devoted to the testing and analysis of any product or animal (includes humans) and/or which provides bacteriological, biological, medical, prosthetics, X-ray, pathological and similar analytical or diagnostic services to doctors or dentist. No manufacturing is conducted on the premises except for experimental or testing purposes. 
    Lake or natural watercourse. Any stream, river, brook, swamp, sound, bay, creek, run, branch, canal, waterway, estuary, and any reservoir, lake or pond, natural or impounded in which sediment may be moved or carried in suspension, and which could be damaged by accumulation of sediment. 
    Land Development Code. Refers to this LDC as recommended by the planning board and adopted by city council. 
    Land disturbing activity. Land disturbing activity means any activity, use, or disturbance of land in residential, industrial, educational, institutional, or commercial development, including but not specifically limited to parking lots, highways, and road construction and maintenance, that results in any change in the natural cover or topography of the land, including, without limitation, any filling, digging, earthmoving, or plowing of land, that may cause or contribute to sedimentation regardless of size of the area disturbed, or mass cutting, clearing or selective removal of trees on any tract of land not subject to a Forestry Management Plan on file with the North Carolina Department of Forestry. This includes borrow and waste disposal activity not regulated by the provisions of the Mining Act of 1971 or the Department of Environment and Natural Resources, Division of Environmental Health. 
    Landfill. A facility for the disposal of solid waste on land in a sanitary manner in accordance with N.C.G.S. Chapter 130A, Article 9. For the purpose of this ordinance this term does not include composting facilities. 
    Landfill, construction/demolition (C&D). A facility solely for the disposal of construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations on pavement, building, or other structures. 
    Landfill, discharging. A facility with liners, monitoring equipment and other measures to detect and/or prevent leachate from entering the environment and in which the leachate is treated on site and discharged to a receiving stream. 
    Landfill, land clearing-Inert debris (LCID). A facility for the disposal of land clearing waste, concrete, brick, concrete block, uncontaminated soil, gravel and rock, untreated and unpainted wood, and yard trash. 
    Landfill, municipal solid waste landfill facility (MSWLF). A discrete area of land or an excavation that receives household waste, other types of RCRA Title D wastes, such as commercial solid waste, nonhazardous sledge and industrial solid waste as defined in the Federal Register 40 CFR Parts 257 and 258. 
    Landscape plan. A portion of a site plan that graphically illustrates the locations of landscape features including materials and specifications of plant materials, fencing, screening and ground form. This includes spot elevations, details, plant material quantity, common and botanical names, and minimum sizes. 
    Landscaped/planting area. An area (including bufferyards) in which plants required by this LDC are located, which contains no impervious surfaces except for fences, walls, and benches, and as specifically provided by this LDC. 
    Landscaping. Plant material, including, but not limited to, grass, trees, shrubs, flowers, vines and other ground covers, native trees and shrubs, natural land forms, water forms, planters, other landscape features, such as decorative rock or bark, walks and plaza areas consisting of enhanced paving. The use of walks and plaza areas with enhanced paving shall not dominate the use of live plant materials. Artificial plant material shall not be considered landscaping. 
    Level, floor. The bottom portion, inclusive of horizontal sills, of the first living floor of a structure intended for occupancy. 
    Loading area. An area which contains trash collection areas or dumpsters, outdoor loading and unloading spaces, docks, outdoor shipping and receiving areas, outdoor bulk storage of materials or parts thereof, and/or outdoor repair areas of any business. 
    Local government. Refers to the City of Rocky Mount, North Carolina. 
    Lot. A portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land, as defined boundaries in single ownership set aside for separate use or occupancy, recorded as such in the Edgecombe or Nash County Register of Deeds, and intended as a unit for transfer or ownership or for construction or development. The word "lot" shall include words "plot," "parcel," or tract." 
A.  Corner lot. Any parcel of land having frontage on more than one (1) street (road) which abuts an intersection of those streets (roads). 
B.  Double frontage lot. A lot other than a corner lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets. 
C.  Interior lot. A lot that has only one (1) dimension or portion of a lot abutting on a street. 
    Lot, legal. 
A.  A lot that is shown on a subdivision plat that has been approved by the city and recorded in the office of the county register of deeds; or 
B.  Any parcel of land created prior to the effective date of this LDC that has been recorded in the office of the county register of deeds, provided than such lot meets all of the following standards: 
1.  The lot complied with all applicable lot area standards in effect at the time of recording; and 
2.  The lot has access to a public street or a private street built to standards acceptable to the director of engineering; and 
3.  The lot is located such that no public dedication is required for utility easements or street rights-of-way based on the street classification plan in the city's current comprehensive plan. 
    Lot area. The parcel of land enclosed within the boundaries formed by the property lines, plus one-half (1/2) of any alley abutting the lot between the boundaries of the lot, if extended. 
    Lot depth. The depth of a lot, for the purpose of this ordinance, is the distance measured in the mean direction of the side lines of the lot from the midpoint of the front line to the midpoint of the opposite lot line. 
    Lot coverage. That portion of a lot which, when viewed directly from above, would be covered by a building or any part of a building, however, for the purposes of computing a height factor, any portion of such building covered by a roof which qualifies as an open space, or any terrace, balcony, breezeway or porch, or portion thereof not included in the floor area of a building, shall not be included in lot coverage. 
    Lot frontage. All property abutting on one (1) side of a street right-of-way measured at the street line. 
    Lot lines. The lines bounding a lot (parcel of land) as defined herein. 
    Lot line, front. 
A.  If a lot has one (1) property line that is coterminous with a street right-of-way line, such line shall constitute the front lot line; 
B.  If a lot has two (2) property lines which are also street right-of-way lines and those two (2) property lines form an angle between eighty (80) degrees and one hundred (100) degrees, the front lot line shall be the property line that the primary building faces; 
C.  If a lot is not encompassed by provision (a) or (b) and no front property line is designated on the final plat, the front property line shall be designated by the board of adjustment. 
    Lot line, rear. The rear lot line shall be the property line(s) which is (are) opposite the front property line. If no property line is deemed by the director of development services or designee to be opposite the front property line and no minimum building line exists on the final plat to establish a rear lot line, then there shall be no rear lot line; however, the rear yard setback shall be maintained from the point (apex) on the property's perimeter which is the furthest removed from the midpoint of the front line. The rear yard minimum building line shall be a line perpendicular to a straight line connecting said apex and the midpoint of the front lot line. 
    Lot line, side. A boundary line which is not defined as a front or rear lot line. 
    Lot of record. A lot, a plat or a map which has been recorded in the office of the registrar of deeds of Nash or Edgecombe County, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded in one (1) of the aforementioned offices. 
    Lot width. The distance between the side property lines along the front minimum building line as specified in the table of area, yard and height requirements. 
    Manufactured dwelling unit. A relocatable living unit manufactured off-site and transported, on an independent carrier unit, to a permanent site that has been constructed in accordance with an "engineering bulletin" issued by the Office of Technical Standards, Department of Housing and Urban Development, Washington, D.C. A single-family home constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the North Carolina State Building Code and composed of components substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and transported to the site for final assembly on a permanent foundation. 
    Manufactured home park. A tract of land with required improvements and utilities, containing spaces that are leased for the long-term placement of manufactured homes, and which may include services or facilities for the residents. 
    Manufactured home lot. That part of a manufactured home park designed for the accommodation of one (1) mobile home. 
    Manufactured housing, residential-design. A manufactured home shall generally be defined as a dwelling unit that meets all of the following criteria: 
A.  Is composed of one (1) or more components, each of which was substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and designed to be installed or assembled on the building site; 
B.  Exceeds thirty-two (32) feet in length and eight (8) feet in width; 
C.  Is not constructed in accordance with the standards of the North Carolina Uniform Residential Building Code (this criterion excludes modular homes from classification as manufactured homes); and, 
D.  Is designed for permanent residential use (this criterion excludes recreational vehicles that are not designed to be used as permanent housing). 
A manufactured home is further defined as being one (1) of the following types: 
A.  Type A: HUD-code manufactured homes (includes all manufactured homes built after June 14, 1976 that meet or exceed the construction standards established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development), which also meet or exceed the following criteria: 
1.  A minimum roof pitch of 3.5/12, finished with materials commonly used in standard residential construction; 
2.  A minimum width of twenty (20) feet (no single-wide units); 
3.  Exterior siding which is comparable to that used in standard residential construction, such as vinyl or aluminum lap siding, cedar or other wood siding, wood grain, stucco siding, etc.; 
4.  Towing apparatus, wheels, axles and transporting lights removed; 
5.  The longest axis oriented parallel or within a ten (10) degree deflection of being parallel to the lot (or approved space) frontage (see waiver provision for parks in planned building group regulations); 
6.  A continuous, permanent masonry foundation or masonry curtain wall, unpierced except for required ventilation and access, installed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
B.  Type A-1: HUD-code manufactured homes (includes all manufactured homes built after June 14, 1976 that meet or exceed the construction standards established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development), which also meet or exceed the following criteria: 
1.  A minimum roof pitch of 3.5/12, finished with materials commonly used in standard residential construction; 
2.  A minimum width of twelve (12) feet; 
3.  Exterior siding which is comparable to that used in standard residential construction, such as vinyl or aluminum lap siding, cedar or other wood siding, wood grain, stucco siding, etc.; 
4.  Towing apparatus, wheels, axles and transporting lights removed; 
5.  The longest axis oriented parallel or within a ten (10) degree deflection of being parallel to the lot (or approved space) frontage (see waiver provision for parks in planned building group regulations); 
6.  A continuous underpinning unpierced except for required ventilation and access, installed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Underpinning materials shall be designed and/or adapted for specific use as manufactured home skirting, shown to be durable and architecturally resemble masonry. These products would include thermoplastic products with a minimum nominal gauge of 0.60 inches. All products must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
C.  Type B: HUD-code manufactured homes (includes all manufactured homes built after June 14, 1976 that meet or exceed the construction standards established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development), which also meet or exceed the following: 
1.  A minimum width of twelve (12) feet; 
2.  Exterior siding which is comparable to that used in standard residential construction, such as vinyl or aluminum lap siding, cedar or other wood siding, wood grain, stucco siding, etc.; 
3.  Towing apparatus, wheels, axles and transporting lights removed; 
4.  The longest axis oriented parallel or within a ten (10) degree deflection of being parallel to the lot (or approved space) frontage (see waiver provision for parks in planned building group regulations); 
5.  Continuous skirting or curtain wall, unpierced except for required ventilation and access, made of material designed and/or adapted for specific use as manufactured home skirting. Vinyl products shall have a minimum nominal gauge of 0.44 inches. All products shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer's instructions, and be installed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
D.  Type C: A standard HUD-code manufactured home, without additional design criteria. Skirting for a Type C unit must be made of material designed and/or adapted for specific use as manufactured home skirting. 
E.  Type D: All manufactured units not meeting the standards of a Type A, A-1, B, or C unit as described herein (includes pre-HUD code units). 
    Manufacturing, heavy. The processing of raw materials such as lumber, metals, food products or petroleum; or the assembly, fabrication or processing of goods that have impacts on adjacent properties; or uses that require large amounts of outside storage or equipment. 
    Manufacturing, research related. The assembly or fabrication of products where scientific research comprises a significant component of the value added by manufacture for each unit of product. This definition includes but is not limited to, electronic products, pharmaceuticals, computer equipment, scientific equipment, optical equipment, precision instruments, medical equipment, and communications equipment. Heavy manufacturing is not included in this definition. 
    Mean sea level. The National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a FIRM are referenced. 
    Minimum building line (minimum setback). A line parallel to the street right-of-way line which establishes the minimum allowable distance between the nearest portion of any building, excluding the outmost three (3) feet of any uncovered porches, steps, eaves, gutters and similar fixtures, and the street right-of-way line, when measured perpendicularly thereto, such minimum distance from the street right-of-way line as specified in the "table of area, yard and height requirements." 
    Modular structure. A single-family home or commercial structure constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the North Carolina State Building Code and composed of components substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and transported to the site for final assembly on a permanent foundation. 
    Monuments, legal marking. Permanent markers properly located as required in these regulations for the location and identification on the site of reference points in the subdivision, such as but not limited to: corners of the subdivision, corners of the block, radius points for street curvature, etc. 
    Motel. A group of attached or detached buildings containing individual sleeping units where a majority of such units open individually and directly to the outside and where a garage is attached to or a parking space is conveniently located to each unit all for the temporary use of automobile tourists. 
    Museum. An establishment operated as a repository or a collection of nature, scientific or literary curiosities or objects of interest or works or art, not including the regular sale or distribution of the objects collected. 
    Multifamily development. A single building on a single lot or tract containing more than two (2) but fewer than nine (9) dwelling units. 
    National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). The NFIP is a federal program enabling property owners in participating communities to purchase insurance protection against losses from flooding. This insurance is designed to provide an insurance alternative to disaster assistance to meet the escalating costs of repairing damage to buildings and their contents caused by floods. Participation in the NFIP is based on an agreement between local communities and the federal government that states if a community will adopt and enforce a floodplain management ordinance to reduce future flood risks to new construction in special flood hazard areas, the federal government will make flood insurance available within the community as a financial protection against flood losses. 
    National register of historic places. The national list of districts, sites, buildings, structures and objects significant in American history, architecture, archeology, engineering or culture, maintained by the secretary of the interior under authority of the National Historic Preservation Act, as amended. 
    Natural erosion. The wearing away of the earth's surface by water, wind, or other natural agents under natural environmental conditions undisturbed by man. 
    New construction. For floodplain management purposes, a structure for which the "start of construction" date is on or after the effective date of the floodplain protection zoning overlay and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. This shall include without limitation manufactured homes. 
    Nonconforming building. Any building legally existing prior to the effective date hereof, which fails to comply with the provisions of this LDC. 
    Nonconforming lot. In any district in which a legal lot (as defined in Chapter 11 [§ 102] of this LDC) exists of record on the effective date of adoption or amendment of this LDC that does not conform in size or area to the provisions of this LDC, buildings for the uses permitted in such district may be erected on such lot, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of the LDC; provided that such lot is in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. 
    Nonconforming use. Any use legally existing prior to the effective date hereof, which fails to comply with the provisions of this LDC. 
    Nursing home. A convalescent facility having over six (6) beds meeting all of the requirements of the State of North Carolina for the boarding and care of persons who cannot care for themselves. 
    Office. A room, group of rooms, or building whose primary use is the conduct of a business, professional service, or governmental activity of a non-retail nature; including administration, record keeping, clerical work, and similar functions. This definition is not meant to include manufacturing, processing, repair, or storage of materials or products. 
    Offsite improvements. Any utility, structure, street, drainage area or modification of topography located outside the property to be subdivided. 
    Open space. Areas of a development that allow for light, air, wildlife habitat, and for scenic and recreational use. Also included are areas designed to enhance the privacy or general appearance of a development. Private open space is open space that is owned by a corporation, individual or home owners association. Public open space is open space owned by a governmental jurisdiction. 
    Ordinary maintenance and repairs. Any work on which a building permit or any other city permit or certificate is not required and where the purpose is stabilization, and further, where such work is not inconsistent with the findings of the board regarding a historic structure or the findings of the city council applicable to a historic district. Work not satisfying all of the above requirements shall not be considered ordinary maintenance and repair. The application of paint to previously unpainted brick or masonry, the construction or enlargement of a driveway or parking area, the replacement of exterior doors or windows, except for repairs of broken glass or screens or by use of like glass or screens, shall not be considered ordinary maintenance or repair. 
    Outdoor storage. The temporary or permanent warehousing, displaying inventory, equipment, or other items not within the confines of a building. 
    Outparcel. Individual sites in a shopping center, either leased or subdivided. The total square footage of all outparcels must be less than the total square footage of all attached spaces in the shopping center. Generally, outparcel traffic circulation is internal to the shopping center. 
    Overlay district: A specifically defined area that may be added to the zoning map on a case-by-case basis, enhancing or restricting specified underlying base district uses and regulations. Overlay districts permit activities that are compatible with the purposes of the zoning LDC and are consistent with the city's comprehensive plan, but which are not permitted by the regulations established for the underlying zoning districts. 
    Parent. A person who is either the birth or adopted mother or father, the court appointed legal guardian or the person who directly, or indirectly through one (1) or more intermediaries, lawfully controls the other person. 
    Permittee. Any person to whom a permit is issued under the provisions of this LDC. 
    Perennial stream, waters or watercourse. A watercourse that collects surface runoff and is a) shown as a solid blue line on the most recent USGS 7.5 minute quadrangle topographic maps or is shown as a perennial stream on maps in the most recent US Department of Agriculture Soil Survey of Edgecombe or Nash County, North Carolina, as applicable, and b) drains an area greater than twenty-five (25) acres. Where a USGS topographic map and the Soil Survey map show a difference in stream type for a particular reach of stream, the map that offers the greater stream protection shall apply. 
    Person. Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or corporation or any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, interstate body, or other legal entity. 
    Person conducting land-disturbing activity. Any person who may be held responsible for a violation unless expressly provided otherwise by this LDC. 
    Person responsible for the violation. As used in LDC: 
A.  The developer or other person who has or holds himself out as having financial or operational control over the land-disturbing activity; or 
B.  The landowner or person in possession or control of the land when he has directly or indirectly allowed the land-disturbing activity or has benefited from it or he has failed to comply with any provision of this LDC. 
    Pervasive poverty. A level of poverty either exceeding twenty (20) percent for a period of two (2) or more consecutive decennial censuses or where the poverty level demonstrates an increased rate of poverty as compared to the previous decennial census. 
    Poverty. The percentage of persons living in poverty as a percentage of the total population of the area, as defined by the U.S. Census Bureau. 
    Phase of grading. One (1) of two (2) types of grading, rough or fine. 
    Planned building group. Refers to any of the following projects: 
A.  A residential project containing nine (9) or more attached dwelling units (e.g. apartments); 
B.  A residential project with attached dwelling units for individual ownership (e.g. townhouses); 
C.  A commercial and/or office-institutional project located within a PDR, MA, O-I, B-1, B-2, B-4 or B-5 zoning district involving the construction of one (1) or more buildings containing a combined total of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or greater; 
D.  A commercial and/or office-institutional project within a PDR, MA, O-I, B-1, B-2, B-4 or B-5 zoning district involving the construction of three (3) or more buildings regardless of project size; 
E.  A commercial and/or office-institutional project located within a B-3 zoning district regardless of project size and building number; 
F.  A formally approved non-planned building group project for which new structures are added to the site and/or the cumulative addition of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or greater is obtained on the site. 
G.  Institutional uses such as childcare centers, churches, schools, and similar institutional uses, regardless of the zoning district, involving the construction of one (1) or more building containing a combined total of ten thousand (10,000) square feet gross floor area or greater; 
H.  A commercial and/or office-institutional project within a B-2 or B-5 zoning district located within the Central City Area; 
I.  A college or university; 
J.  A manufactured home park. 
    Planned density residential development. The development of property, which allows the mixing of residential and commercial, and other uses within the PDR zoning district. 
    Planning board. The planning board of the city, appointed by the city council and county commissioners (Edgecombe and Nash Counties) for the following purposes: 
A.  To develop and recommend long-range development plans and policies, and 
B.  To advise the city council in matters pertaining to current physical development and zoning for the city's planning jurisdiction. 
    Plat. A map or chart indicating the subdivision or re-subdivision of land, intended to be filed for record. 
A.  Final plat. A map of land subdivision prepared in a form suitable for filing of record with necessary affidavits, dedications and acceptances, and with complete bearings, angles, and dimensions of all lines defining blocks, lots, rights-of-way, easements, public areas, and other dimensions of land as required in these regulations. 
B.  Preliminary plat. A preliminary drawing which shows the proposed layout of a subdivision in sufficient detail to indicate unquestionably its workability in all aspects, but is not in final form for recording and the details of which are not completely computed. 
C.  Sketch plat. A plat of a proposed subdivision indicating, in general, the area to be subdivided, the street layout, lots and blocks and the general nature of improvements. 
    Pre-existing encroachment. Development that was allowed to be placed prior to being designated in the floodway, such as a parking lot, land previously used for farming and landscaped areas. 
    Preservation. The act or process of applying measures to sustain the existing form, integrity and material of a building or structure, and the existing form and vegetative cover of a site It may include initial stabilization work, where necessary, as well as ongoing maintenance of the historic building materials. 
    Principal building. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any district any dwelling shall be deemed a principal building on the lot on which it is situated. 
    Private club. Any association, person, firm, partnership or corporation, key club, bottle club, locker club, pool club, or any other kind of club or association excluding the general public from its premises or place of meeting or congregating or operating or exercising control over any other place where persons are permitted to drink alcoholic beverages other than in private homes. 
    Processing. Any operation changing the nature of a material or a material's chemical composition or physical properties; does not include operations described as fabrication. 
    Protected area. The area adjoining and upstream to the critical area in which protection measures are required. The boundaries of the protected area extend five (5) miles upstream from the critical area, or to the boundary of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction (whichever comes first). The protected area also extends to the ridgeline of the watershed. 
    Protected ground area. The landscaped/planting area within which no encroachment may occur. 
    Public water system or public sewer system. Any such system built and owned by, or dedicated to and accepted by a governmental agency; all other such systems are private. 
    Railroad yard operations. A facility containing a network of railroad tracks, buildings, structures, roadways or equipment for the storage, movement, maintenance, transfer and transloading of cars, containers, freight, shipments or other property and other activities ancillary to rail transportation or multi-modal terminal operations. 
    Recreational vehicle. A motorized or towable vehicle that combines transportation and temporary living quarters for travel, recreation and camping. RVs do not include mobile homes, off-road vehicles, snowmobiles and conversion vehicles. RVs are sold by recreation vehicle dealers. 
    Recreational vehicle park. A lot or parcel of land which is occupied or designed for occupancy by transient persons using recreational vehicles as temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation purposes. A "recreational vehicle park" shall not include a manufactured housing or manufactured home lots. 
    Remedy a violation. To bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the floodplain protection zoning overlay or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
    Restaurant. An establishment open to the general public for which the principal use is food service which includes food preparation and food ordering and which meets the following criteria for either on-premises or off-premises food consumption: 
A.  On-premises food consumption. 
1.  The establishment provides a dining area for seating customers. 
2.  The establishment provides table bussing and table cleaning services. 
3.  The establishment provides attendant (waiter/waitress), food delivery services, self-service from a buffet table(s) or service from a cafeteria line. 
4.  The establishment provides food service for consumption by patrons in automobiles in the parking lot of the establishment or other dedicated areas contiguous or adjacent to the food preparation structure. 
5.  The establishment does not require a membership, cover charge or minimum charge for admittance or service during regular or special hours of operation. 
6.  The establishment may have a full service bar for serving alcoholic beverages as an ancillary or accessory use provided that the bar is open to restaurant patrons and is limited to the hours of operation for the serving of food. 
7.  The establishment may have live or recorded amplified music or televised entertainment as an ancillary or accessory use provided that these services are limited to the hours of operation for the serving of food. 
8.  The establishment may have a performance area inside only for live entertainment, floor shows, or dancing which is open to restaurant patrons and limited to the hours of operation for the serving of food; and provided further that the occupancy limits set forth in the building code do not exceed the limits for food service restaurants. 
B.  Off-premises food consumption. The establishment offers carry-out, off-site delivery, drive-through takeout food service, or over-the-counter ordering and takeout food service. 
C.  Exclusions. The following are not considered a "restaurant" as defined herein: 
1.  Ancillary or accessory food service for a permitted principal use where the food service is open to the general public such as an employee and/or patron cafeteria or eating area. 
2.  Temporary food service as part of permitted temporary uses such as carnivals, fairs, street fairs, circuses, athletic events, concerts, non-profit fundraising events, emergency shelters and the like; or 
3.  Any establishment where the preparation of food is merely incidental to the sale of food such as grocery stores or food markets. 
    Retail. Sale of a commodity to the ultimate consumer and not customarily subject to sale again. 
    Retirement facility. Residential facilities providing housing and some degree of food service and may also provide individual assistance with some medical needs or housekeeping. The facility may also provide recreational facilities and some personal service shops such as a bank or barber shop, in which ninety (90) percent of the occupied dwelling units are occupied by at least one (1) elderly person (sixty (60) years of age or older) with the following exceptions: 
A.  A spouse under sixty (60) years of age married to and living with an occupant over that age. 
B.  A spouse under sixty (60) years of age who remains a resident following removal of the spouse over the age of sixty (60) by reason of death, divorce, or medical care needs. 
C.  Children or stepchildren of an occupant aged sixty (60) or older residing in the same household as the occupant aged sixty (60) or over. 
D.  Children or stepchildren of an occupant aged sixty (60) or older who remain as residents following removal of the parent aged sixty (60) or older by reason of death, divorce or medical care needs. 
E.  Adults of any age who are related to, employed by, or on the basis of friendship, desire to live with an occupant who is sixty (60) years of age or older. 
    Right-of-way. A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary sewer, drainage channel, storm sewer facility, or for other special use. The use of the term right-of-way for land platting purposes in connection with these regulations shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels. Rights-of way intended for any use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the subdivider on which such right-of-way is established. The width of rights-of-way shall be measured as the shortest distance between the abutting property lines. 
    Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Roofline. The juncture of the roof and the perimeter wall of the structure. 
    Salvage operation. The reclamation, dismantling or storage of pre-used commodities, junk and similar material for the purposes of resale, processing, distribution or deposition. 
    School. See educational facility. 
    Sediment. Solid particulate matter, both mineral and organic, that has been or is being transported by water, air, gravity, or ice from its site of origin. 
    Sedimentation. The process by which sediment resulting from accelerated erosion has been or is being transported off the site of the land-disturbing activity or into a lake or natural watercourse. 
    Sedimentation Control Commission (SCC). Refers to the North Carolina Sedimentation Control Commission. 
    Sedimentation and Erosion Control Plan (SEC Plan). Refers to a sedimentation and erosion control plan including all relevant supporting calculations, notes, descriptions, details, assumptions, and other design criteria. 
    Sedimentation Pollution Control Act (SPCA). Refers to the North Carolina Sedimentation Pollution Control Act of 1973 and all rules and orders adopted pursuant to it. 
    Service station. A building or lot where gasoline, oil, grease and automotive accessories are supplied and dispensed to the motor vehicle trade. 
    Setback. The minimum required distance existing between the abutting street right-of-way line (if no street right-of-way line is involved, the subject property line) and the minimum building line as specified in section Chapter 6, "Lot and Yard Dimensional Standards." Unless specifically noted in the text, ground level parking and security gatehouses may be located within the setback area. 
    Shelter for women or families, with or without children. Shelters for women or families, with or without children who need temporary care or refuge because of domestic violence, dependency or their inability to remain at home for other reasons. The maximum number of individuals allowed in a shelter is twenty-five (25). 
    Shelter home for women or families, with or without children. Shelters homes for women or families, with or without children who need temporary care or refuge because of domestic violence, dependency or their inability to remain at their primary residence for other reasons. The number of individuals allowed in a shelter home is between two (2) and nine (9). 
    Shopping center. A building or buildings consisting of stores, businesses and restaurants having a common parking lot. A shopping center may also have outparcels that utilize the common parking lot and the shopping center entrances and exits drives. 
    Sign. Any object, device, display, banner, flag, structure or part thereof situated outdoors which is appreciable from any public right-of-way or adjacent lot and used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, motion, illuminations or projected images. For the purposes of LDC, the term sign shall include all structural members. A sign shall be construed to be a display in a random or unconnected manner without organized relationship of the components, each such component shall be considered to be a single sign. 
A.  Freestanding sign: A sign self-supported by a post or other supports independent of any building or other structure and anchored in or upon the ground. 
B.  Hanging sign: Any sign suspended from the ceiling of an arcade, marquee, canopy or other architectural projection. 
C.  Monument sign: A freestanding sign that is attached directly to the ground without use of poles, braces, attachments or other similar devices. A monument sign shall have a maximum height of eight (8) feet. 
D.  Pole-mounted sign: A freestanding sign with a base at least seven (7) feet above the ground which is supported from the ground by a pole, posts or other supports of similar support of narrow width. 
E.  Projecting sign: A sign attached to a building or extending in whole or in part fifteen (15) inches or more horizontally beyond the surface of the building to which the sign is attached and where the face of the sign is not in a plane parallel to the wall to which it is attached. 
F.  Roof sign: A sign painted on the roof of a building, supported by poles, uprights or braces extending from the roof of a building or projecting above the roofline of a building except as defined as a wall sign within this LDC. 
G.  Wall sign: A sign, including canopies, attached flat to any wall of a building, where the exposed face of the sign is in a plane parallel to the plane of said wall and extends not more than thirty (30) inches horizontally from the face of said wall. A sign erected upon or against the side of a roof having an angle of thirty (30) degrees or less from the vertical shall be considered to be a wall sign and shall be regulated as such. A sign painted directly on the surface of the building shall also be considered a wall sign. 
    Sign area. That area enclosed by one (1) continuous line connecting the extreme points or edges of a sign. The area shall be determined using the largest sign area or silhouette visible at any one (1) time from any one (1) point. This area does not include the main supporting sign structure; but all other ornamental attachments, inner connecting links, etc., which are not a part of the main supports of the sign are to be included in determining sign area. On a two-sided sign, only one (1) face is counted in computing the sign area. 
    Sign, off-premise (billboards). Any sign which advertises an establishment, service, commodity, goods or entertainment sold or offered on premises other than that on which such sign is located. 
    Sign structure. A structure constructed for the purpose of displaying or supporting a sign. 
    Siltation. Means sediment resulting from accelerated erosion which is settleable or removable by properly designed, constructed, and maintained control measures; and which has been transported from its point of origin within the site of a land-disturbing activity; and which has been deposited, or is in suspension in water. 
    Special use. A use permitted in a zone only after specific findings by the board of adjustment or the city council. 
    Special use permit. The documented evidence or authority granted by the board of adjustment or the city council to locate a use at a particular location. 
    Specified anatomical areas. 
A.  Less than completely and opaquely covered: (i) human genitals and pubic region, (ii) buttock, or (iii) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
B.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities. 
A.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
B.  Fondling or other erotic touchings of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts; or 
C.  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral sex, masturbation, or sodomy; or 
D.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsection[s] (a), (b), or (c) above. 
    Staff. The employees of the city, administering the LDC. 
    Start of construction. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    State register of historic places. The State of North Carolina list of districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects, significant in state history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, and culture maintained by the state. 
    Storage, outdoor. The deposition of commodities or items for the purpose of future use or safekeeping. 
    Storm drainage facilities. The system of inlets, conduits, channels, ditches and appurtenances which serve to collect and convey stormwater through and from a given drainage area. 
    Stormwater runoff. The direct runoff of water resulting from precipitation in any form. 
    Story. That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Story, half. A space under a sloping roof which as the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three (3) feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the floor area is finished off for use. A half-story containing independent apartment or living quarters shall be counted as a full story. 
    Street. Any public or private right-of-way which affords the primary means of access to abutting property and is recorded as such in the office of the Edgecombe County or Nash County Registrar of Deeds. 
A.  Major arterial. Streets that carry the major portion of trips entering or leaving the urban area that carry the most significant amount of intra-area travel, usually for major commercial and industrial use. This system is stratified as (1) Interstate, (2) Other freeways and expressways, and (3) Other principal arteries (with no control of access). The basic concept of these streets is to provide travel service to major traffic generators. 
B.  Minor arterial. Streets that carry a significant amount of intra-area travel placing a greater emphasis on land access but which do not penetrate neighborhoods. 
C.  Collectors. Streets that provide land access services and traffic-circulation within residential neighborhoods, commercial and industrial areas and that collect traffic from local streets channeling it into the arterial system. 
D.  Local streets. All streets not on one of the higher systems providing direct access to abutting land and access to higher level systems. 
E.  Cul-de-sac. A local street with only one (1) outlet and having a terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of all appropriate traffic including the full range of emergency and service vehicles. 
F.  Private street. A vehicular travel-way not dedicated as a public street but resembling a cul-de-sac or local street by carrying traffic from a series of driveways to the public street system. 
G.  Public street. A public street, which affords access to abutting property and is recorded in the office of the Edgecombe or Nash County Register of Deeds. 
H.  Service drive. A public street, generally paralleling and contiguous to an arterial, designed to promote safe ingress and egress to the thoroughfare and to provide access to abutting properties. 
    Street, intersecting. Any street that joins another street at an angle, whether or not it crosses the other. 
    Structural alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls. 
    Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground. For the purpose of this LDC, portable storage units or bins, including demountable units shall be considered a structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made facility or infrastructure that is principally above ground. 
    Subdivider. Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, or trust, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as herein defined, and which includes any agent of the subdivider. 
    Subdivision. All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, building sites or other divisions when any or more of those divisions is created for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, and all divisions of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets; provided, however, that the following shall not be included within this definition: 
A.  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots, where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards contained herein; 
B.  The division of land into parcels greater than ten (10) acres, where no street right-of-way dedication is involved; 
C.  The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets; 
D.  The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is no greater than two (2) acres into not more than three (3) lots, where no street right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards contained in the LDC. 
    Subdivision, minor. Minor subdivisions of not more than four (4) lots fronting on an existing dedicated public street and meeting all standards of the city codes. 
    Subsidiary. An affiliate that is directly, or indirectly through one (1) or more intermediaries, controlled by another person. 
    Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. Substantial damage shall include electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities. See definition of "substantial improvement". 
    Substantial improvements. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage" as defined above, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (a) cost of improvement to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or (b) any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. Substantial improvement shall include electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities. 
    Ten-year storm. A rainfall event that has a ten (10) percent (one (1) in ten (10)) chance per year of being equaled or exceeded. 
    Therapeutic community (TC). A consciously designed social environment and program in which the social and group process is harnessed with therapeutic intent, to assist individuals with drug and alcohol addiction as well as domestic abuse issues. In the therapeutic community, the community is the primary therapeutic instrument; it represents a move away from a purely medical view of psychiatry to "social psychiatry" where human interaction rather than medication brings about change. Typical on-site TC services include, but are not limited to, medical treatment, detoxification (detox.), psychology and/or psychiatry, childcare, job training, and job placement. Treatment is often provided on a long-term basis, one (1) year to three (3) years. Patients often reside on site, with or without children, during the period that treatment is provided. 
    Therapeutic massage and related touch therapy modalities. The mobilization of the soft tissue which may include skin, fascia, tendons, ligaments, and muscles, for the purpose of establishing and maintaining good physical condition. The term shall include effleurage (long strokes), petrissage (kneading), tapotement (chopping), compression, vibration, stretching, heliotherapy, superficial hot and cold applications, topical applications, or other therapy which involves movement either by hand, forearm, elbow, or foot, for the purpose of therapeutic massage. Massage therapy may include the external application and use of herbal or chemical preparations and lubricants such as salts, powders, liquids, nonprescription creams, mechanical devises such as T-bars, thumpers, body support systems, heat lamps, hot and cold packs, salt glow, steam cabinet baths or hydrotherapy. The term includes any massage, movement therapy, massage technology, myotherapy, massotherapy, oriental massage techniques, structural integration, or polarity therapy. The term shall not include laser therapy, microwave, injection therapy, manipulation of the joints, or any diagnosis or treatment of an illness that normally involves the practice of medicine, chiropractic, physical therapy, podiatry, nursing, occupational therapy, veterinary, acupuncture, osteopathy, orthopedics, hypnosis, or naturopathics. 
    Townhouse. Three (3) or more attached single-family dwelling units separated by property lines with open space on at least two (2) sides. 
    Toxic substance. Any substance or combination of substances (including disease causing agents), which after discharge and upon exposure, ingestion, inhalation, or assimilation into any organism, either directly from the environment or indirectly by ingestion through food chains, has the potential to cause death, disease, behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutations, physiological malfunctions (including malfunctions or suppression in reproduction or growth) or physical deformities in such organisms or their offspring or other adverse health effects. 
    Tract. Any contiguous land and bodies of water, regardless of ownership. The word "tract" shall include words "lot," "plot," or "parcel." 
    Transient shelter facility. A shelter providing daily quarters for indigent individuals. 
    Twenty-five year storm. A rainfall event that has a four (4) percent (one (1) in twenty-five (25)) chance per year of being equaled or exceeded. 
    Utilities. The distribution system for water, gas, electric, telephone, cable and antenna systems as well as the collection systems for sanitary sewer and stormwater. 
    Uncovered. The removal of ground cover from, on, or above the soil surface. 
    Undertaken. The initiating of any activity, or phase of activity, which results or will result in a change in the ground cover or topography of a tract of land. 
    Unemployment. The rate of unemployment reported in the most recent decennial census for the area defined. 
    Unhealthy. A plant or tree is "unhealthy" when: 
A.  Its foliage and bark has a form and color that is not characteristic of the species similarly located within the environs of Rocky Mount; or 
B.  Its twig elongation is dissimilar to that of others of the same species and size similarly located within the environs of Rocky Mount; or 
C.  It is not free from infestation of insects and detrimental diseases; or 
D.  It no longer screens, filters, or shades the area of which it was installed; or 
E.  More than thirty (30) percent of its crown dies or is lost in any one (1) calendar year; or 
F.  More than ten (10) percent of its truck [trunk] circumference dies in any one (1) calendar year. 
    Use. The purpose for which land or structure thereon are designed, arranged or intended to be occupied or used for, or for which it is occupied, maintained, rented or leased. 
    Use, by-right (permitted). A use that is listed as permitted activity in this LDC. 
    Use, nonconforming. A use of building or land that existed prior to the adoption of a regulation and does not conform to the regulations of the district in which the building or land is situated. 
    Variance. A modification or alteration of any of the requirements of this ordinance. 
    Vegetation screen. Evergreen trees, including, but not limited to, evergreen shrubs or plants with a minimum height of six (6) inches when planted, which reach a height of at least six (6) feet within five (5) years. 
    Velocity. The average velocity of flow through the cross section of the main channel at the peak flow of the storm of interest. The cross section of the main channel shall be that area defined by the geometry of the channel plus the area of flow below the flood height defined by vertical lines at the main channel banks. Overload flows are not to be included for the purpose of computing velocity of flow. 
    Vested rights. Right of property owner to develop according to the terms of an approved site specific development plan or building permit even if the zoning or zoning district requirements are changed prior to development pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 160A-385.1. 
    Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this LDC. 
    Visible. Capable of being seen without visual aid by a person of normal visual acuity. 
    Warehouse. A building or compartment in a building used and appropriated by the occupant for the deposit and safekeeping or selling of personal goods at wholesale and/or for the purpose of storing the goods of others placed there in the regular course of commercial dealing and trade to be again removed or reshipped. 
    Waste. Surplus materials resulting from on-site construction and disposed of at other locations. 
    Watercourse. Any natural depression two (2) feet or more below natural ground serving to give direction to a current of water and having a bed and well defined banks. 
    Water dependent structure. Any structure for which the use requires access to or proximity to or citing within surface waters to fulfill its basic purpose, such as boat ramps, boathouses, docks and bulkheads. Ancillary facilities such as restaurants, outlets for boat supplies, parking lots and commercial boat storage areas are not water dependent structures. 
    Watershed. The entire land area contributing surface drainage to a specific point (e.g. the water supply intake). 
    Wholesale. Sale of a commodity for resale to the public for direct consumption. 
    Wireless communications antenna. Any system of poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency signals. 
    Wireless communications tower: A structure to be erected to support wireless communications antennas and connecting equipment cabinets to elevate an antenna above the surrounding terrain or structures. It may be attached to an existing building or other permanent structure or constructed as a freestanding structure. Wireless communication towers shall not include ham radio equipment antennas. 
    Working days. Days exclusive of Saturday, Sunday and recognized holidays during which weather conditions or soil conditions permit land-disturbing activity to be undertaken. 
    Yard. An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upwards except where otherwise specifically provided in this LDC that an accessory building may be located in a portion of a yard required for a main building. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of the side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear year, the lease horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
A.  Front yard. A yard located in front of the front elevation of a building and extending across a lot between the side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the front property line and the main building or any projection thereof, other than steps. 
B.  Rear yard. A yard extending across the rear of a lot measured between lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections other than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. On corner lots, the rear yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. On both corner lots and the interior lots, the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
C.  Side yard. A yard between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the main building or any projections other than steps. 
    Yard sale. See "garage sale." 
    Youth development center. Provides a therapeutic living environment for youth defined by focused interactions between youth and youth counselors. A model of care will be implemented which will focus on skill development and behavior change. The youth development center offers blended education-treatment opportunities and other activities that are designed to enable youth to be successful in their home communities. 
    Zoning certificate. A certification by the director of development services or designee that a course of action to use or occupy a tract of land or a building, or to erect, install or alter a structure, building or sign situated in the city's jurisdiction, fully meets the requirements of this LDC. 
(Ord. No. O-2004-87, § 1, 11-8-04; Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2005-34A, § 1a.-1c., 5-9-05; Ord. No. 0-2006-1, § 1, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 0-2006-2, § 1, 1-9-06; Ord. No. O-2006-28, § 2, 4-24-06; Ord. No. O-2007-107, § 2, 10-8-07; Ord. No. O-2009-107, § 1, 10-12-09; Ord. No. O-2010-20, § 2, 3-22-10; Ord. No. O-2011-25, §§ 2, 3, 3-14-11; Ord. No. O-2011-117, § 1, 12-12-11; Ord. No. O-2016-32, § 2, 5-9-16; Ord. No. O-2016-60, § 2, 7-25-16; Ord. No. O-2016-62, § 2, 8-8-16; Ord. No. O-2016-95, §§ 2, 3, 12-12-16; Ord. No. O-2018-71, § 2, 7-9-18; Ord. No. O-2018-78, §§ 2, 3, 8-13-18) 
CHAPTER 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 201. - Title and authority. 
    This ordinance shall be known as the "Land Development Code" or "LDC" of the city. It consists of 1) text to regulate subdivision and zoning in the corporate city limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) and 2) the city's Official zoning map, including overlay zoning districts, as amended from time-to-time, filed in the department of development services. This LDC is adopted in accordance with the powers and duties granted by authority conferred by N.C.G.S. Ch. 160A, § 381, as amended, relating generally to building and zoning, and including, without limitation, planning, zoning, site plan review, historic preservation and the creation of the planning board and the board of adjustment. This LDC is also adopted with the powers and duties granted in pursuance of authority conferred by N.C.G.S. chs. 160A, 39 and 47 relating to the subdivision and platting of property. It is the intent of the city council in adopting this LDC to exercise as fully as possible all the authority granted by all the separate sections of all of those articles and to do so in a comprehensive, integrated, consistent and cohesive code. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 2, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 202. - Purpose and intent. 
    This LDC classifies and regulates the use of land, buildings and structures within the corporate limits and the ETJ. The zoning regulations contained herein are enacted to promote the health, safety, convenience and welfare of the city's inhabitants by dividing the city into districts and regulating therein the use and size of parcels of land and the use and size of buildings and structures as to height and number of stories, the coverage of land by buildings, the size of yards and open space, density of population and location of buildings. It is the intention of the city council that the provisions of this LDC will implement the purpose and intent of the adopted comprehensive plan and other development plans of the city by encouraging the most desirable use of the land for residential, recreational, agricultural, commercial, industrial, conservation, public service, floodplain and drainage purposes, and the most desirable density of population in all parts of the city, and by encouraging the most appropriate use and occupancy of buildings, and by promoting good land use planning. The subdivision regulations establish proper legal description, monumentation and recordation of land that will facilitate identification and permanent location of real estate boundaries, while setting forth requirements for layout, design and construction improvement standards for streets, utilities and similar public facilities. 
Sec. 203. - Bona fide farm exemption. 
    In addition to the purposes set out above, the city hereby establishes a bona fide farm use exemption policy. With the exception of flood regulations contained in this LDC, the LDC shall in no way regulate, restrict, prohibit or otherwise deter any bona fide farm and its related uses within the corporate limits or ETJ; except that in the case of conversion of such uses to nonagricultural or non-farm purposes, a new zoning certificate shall be procured, and the new use must comply with all regulations for the district in which it is situated. Within the corporate limits, vegetative crop production shall be exempt from the provisions of this LDC. 
Sec. 204. - All development. 
    Except as provided in this LDC, no land shall be used and no building, structure or improvement shall be made, erected, constructed, moved, altered, enlarged or rebuilt which is designed, arranged or intended to be used or maintained for any purpose or in any manner except in accordance with the requirements established in the district in which such land, building, structure, or improvement is located, and in accordance with the provisions in this LDC relating to any or all districts. 
Sec. 205. - Applicability and jurisdiction. 
A.  Jurisdiction. The zoning regulations of this LDC apply to all land within the corporate limits and the ETJ. The subdivision regulations of this LDC shall apply within the corporate limits of the city and within the ETJ as shown on the official zoning map of the city and may apply by agreement with any land developer who desires water, sewer, electric, or gas utility service from the city for any development outside the city's corporate limits and extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction in accordance with the city's administrative policy manual. 
B.  Official zoning map, locations and boundaries of districts. The official zoning maps entitled "Official Zoning Map of the City of Rocky Mount and the Surrounding Areas," also known as the zoning map, dated January 1, 1976 as amended from time to time to include any additional areas which may become a part of the city's zoning jurisdiction is hereby made a part of this LDC. The locations and boundaries of each of the zoning districts shall be shown on the map or maps of this LDC and are made a part hereof entitled the zoning map. The zoning map, and all the notations, references and amendments thereto and other information shown, are hereby made a part of this LDC. The zoning map shall be kept on file in the office of the department of development services and shall be available for inspection by the public. The provisions of this LDC governing within each type of district the use of land and buildings, height of buildings, building site areas, sizes of yards around buildings and other matters as are hereinafter set forth are hereby established and declared to be in effect upon all land included within the boundaries of each and every district as shown upon said map. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
1.  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following street lines, alley lines, lot lines or such lines extended, these lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
2.  Where a district boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions on the zoning map, shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet from the nearest street which it parallels. 
3.  Where lots are split by multiple jurisdictional boundary lines, the jurisdictions involved shall have the authority to determine which jurisdiction will have authority. 
In case any further uncertainty exists, the board of adjustment shall interpret the intent of the zoning map as to the location of the district boundaries. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 2, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 206. - Minimum requirements. 
    In the interpretation and application of this LDC, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under N.C.G.S. 
Sec. 207. - Effective date. 
    This LDC shall become effective July 12, 2004 as adopted by city council. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05) 
Sec. 208. - Conflicting provisions. 
A.  Conflict with state or federal regulations. If the provisions of this LDC are inconsistent with those of the state or federal government, the more restrictive provision shall control, to the extent permitted by law. 
B.  Conflict with other city regulations. If the provisions of this LDC are inconsistent with one another, or if they conflict with a provision found in other adopted LDC or regulations of the city, the more restrictive provision shall control without intervention by the city. 
C.  Conflict with private restrictions. It is not the intent of the LDC to interfere, abrogate or annul any lawful easement, covenant, deed restriction or other agreement between private parties. If the provisions of this LDC impose a greater restriction than imposed by a private agreement, the provisions of the LDC shall control and be enforced by the city. Where the provisions of a private agreement impose a greater restriction than this LDC, the provisions of the private agreement shall control as provided and shall be enforced only by private actions of such private parties with no intervention by the city. 
Sec. 209. - Transitional provisions. 
A.  Violations continue. Any violation of the previously adopted zoning or subdivision regulations of the city shall continue to be a violation under this LDC and be subject to penalties and enforcement under chapter 12, unless the use, construction or activity complies with the provisions of this LDC. 
B.  Nonconformities under previous regulations. Any nonconformity under the previous zoning regulations of the city will also be a nonconformity under this LDC, as long as the situation that resulted in the nonconforming status under the previous regulations continues to exist. If, however, a nonconforming situation under the previous regulations becomes conforming because of the adoption of this LDC, or any subsequent amendment to it, then the situation will no longer be nonconforming. Furthermore, if any change is made to a nonconformity which creates a violation to the regulations of this LDC, the situation will be subject to the penalties and enforcement of this LDC. 
C.  Permit issued before effective date. Any building or development for which an application has been issued or is pending approval before the effective date of this LDC may be completed in conformance with the issued permit and all applicable permits, regulations and conditions, even if such building or development does not fully comply with provisions of this LDC. 
D.  Plat approved before effective date. 
1.  Any lot shown on any recorded, fully improved and completed subdivision plat approved by the city under any prior subdivision ordinance shall be deemed to be fully conforming to the subdivision requirements of this LDC as to lot area and access. 
2.  Any parcel other than a lot described under subsection D.1. above that meets both of the following criteria shall be deemed fully conforming with this LDC as to lot area and access: 
a.  The parcel consists of all or part of one (1) or more lots shown on a subdivision plat approved by the city under any prior subdivision ordinance; and 
b.  The parcel conformed to the zoning ordinance at the time that it was created or, prior to issuance of a building permit, such lot will conform to the requirements of this LDC as to lot size, roadway and street surface standards and provisions for water and sewer services. 
3.  Any subdivision for which a preliminary or final plat was approved by the planning board before the effective date of this LDC may be completed according to the approved plat and other applicable permits and conditions which were in effect at the time of approval. 
4.  If the prior approved subdivision is not completed within the time requirements established by prior regulations or within any schedule included in the approval of the plat, then the subdivision may be completed only in compliance with this LDC. 
E.  PUD approval before effective date. Any PUD for which the city council has approved a development plan is considered legal, and shall continue to be governed by the specific regulations and development plan previously adopted by the planning board and city council. Any amendments, revisions or changes to a previously adopted PUD shall comply with PDR district provisions of this LDC. 
_____
F.  Zoning district conversion. Zoning districts existing before the effective date of this LDC are hereby converted and revised as follows: 
Table 2-1. Zoning District Conversion 
Existing Zoning Districts Revised Zoning Districts A-1, A-1CU* Agriculture A-1 Agricultural District R-15, R-15CU* Residential District R-15 Very Low Density Residential District R-10, R-10CU* Residential District R-10 Low Density Residential District R-8, R-8CU* Residential Mobile Home R-8 Medium Density Manufactured and Single-family Residential District R-6S, R-6SCU* Residential District R-6 Medium Density Single-family Residential District R-6, R-6CU* Residential District R-6MFA High Density Multifamily Residential MF, MFCU* Multifamily District R-MHP Manufactured Home Park District PUD Planned Unit Development PDR Planned Density Residential District O-I, O-ICU* Office & Institutional O-I Office & Institutional District MA, MACU* Medical Arts MA Medical Arts District B-1, B-1CU* Neighborhood Shopping Bus B-1 Neighborhood Commercial District B-2, B-1CU* Highway Commercial Bus B-2 Commercial Corridor District B-3, B-3CU* Regional Shopping Center B-3 Regional Commercial District B-4, B-4CU* Central Business District B-4 Central Business District B-5, B-5CU* Service Business District B-5 Commercial Services District I-1, I-1CU* Light Industrial I-1 Light Industrial District I-2, I-2CU* Heavy Industrial I-2 Heavy Industrial District I-P, I-PCU* Industrial Park I-P Industrial Park District  
Existing Overlay Districts Revised Overlay Districts HP Local Historic District HP Local Historic District N/A N/A LHL Local Historic Landmark CED Comm. Enterprise Overlay CED Community Enterprise District A Subdistrict A (Floodway) AEFW Subdistrict AEFW (Floodway) B Subdistrict B (100-year flood zone) AE Subdistrict AE (100-year flood zone) C Subdistrict C (all other watercourses) X Subdistrict X (all other watercourses) *All CU Districts *All CU Districts CU Conditional Use Overlay  
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05) 
Sec. 210. - Severability. 
    In case any portion of this LDC shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder of the LDC shall not thereby be invalid, but shall remain in full force and effect. 
CHAPTER 3. - DEVELOPMENT REVIEW ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 301. - Director of development services. 
A.  Responsibility. The director shall have responsibility for administering this LDC, under the authority of the city manager and as prescribed, to delegate, designate and appoint such key departmental staff persons as necessary to carry out such zoning, subdivision, building and enforcement activities of this LDC. 
B.  Powers and duties. In administering this LDC, the director shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  To enforce the provisions of the zoning, subdivision regulations and design standards of this LDC; 
2.  To receive, file, and forward to the board of adjustment the record for all authorized appeals and actions; 
3.  To maintain permanent and current records of this LDC, including but not limited to, zoning maps, amendments, conditional uses, variances, interpretations, appeals and applications therefore and records hearings thereon; 
4.  To maintain for distribution to the public a supply of copies of the official zoning map with adopted overlay districts and the compiled text of this LDC; and 
5.  To provide such clerical, technical and consultative assistance as may be required by the planning board, board of adjustment, historic preservation commission and other boards, commissions and officials in the exercise of their duties relating to this LDC. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 3, 8-13-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 3, adopted Aug. 13, 2018, changed the title of § 301 from director of planning and development to director of development services. 
Sec. 302. - Inspection services administrator. 
A.  Responsibility. The inspection services administrator shall be responsible for issuance of building permits and other matters that reference the building code. 
B.  Powers and duties. In administering this LDC, the inspection services administrator shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  To approve all building permits, approve certificates of occupancy and make and maintain records thereof; 
2.  To determine the extent of damage or destruction of nonconforming uses and structures. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05) 
Sec. 303. - Director of engineering. 
A.  Responsibility. The director of engineering shall be responsible for review of subdivision improvements, planned building groups, various site plans, and other engineering related matters of this LDC. 
B.  Powers and duties. In administering this LDC, the director of engineering shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  To review and approve design conditions and specifications for required subdivision street and public utility or facility improvements; 
2.  To review and approve design conditions and specifications for required or needed local, collector, arterial and major arterial street extensions, widening or improvements; 
3.  To calculate the amounts of required subdivision financial guarantees; 
4.  To determine the sufficiency of improvement guarantees; 
5.  To inspect, approve and recommend acceptance of public improvements; 
6.  To review any and all plans for stormwater control and flood plain development; and 
7.  To review any and all plans for traffic access, ingress and egress. 
Sec. 304. - Fire chief. 
A.  Responsibility. The fire chief shall be responsible for review of subdivision improvements, planned building groups, various site plans, and other related matters of this LDC. 
B.  Powers and duties. 
1.  To review any and all plans for compliance with regulations; 
2.  To monitor CAD address issues working directly with police and fire needs; 
3.  To maintain "bank" of pre-approved street names; 
4.  To maintain MSAG for city's E911 (master street address guide); 
5.  To prepare, deliver, and maintain records of E911 maintenance ledgers; 
6.  To prepare, deliver, and maintain records of E911 problem reports; 
7.  To perform field survey verifications on all new and changed addresses; 
8.  To prepare and provide updated street map information to utilities GIS technician, CAD map, utility billing, and city GIS web master; 
9.  To prepare and provide continual updates for fire department senior firefighter street testing program; 
10.  To maintain and modify when required fire geo-proximity sectors, ESN (emergency service numbers) boundaries, police beat mapping information, emergency telephone number list; 
11.  To perform task requests related to CAD and E911 information from police and fire; 
12.  To perform follow up of address assignments assuring adequate notification of customers and adherence of posting requirements of this policy; 
13.  To cause to notify the USPS, E911 telephone service provider(s), city, Nash and Edgecombe County Emergency Services, appropriate county tax assessors, elections and school boards, NCDOT, and affected property owners of street name changes; 
14.  To coordinate street renaming activities when conflicts in accordance with this Code; and 
15.  To coordinate road names and address numbers with adjacent Nash and Edgecombe counties to insure logical transition at city/county boundaries. 
Sec. 305. - Development review committee (DRC). 
A.  Creation. The development review committee (DRC) is established as the technical staff committee for the city and is responsible for the application of this LDC where specified and for the approval or recommendation of land use and development proposals and permits in accordance with the provisions of this LDC. 
B.  Appointed membership. The DRC shall consist of official representatives from designated city departments and ex-officio representatives of other agencies listed below: 
1.  Department of development services, 
2.  Engineering department, 
3.  Department of public works, 
4.  Department of water resources, 
5.  Fire department, 
6.  Police department, 
7.  Public utilities, 
8.  Such other city department members as designated by the city manager. 
Ex-officio members: 
1.  NC DOT, (as applicable), 
2.  applicable communications provider, 
3.  applicable energy provider, and 
4.  applicable cable service provider. 
A roster of DRC members will be maintained in the department of development services and available for public review. An alternate may serve in a member's absence and have the same powers and duties as the regular member. The director or the director's designee shall serve as secretary to the DRC and shall be responsible for preparing agendas and reporting results. The director or designee shall have the authority to stamp and sign approved plans. The director or designee shall maintain accurate records of the results of the meeting. 
C.  Powers and duties. The DRC shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  Provide review of land use and development proposals (site plans, preliminary plats, final plats, community design review plans, zoning plans etc.) with approval of certain plans and provide recommendations to the planning board for other plans as specified in this LDC. 
2.  Monitor existing LDC, adopted plans and development standards and recommend changes in order to improve planning and development within the jurisdiction. 
3.  Review revisions to development proposals for approval or recommendation to the planning board. 
4.  Recommend installation of street and utility improvements related to development proposals. 
5.  Establish a formal meeting schedule for systematic review of plans, permits, site plans, zoning and subdivision matters with the applicants. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 2, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 306. - Street name review committee (SNRC). 
A.  Creation. The street name review committee (SNRC) is established as the technical staff committee for the city and is responsible for the application of this LDC where specified and for the approval or recommendation of street names in accordance with the provisions of this LDC. 
B.  Membership. The SNRC shall consist of official representatives from designated city departments listed below: 
1.  Department of development services, 
2.  Fire department, 
3.  Police department, 
4.  Engineering department, 
5.  Utilities GIS department, 
6.  Life safety emergency management, and 
7.  E 9-1-1 coordinator. 
A roster of SNRC members will be maintained in the fire department and available for public review. An alternate may serve in a member's absence and have the same powers and duties as the regular member. The fire chief or the designee shall serve as secretary to the SNRC and shall be responsible for reporting results. The fire chief or designee shall maintain accurate records of the results of the committee. 
C.  Powers and duties. The SRNC shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  Review and selection of appropriate street names that do not conflict with existing street names by utilizing the guidelines and procedures outlined in the National Emergency Number Association (NENA) publication which are demonstrated in this LDC to the fullest extent possible. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 2, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 307. - Planning board. 
A.  Purpose. The provisions of this section are enacted for the purpose of exercising the powers authorized by Article 19 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes of North Carolina, and any amendments made thereto, and are intended to give the planning board all the powers, duties and authority provided in said Article and amendments thereto. 
B.  Appointment of office. 
1.  There is hereby created the Rocky Mount Planning Board consisting of nine (9) members. Seven (7) of said members shall be residents of the city and appointed by the city council of the city (the "city members"). One (1) member shall reside in Nash County in the area between the corporate limits of the city and the outer boundary of the extraterritorial area subject to zoning regulation by the city and shall be appointed by the Nash County Board of Commissioners. One (1) member shall reside in Edgecombe County in the area between the corporate limits of the city and the outer boundary of the extraterritorial area subject to zoning regulation of the city and shall be appointed by the Edgecombe County Board of Commissioners. 
2.  Members of the planning board shall be actual residents of the respective city or extraterritorial area (except as otherwise provided by the General Statutes of North Carolina) at the time of their appointment to the board and during their tenure of office. Any member moving and no longer residing within their city or county jurisdictional limits during their term of office shall by doing so create a vacancy in the office of the member who has moved. 
3.  One (1) city member shall be appointed from each ward of the city and shall be a resident of such ward. 
4.  An extraterritorial member shall function only with (i) respect to matters arising within the extraterritorial area such member was appointed to represent and (ii) matters involving the city and the extraterritorial area such member was appointed to represent. The city members shall function with respect to all matters coming before the planning board. Only the city members shall function with respect to matters arising within the corporate limits of the city. The city council and/or respective county commission shall appoint a replacement to fill any unexpired terms. 
C.  Term of office. Terms like appointments shall reflect current policy established by North Carolina State Planning Enabling Legislation for all appointees, by the City Council of Rocky Mount for all city appointees, by the Nash County Board of Commissioners for the Nash County appointee and by the Edgecombe County Board of Commissioners for the Edgecombe County appointee. The terms of appointment by the City Council of Rocky Mount, the Nash County Board of Commissioners, and the Edgecombe County Board of Commissioners shall be three (3) years. All terms shall expire on June 30 in the year of expiration. 
D.  Qualifications. Members of the planning board shall be actual residents of the city (and the ward they were appointed to represent) or the ETJ (except as otherwise provided by the General Statutes of North Carolina) at the time of their appointment to the board and during their tenure of office. Any city member moving and no longer residing within the boundaries of the ward he or she was appointed to represent, or any county member moving and no longer residing within the ETJ area he or she was appointed to represent during their term of office shall by doing so create a vacancy. Only one (1) city member from each ward shall be eligible to serve on the planning board. 
E.  Compensation. The members of the planning board shall serve without pay. 
F.  Board rules and procedures. The board shall adopt rules governing its organization and for all proceedings before it. The rules shall not be effective until filed with the office of the city clerk. Such rules shall provide and require the following in addition to such other rules and regulations the board shall adopt: 
1.  The board shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman on an annual basis. The members serving as chair and vice-chair may be re-elected in subsequent years. 
2.  The director or the director's designee shall serve as the secretary of the board. The secretary shall keep full and accurate minutes of the proceedings of the board so that a person not in attendance would have a reasonable understanding of what transpired. The minutes shall state which members attended and which members were absent, contain the votes of each member, and state which members abstained from voting and the reason for the abstention. The minutes shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be a public record. 
3.  The board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this LDC. Meetings of the board shall be held on the second Tuesday of each month as needed and at such other times as the board may determine. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. 
4.  No action shall be taken by the board unless a quorum is present. A quorum for any matter arising within the corporate limits of the city shall consist of four (4) city members of the board. A quorum for any matter arising within the Nash County extraterritorial area shall consist of five (5) members of the board, not including the Edgecombe County member. A quorum for any matter arising within the Edgecombe County extraterritorial area shall consist of five (5) members of the board, not including the Nash County member. A quorum for any matter involving the area within the corporate limits and both extraterritorial areas shall be five (5) members of the board. 
5.  A representative of the director and any other interested party may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney to provide information and offer recommendations with regard to any matter pending before the board. 
G.  Powers and duties. The planning board shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  Adoption of comprehensive plan and other plans. The department of development services shall prepare and recommend to the planning board from time to time plans for the systematic development and betterment of the city. The planning board may consider and investigate any subject matter related to the development and betterment of the city, and make recommendations as it may deem advisable concerning the adoption of such plans to the city council, and for any purpose may make, or cause to be made, surveys, maps or plans. 
2.  Text amendments. The planning board shall be responsible for reviewing LDC text amendment applications and for recommending that the city council approve or deny such applications. 
3.  Zoning map amendments. The planning board shall be responsible for reviewing map amendment (rezoning) applications and for recommending that the city council approve or deny such applications. 
4.  Subdivisions. The planning board shall be responsible for approval of land subdivisions in conformance with this LDC. 
5.  Variances to subdivisions provisions. The planning board may vary the requirements of Chapter 13 of this LDC where, because of the size of the tract to be subdivided, its topography, the condition or nature of adjoining areas or the existence of other unusual physical conditions, strict compliance with the provisions of Chapter 13 would cause an unusual and unnecessary hardship on the subdivider. In granting variances, the planning board may require such conditions as will secure, insofar as practicable, the objectives and the requirement(s) of this LDC. Any variance thus granted is required to be entered in writing in the minutes of the planning board, and the reasons justifying such variance set forth. 
6.  Planned building groups. The board shall review planned building groups and confirm compliance with the requirements of this LDC. 
7.  Public improvements. Before any final action shall be taken by the city or any department thereof concerning the location and design of any public building, memorial park, parkway, boulevard, new street, alley or bridge, the proposal, project, or improvement shall be submitted to the planning board for investigation and report to the city council. 
8.  Other matters. The planning board shall have such other duties as determined from time-to-time by the city council and as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. 0-2005-108, § 1, 12-12-05; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 2, 8-13-18) 
Editor's note- Section 4a of Ord. No. 0-2005-108 provided that subsection 307B.2 is effective upon adoption and until June 30, 2006. Section 4b of said ordinance provided that subsections 307B.3. and 307D. are effective July 1, 2006. The remainder of this section is effective upon adoption. 
Sec. 308. - Board of adjustment. 
A.  Purpose. The provisions of this section are enacted for the purpose of exercising the powers authorized by Article 19 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes of North Carolina, and any amendments made thereto, and are intended to give the board of adjustment all the powers, duties and authority provided in said Article and amendments thereto. 
B.  Appointment of office. 
1.  There is hereby created the Rocky Mount Board of Adjustment consisting of nine (9) members. Seven (7) of said members shall be residents of the city and appointed by the city council of the city (the "city members"). One (1) member shall reside in Nash County in the area between the corporate limits of the city and the outer boundary of the extraterritorial area subject to zoning regulation by the city and shall be appointed by the Nash County Board of Commissioners. One (1) member shall reside in Edgecombe County in the area between the corporate limits of the city and the outer boundary of the extraterritorial area subject to zoning regulation of the city and shall be appointed by the Edgecombe County Board of Commissioners. 
2.  Members of the board of adjustment shall be actual residents of the respective city or extraterritorial area (except as otherwise provided by the General Statutes of North Carolina) at the time of their appointment to the board and during their tenure of office. Any member moving and no longer residing within their city or county jurisdictional limits during their term of office shall by doing so create a vacancy in the office of the member who has moved. 
3.  One (1) city member shall be appointed from each ward of the city and shall be a resident of such ward. 
4.  An extraterritorial member shall function only with (i) respect to matters arising within the extraterritorial area such member was appointed to represent and (ii) matters involving the city and the extraterritorial area such member was appointed to represent. The city members shall function with respect to all matters coming before the board of adjustment. Only the city members shall function with respect to matters arising within the corporate limits of the city. The city council and/or respective county commission shall appoint a replacement to fill any unexpired terms. 
5.  The board of adjustment shall also consist of four (4) alternate members. Two (2) alternate members shall be appointed by the city council and shall be residents of the city (the "city alternate members"); and two (2) alternate members, one (1) who resides in the Edgecombe County extraterritorial area (the "Edgecombe Alternate Member") and one (1) who resides in the Nash County extraterritorial area (the "Nash Alternate Member"), shall be appointed by the respective board of county commissioners. Alternate members shall serve as provided herein in the absence or temporary disqualification of a regular member or to fill a vacancy pending appointment of a regular member. A city alternate member shall only serve on behalf of a regular city member. The Edgecombe alternate member shall only serve on behalf of the regular member appointed to represent the Edgecombe County extraterritorial area, and the Nash [County] alternate member shall only serve on behalf of the regular member appointed to represent the Nash County extraterritorial area. An alternate member, while attending any regular or special meeting of the board of adjustment and serving on behalf of a regular member, shall have and may exercise all of the powers and duties of a regular member. The city council and/or respective county board of commissioners shall appoint a replacement to fill any unexpired term. 
C.  Term of office. Terms like appointments shall reflect current policy established by North Carolina State Planning Enabling Legislation for all appointees, by the City Council of Rocky Mount for all city appointees, by the Nash County Board of Commissioners for all Nash County appointees and by the Edgecombe County Board of Commissioners for all Edgecombe County appointees. The terms of appointment by the City Council of Rocky Mount, the Nash County Board of Commissioners, and the Edgecombe County Board of Commissioners shall be three (3) years. All terms shall expire on June 30 in the year of expiration. 
D.  Qualifications and procedures. The city, as well as Nash and Edgecombe County, may from time to time adopt rules and procedures bearing on their appointments and appointees as deemed necessary. Members of the board of adjustment shall be actual residents of the city (and, except for alternate members, the ward they were appointed to represent) or the ETJ area (except otherwise provided by the General Statutes of North Carolina) at the time of their appointment to the board and during their tenure of office. Any city member moving and no longer residing within the boundaries of the ward he or she was appointed to represent, any city alternate member moving and no longer residing within the corporate limits of the city, or any county member moving and no longer residing within the boundaries of the ETJ area he or she was appointed to represent during their term of office shall by doing so create a vacancy. Only one (1) city member (not including alternate members) from each ward shall be eligible to serve on the board of adjustment. 
E.  Compensation. The members of the board of adjustment shall serve without pay. 
F.  Board rules and procedures. 
1.  The board shall adopt rules governing its organization and for all proceedings before it in accordance with the provisions of this LDC. The rules shall not be effective until filed with the office of the city clerk. Such rules shall provide and require the following in addition to such other rules and regulations the board shall adopt. 
2.  The board shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman on an annual basis. The presiding officer shall be a voting member of the board. The members serving as chair and vice-chair may be re-elected in subsequent years. 
3.  The director or the director's designee shall serve as the secretary of the board. The secretary shall keep full and accurate minutes of the proceedings of the board so that a person not in attendance would have a reasonable understanding of what transpired. The minutes shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be a public record. The minutes shall state which members attended and which members were absent, contain relevant facts and testimony of each matter coming before the board, the vote of each member on each such matter, and shall state which members abstained from voting and the reason for the abstention. 
4.  Meetings of the board shall be held on the first Tuesday of each month as needed and at such other times as the board may determine. The chair or acting chair may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. 
5.  No matters shall be heard or action taken by the board unless a quorum is present. A quorum for any variance shall consist of four-fifths (4/5) of the membership of the board as hereinafter set forth. A quorum for any other matter arising within the corporate limits of the city shall consist of four (4) city members of the board. A quorum for any matter arising within the Nash County extraterritorial area shall consist of five (5) members of the board, not including the Edgecombe County member. A quorum for any matter arising within the Edgecombe County extraterritorial area shall consist of five (5) members of the board, not including the Nash County member. A quorum for any matter involving the area within the corporate limits and both extraterritorial areas shall be six (6) members of the board. Alternate members may be used to constitute a quorum. 
6.  Due notice as required by law shall be given to all parties having an interest in any matter heard by the board and to the director. The director shall be permitted to intervene for and on the behalf of the city in all hearings. 
7.  A representative of the director and any other interested party may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney to offer evidence and testimony relative to any matter heard by the board. 
8.  Fees for filing petitions and appeals to the board of adjustment shall be as set from time to time by the city council. 
G.  Powers and duties. The board of adjustment's powers and duties under this LDC are set out below. In exercising its powers and making decisions hereunder the board of adjustment shall make findings of fact based on the evidence presented at the hearing and shall set forth in its minutes the facts required under this LDC and other applicable law to support each decision made. If an appeal, permit, or variance is denied, the board of adjustment shall set forth in its minutes the specific conditions or requirements of this LDC or other applicable law that were not established by the appellant or applicant and the specific facts supporting those findings and conclusions. 
1.  Variances to zoning provisions. The board of adjustment shall hear variance requests as provided in section 509 of this LDC. 
2.  Variances, adult establishments. The board of adjustment shall hear requests for variances in the separation requirements for adult establishments as provided in section 509. 
3.  Variances, watershed protection. The board of adjustment shall hear requests for variances from the watershed protection provisions of chapter 8 of this LDC as provided in section 509. 
4.  Variances, flood protection overlay district. The board of adjustment shall hear requests for variances from the flood protection overlay district provisions of chapter 9 of this LDC as provided in section 909. 
5.  Special use permits. The board of adjustment shall hear requests for special use permits as provided in section 506. 
6.  Appeals of city officials' decisions. The board of adjustment shall hear appeals from any order, requirement, or decision made under this LDC as provided in section 509 and section 510; provided, however notwithstanding the provisions of section 509 and section 510 no vote greater than the number of members of the board of adjustment required to constitute a quorum for the appeal being heard shall be required to reverse any order, decision, or requirement made under this LDC. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. 0-2005-109, § 1, 12-12-05; Ord. No. O-2017-95, § 2, 11-13-17) 
Editor's note- Section 4a of Ord. No. 0-2005-109 provided that subsection 308B.2 is effective upon adoption and until June 30, 2006. Section 4b of said ordinance provided that subsections 308B.3. and 308D. are effective July 1, 2006. The remainder of this section is effective upon adoption. 
Sec. 309. - Historic preservation commission. 
A.  Creation; membership. There is hereby established a Rocky Mount Historic Preservation Commission ("commission") under the authority of the North Carolina General Statutes. The commission shall consist of nine (9) members appointed by the mayor and city council. The city council may appoint ex-officio members who shall not have a right to vote. All voting members shall reside within the planning and zoning jurisdiction of Rocky Mount. A majority of the members of the commission shall have demonstrated special interest, experience, or education in history, architecture, archaeology, or related fields. The commission shall serve without compensation. The commission may appoint advisory bodies and committees as appropriate. Members of the commission shall serve terms of four (4) years. Terms shall be staggered. A member may be reappointed for successive consecutive terms. 
B.  Meetings; procedures. The commission shall establish a meeting time, and shall meet at least quarterly and more often as it shall determine and require. All meetings shall conform to the North Carolina Open Meetings Law. Prior to any official action the commission shall adopt and publish rules of procedure governing its meetings, attendance, the conduct of official business, the election of officers and related matters. The commission shall also prepare and adopt principles and guidelines for altering, restoring, moving, or demolishing properties designated as landmarks or located within historic districts. The commission shall keep permanent minutes of all its meetings. The minutes shall record attendance of its members, its resolutions, findings, recommendations, and actions. A copy of the minutes of all meetings shall be furnished to the city council. 
C.  Powers and duties. The commission is authorized and empowered to undertake such actions reasonably necessary to the discharge and conduct of its duties and responsibilities as outlined in this division and the General Statutes of the State of North Carolina, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  Undertake an inventory of properties of historical, archeological, architectural and/or cultural significance. 
2.  Recommend to the city council areas to be designated by LDC as "historic districts" and individual structures, buildings, sites, areas or objects to be designated by LDC as "local historic landmarks." 
3.  Recommend to the city council that designation of any area as a historic district, or part thereof, or designation of any building, structure, site, area or object as a landmark, be revoked or removed for cause. 
4.  Review and act upon proposals for alterations, demolition or new construction within historic districts or for the alteration or demolition of designated landmarks. The historic preservation commission shall be responsible for final action on any certificate of appropriateness. 
5.  Conduct an educational program with respect to historic districts and landmarks within its jurisdiction. 
6.  Cooperate with the state, federal and local government in pursuance of the purposes of this division; to offer or request assistance, aid, guidance or advice concerning matters under its purview or of mutual interest. The city council, or the commission when authorized by the city council, may contract with the state or the United States, or any agency of either, or with any other organization provided the terms are not inconsistent with state or federal law. 
7.  Enter, solely in performance of its official duties and only at reasonable times, upon private lands for examination or survey thereof. However, no member, employee or agent of the commission may enter any private building or structure without express consent of the owner or occupant thereof. 
8.  Prepare and recommend the official adoption of a preservation element as part of the city's comprehensive plan. 
9.  Acquire by any lawful means (not to include eminent domain) the fee or any lesser included interest, including options to purchase, to properties within established districts or to any such properties designated as landmarks, to hold, manage, preserve, restore and improve the same, and to exchange or dispose of the property by public or private sale, lease or otherwise, subject to covenants or other legally binding restrictions which will secure appropriate rights of public access and promote the preservation of the property. 
10.  Restore, preserve and operate historic properties, subject to appropriation of funds by the city council. 
11.  Negotiate at any time with the owner of a building, structure, site, area or object for its acquisition or its preservation, when such action is reasonably necessary or appropriate. 
D.  Administrator. The city manager, or designee, will be the administrator of the commission and of this section. 
Sec. 310. - City council. 
A.  Jurisdiction. For the purpose of promoting the orderly growth, expansion and development of the City and the surrounding territory hereinafter defined, and for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, economy and general welfare of the citizens of such area, the city council is hereby authorized to exercise any planning, subdivision, zoning and building regulation powers (including plumbing, heating, or electrical regulation powers) now or hereafter conferred upon the city and vested in the city council by this LDC, the General Statutes of North Carolina, or any other statute applicable to the city, not only within the corporate limits of the city but also within the territory beyond the corporate limits, as now or hereafter fixed, for a distance not to exceed three (3) miles in all direction's. Such powers may be exercised to the same extent and according to the same procedures as are applicable to the exercise of planning, zoning, subdivision, or building regulation powers (including plumbing, heating, air conditioning or electrical regulation powers) within the corporate limits of the city; but any LDC intended to have application beyond the corporate limits of the city shall so provide. Such powers shall include the power to adopt such LDC and regulations as may be considered necessary or expedient by the city council to regulate, control and restrict, but are not limited to items such as: 
1.  The height, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures; 
2.  The percentage of a lot that may be occupied; 
3.  The size of yards, courts and other open spaces; 
4.  The density of population; 
5.  The location and use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residences or other purposes; 
6.  The construction of buildings, including plumbing, heating and air conditioning and electrical installations; and 
7.  The names of streets (the city may, but need not, provide street name signs in the area). 
In order to enforce properly the provisions of any land development or building regulation, the city council may require by this LDC that prior to the beginning of any construction, reconstruction or alteration of any building or structure, or the installation of any plumbing, heating, air conditioning or electrical installations within said area, that a permit or permits be obtained therefore from the inspection services administrator of the city. All permits, plans, inspections and fees that are specified in the city administrative policy manual will apply to such area within corporate limits and ETJ. The powers herein granted to the city council are intended to be supplementary to any powers now or hereafter conferred upon it. The exercise of powers herein granted shall be within the discussion of the city council. This Section shall have no effect upon any existing city LDC. The adoption of any LDC under authority of this section shall have no effect upon any litigation pending at the time of adoption of such LDC. 
B.  Responsibility. The city council shall be responsible for final action regarding the text of this Land Development Code, and the official zoning map. 
C.  Powers and duties. The city council powers and duties under this LDC are set out below. 
1.  Text amendments. The city council shall be responsible for reviewing LDC text amendment applications and for taking the final local action to approve or deny such applications. 
2.  Map amendments. The city council shall be responsible for reviewing map amendment (rezoning) applications and for taking the final local action to approve, approve with conditions or deny such applications. 
3.  Joint meetings. On request of the city council, the council may attend a joint hearing of the city council and the planning board to discuss development matters or cases pending before the council. 
4.  Changes and amendments affecting watershed protection provisions. No amendments, supplements or changes which would cause any provision of this LDC to violate the watershed protection rules adopted by the North Carolina Environmental Management Commission shall be adopted by the city. All amendments to this LDC relating to public water supply watershed protection shall be filed with the North Carolina Department of Environmental and Natural Resources (NC-DENR). 
5.  Special use permits. The city council shall be responsible for approving certain special use permits as provided in section 506. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-1, §§ 2a, 2b, 1-9-06) 
Sec. 311. - Written interpretations. 
A.  Applicability. The director or the director's designee shall have authority to make all written interpretations concerning the provisions of this LDC and the official zoning map. 
B.  Application. A request for interpretation shall be submitted to the director on forms established by the director and made available to the public. 
C.  Review and action by director of development services. Within ten (10) business days after a request for interpretation has been submitted, the director or the director's designee shall: (1) review and evaluate the request in light of the text of this LDC, the official zoning map, the comprehensive plan and any other relevant information; (2) consult with other staff, as necessary; and (3) render an opinion. The interpretation shall be provided to the applicant in writing by mail. 
D.  Official record. The director shall maintain an official record of interpretations. The record of interpretations shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours. 
E.  Appeal. 
1.  Appeals of written interpretations made by the director shall be taken to the board of adjustment, in accordance with the procedures in section 310. 
2.  In considering such an appeal, the board of adjustment shall review the interpretation and public testimony in light of the comprehensive plan, the LDC and the official zoning map, and any other land use policies adopted by the planning board or city council, whichever are applicable. The board of adjustment shall modify or reject the interpretation only if it is not supported by substantial competent evidence or if the interpretation is contrary to the comprehensive plan, this LDC or the official zoning map. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 3, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 312. - Development review procedures. 
A.  Authority to file applications. An application for development review or approval under this LDC must be filed by the person having legal authority to take action in accordance with the approval sought. Unless otherwise expressly stated, that person is presumed to be the record owner, purchaser under contract from the record owner with signature from that owner, or the duly authorized agent of the record owner in the absence of satisfactory proof to the contrary. City officials are authorized to require proof of legal authority to take the action sought. The city council, planning board, board of adjustment, historic preservation commission, city manager and city department heads may initiate any action to carry out their duties, purposes and responsibilities for implementing public policy under this LDC, with or without an application from the property owner, on behalf of the city. 
B.  Where to file applications, form of application. Applications required under this chapter shall be submitted to the department of development services, and must be submitted on forms and in such numbers as required by the director. 
C.  Application fee. Applications must be accompanied by the non-refundable fee established and amended from time-to-time by city council. Fees shall not be required for applications initiated by the city council, planning board, historic preservation commission, board of adjustment, city manager or city department heads. 
D.  Complete applications. Applications that do not include all required information or that are not accompanied by required fees will not be accepted, and no further processing of the application will occur until the deficiencies are corrected. If the official designated to receive the application determines it is incomplete, the application will be held from processing and the applicant provided with an explanation of the application's deficiencies pending resubmission of cured deficiencies. Applications will be reviewed for completeness within five (5) business days of filing. 
E.  Application processing cycles. Prior to plan submittal (general plans (II and III), planned building groups, preliminary and construction plats-Major subdivisions) a preliminary meeting between the applicants shall be conducted with the DRC. The director or director's designee may waive the preliminary meeting if the applicant is unable to make appropriate accommodations to schedule a preliminary meeting. All initial applications for review by the DRC shall be submitted to the city no later than 12:00 p.m. on Tuesday in order to be eligible for review at the following Wednesday DRC meeting. 
    All supplemental reviews shall be submitted to the city no later than 12:00 p.m. on Tuesday in order to be eligible for review at the following Wednesday DRC meeting. 
    Planned building groups and construction/preliminary plats must obtain DRC approval a minimum of ten (10) calendar days prior to the planning board meeting in order to be placed on the planning board agenda. Plans may be recommended by the DRC to planning board with conditions. Processes or permits that are regulated by state or federal agencies will not be considered as part of the required approval for planning board review; however, no final administrative approvals shall be granted nor will any building permits be issued until such time these approvals have also been obtained. Process review deadlines are as follows: 
1.  General (II and III) and planned building group plan review-Initial submittal 12:00 p.m. Tuesday for review the following Wednesday. All supplemental reviews - 12:00 p.m. Tuesday for review the following Wednesday. Plans in this category must obtain DRC approval ten (10) calendar days prior to the planning board meeting. The DRC may forward plans to the planning board with minor outstanding comments. 
2.  Minor plats-Initial submittal 12:00 p.m. Tuesday for review the following Wednesday. All supplemental reviews - 12:00 p.m. Tuesday for review the following Wednesday. 
3.  Preliminary plat and construction plats (major subdivision)-Initial submittal 12:00 p.m. Tuesday for review the next Wednesday. All supplemental reviews - 12:00 p.m. Tuesday for review the following Wednesday. Plats in this category must obtain DRC approval ten (10) calendar days prior to the planning board meeting. The DRC may forward plats to the planning board with minor outstanding comments. 
4.  General plan I and exempt plats-Initial submittal 12:00 p.m. Tuesday for review the following Wednesday. All supplemental reviews - 12:00 p.m. Tuesday for review the following Wednesday. 
5.  Final plats shall be recorded within forty-eight (48) hours of the effective date of the final plat, excluding weekends and legal holidays. 
F.  Content of notice. All notices required under this LDC must: 
1.  Indicate the time and place of all scheduled public hearings, 
2.  Describe the property involved in the application by street address and legal description, 
3.  Describe the nature, scope and purpose of the proposal, 
4.  Indicate the location and source of additional information on the proposal. 
G.  Written notice. Unless otherwise expressly stated, when the provisions of this LDC require that written notice be provided, the official responsible for accepting the application shall provide written notice by first class mail to all owners of the subject property and all adjacent property owners of the subject property. The notice shall be deposited in the U.S. mail at least ten (10) days, but not more than twenty-five (25) days, before the first scheduled public hearing. 
H.  Published notice. When the provisions of this LDC require that notice be published in the newspaper, the official shall ensure that notice is published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten (10) days, but not more than twenty-five (25) days, before the date of the first scheduled public hearing. 
I.  Posted notice. When the provisions of this LDC require that notice be posted on the subject property, notice of public hearing shall be given by a sign or signs, as may be required, placed on the site that is the subject of the hearing or on an adjacent street or highway right-of-way. Such sign (or signs) and the lettering thereon shall be of sufficient size as to be clearly visible and legible from the street toward which it faces. Signs shall be placed on the affected property at least ten (10) days, but not more than twenty-five (25) days, before the date of the public hearing. 
J.  Constructive notice. Minor technical deviation from specified notice requirements shall not be deemed to impair notice where there is actual notice. When required written notices have been properly addressed and deposited in the mail, failure of a party to receive such notice shall not invalidate any subsequent action. In all cases, however, the requirements for the timing of the notice and for specifying the time, date and place of a hearing and the general location of the subject property shall be strictly construed. If questions arise at the hearing regarding the adequacy of notice, the body hearing the matter shall make a finding regarding whether there was compliance with the notice requirements of this chapter. 
K.  Summary of procedures requiring notice. 
Table 3-1. Notice Summary 
Procedure Published Written Posted Variance BA BA BA Special Use Permit BA/CC BA/CC BA/CC Historic District or Landmark Designation HP/CC HP/CC HP/CC Certificate of Appropriateness HP HP Zoning Text Amendment CC PB/CC PB/CC Zoning Map Amendment CC PB/CC PB/CC  
BA = Board of Adjustment PB = Planning Board HP = Historic Commission CC = City Council 
L.  Action by review and decision-making bodies based on notice. 
1.  The city boards and commissions may recommend and the city council may enact any action on an application that is consistent with the notice given, including, but not limited to, approving the application, approving the application with permitted conditions or denying the application. 
2.  They may recommend and the city council may enact any permitted conditions on the application or allow amendments to the application if the effect of the conditions or amendments are to allow a less intensive use or zoning district than indicated in the application or to reduce the impact of the development or to reduce the amount of land area included in the application. 
3.  The planning board may not recommend and the city council may not approve a zoning application for a greater density of development, a more intensive use, a more intensive zoning district, reduced setbacks, more dwelling units, greater height, more access points or fewer improvements than indicated in the notice. 
4.  The planning board may recommend and the city council may approve an application to a lower density of development, increased setbacks, less dwelling units, less height, less access points or more improvements than indicated in the notice. 
M.  Continuation of public hearings. A public hearing for which proper notice was given may be continued to a later date without again complying with the notice requirements, provided that the continuance is set for a date and time certain and announced at the original public hearing. If the public hearing is canceled for lack of a quorum or any other reason, notice of the continuance shall be posted at the place of the original public hearing. 
N.  Summary of review procedures. The following table provides a summary of the review processes and role of boards, commissions, council and staff: 
Table 3-2. Review Summary 
Procedure SEC DRC BOA PB HPC CM CC SC Flood Development Permit I 909 * X X Flood Development Permit II 909 ** * X Land Disturbance Permit 802 * X(1st) X(2nd) Special Use Permit 506 ** *X(1st) *X(1st) X(2nd) General Development Plan 712 * X(1st) X(2nd) Planned Building Group 712 ** X(1st) * * X(2nd) Preliminary Subdivision Minor 1403 * X(2nd) X (1st) X (3rd) X(4th) Preliminary Subdivision Major 1404 ** * X (1st) X(2nd) Construction Plat Major 1404 * X(2nd) X (1st) X (3rd) X(4th) Zoning Provisions Variance 509 ** * X(1st) X(2nd) Final Plat 1405 * X(1st) X(2nd) Appeal of Administrative Decision 510 * X(1st) X(2nd) Certificate of Appropriateness 1003 ** X(1st) * X(2nd) Historic District 1001 ** ** ** * X Historic Landmark 1002 ** ** * X Map or Text Amendment 512 ** ** * X  
Table Key 
* = Final Approval 
** = Review and Recommendation 
*** = Board/Commission/Council Final Approval 
X = Appeal 
SEC = Section Reference 
DRC = Development Review Committee 
BOA = Board of Adjustment 
PB = Planning Board 
HPC = Historic Preservation Commission 
CM = City Manager 
CC = City Council 
SC = Superior Court 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2006-28, § 3a, 4-24-06; Ord. No. O-2006-28, § 3a.-c., 4-24-06; Ord. No. O-2012-18, § 1, 4-9-12; Ord. No. O-2017-95, §§ 3, 4, 11-13-17; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 2, 8-13-18) 
CHAPTER 4. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 401. - Zoning districts established. 
    For the purpose of this LDC, the following districts are established and the city is hereby divided into the following zoning districts. The following chart illustrates the conversion and translation of all adopted prior zoning districts existing at the time of adoption of this LDC to the revised zoning districts established by adoption of this LDC. 
Table 4-1. Zoning Districts Established 
Existing Zoning Districts Revised Zoning Districts A-1, A-1CU* Agriculture A-1 Agricultural District R-15, R-15CU* Residential District R-15 Very Low Density Residential District R-10, R-10CU* Residential District R-10 Low Density Residential District R-8, R-8CU* Residential Mobile Home R-8 Medium Density Manufactured and Single-family Residential District R-6S, R-6SCU* Residential District R-6 Medium Density Single-family Residential District R-6, R-6CU* Residential District R-6MFA Medium Density Multifamily Residential District MF, MFCU Multifamily District MHP Manufactured Home Park PUD Planned Unit Development PDR Planned Density Residential District O-I, O-ICU* Office & Institutional O-I Office & Institutional District MA, MACU* Medical Arts MA Medical Arts District B-1, B-1CU* Neighborhood Shopping Bus B-1 Neighborhood Commercial District B-2, B-1CU* Highway Commercial Bus B-2 Commercial Corridor District B-3, B-3CU* Regional Shopping Center B-3 Regional Commercial District B-4, B-4CU* Central Business District B-4 Central Business District B-5, B-5CU* Service Business District B-5 Commercial Services District I-1, I-1CU* Light Industrial I-1 Light Industrial District I-2, I-2CU* Heavy Industrial I-2 Heavy Industrial District I-P, I-PCU* Industrial Park I-P Industrial Park District  
Existing Overlay Districts Revised Overlay Districts HP Local Historic District HP Historic Preservation District Overlay N/A N/A LHL Local Historic Landmark Overlay Designation CED Comm. Enterprise Overlay CED CED A Subdistrict A (Floodway) AEFW Subdistrict AEFW (Floodway) B Subdistrict B (100-year flood zone) AE Subdistrict AE (100-year flood zone) C Subdistrict C (all other watercourses) X Subdistrict X (all other watercourses) *All existing CU *All existing CU CU Conditional Use Overlay District  
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05) 
Sec. 402. - Official zoning district map. 
    The boundaries of the zoning districts established by this LDC are shown on a map or series of maps designated the "official zoning map," which is part of this LDC as fully as if it were set out in this chapter in detail. Original copies of the official zoning map, as from time to time amended, are maintained in the office of the city clerk. All zoning district symbols and designations appearing on said official map shall be converted to the symbols and designations established in the chart above. 
Sec. 403. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the official zoning map accompanying and made a part of this LDC, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  In cases where a boundary line is given a position adjoining, coincident with, or within a street or alley or non-navigable stream, it shall be deemed to be in the center of the street, alley, and if the actual location of such street, alley or stream varies slightly from the location as shown on the district map, then the actual location shall control. 
B.  In cases where a boundary line is shown as being located a specific distance from a street line or their physical feature, this distance shall control. 
C.  In cases where a boundary line is shown adjoining or coincident with a railroad, it shall be deemed to be in the center of the railroad right-of-way and distances measured from a railroad shall be measured from the center of the designated mainline track. 
D.  Where district boundary lines are not otherwise indicated, and where property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, district boundaries shall be considered to be the lot lines, and where the districts designated on the official zoning map are bounded approximately by lot lines, said lot lines shall be considered to be the boundary of such districts unless said boundaries are otherwise indicated on the map or by LDC. 
E.  In un-subdivided property, unless otherwise indicated, the district boundary line on the official zoning map shall be determined by the use of the scale contained on such map. 
F.  Boundary lines indicated as approximately following city limits shall be considered to follow city limits. 
G.  All water areas within the city limits are considered to be within a zoning district and controlled by applicable district regulations. District boundary lines over water areas are located by noted and scaled dimensions, by relation to physical features, by coincidence with the city limit line, or by a straight line projection of the centerlines of streets indicated on the district maps. Straight-line district boundaries over water areas shall be assumed to continue as straight line until they intersect with each other or with the city limit line. 
H.  Boundary lines indicated as following shorelines shall be considered to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline, shall be considered as moving with the actual shoreline. 
I.  Where existing physical or nature features contradict those shown on the official zoning map, or if cases any other uncertainty exists, the location of district boundaries shall be determined by the director in accordance with the provisions in section 303. 
Sec. 404. - Zoning upon annexation. 
    All new additions and annexations of land to the city shall be zoned A-1, agricultural district unless otherwise classified by the city council at the time of annexation. Rezoning of annexed lands shall follow the procedures and requirements for rezoning of all other lands within the city. 
Sec. 405. - Residential district intent statements. 
    Regulations for the residential districts are designed to protect the residential character of areas so designated from the noise, congestion, and heavy traffic commercial and industrial activities. The regulations are also designed to encourage a suitable environment for family life by providing for openness of living areas and permitted appropriate neighborhood facilities and compatible community facilities. 
A.  A-1, agricultural district. The A-1 district is intended to provide for land situated on the fringe of the urban area that is agricultural in nature and is customarily situated in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction. It is not intended that this district provide a location for a lower standard of residential development than is authorized in other districts. The types of uses, required areas, and the intensity of use of land permitted in this district are designed to provide for both rural character and very low-density residential development. This district is defined as a very low-density residential area and additional open areas where similar residential development will be a viable land use. Since land in this district may contain residences in close proximity to agricultural activities, agricultural activities conducted in this district should not be deemed detrimental to urban density uses. 
B.  R-15, very low density residential district. The R-15 district is intended to provide for urban residential development, which is designed to provide quiet, very low-density areas for single-family living with related recreational facilities protected from intrusion of commercial and industrial activity. Permitted uses are designed to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of the area and permit certain home occupations as set forth in this LDC. 
C.  R-10, low density residential district. The R-10 district is intended to provide for urban residential development, which is designed to provide quiet, low-density areas for single-family living with related recreational facilities protected from intrusion of commercial and industrial activity. Permitted uses are designed to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of the area and permit certain home occupations as set forth in this LDC. 
D.  R-8, manufactured residential district. The R-8 district is intended to provide for urban residential development, which is designed to provide a medium density area, encompassing individual manufactured homes and conventional single-family dwellings along with related recreational facilities protected from intrusion of commercial and industrial activity. Permitted uses are designed to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of the area and permit certain home occupations as set forth in this LDC. 
E.  R-6, single-family residential district. The R-6 district is intended to provide for urban residential development, which is designed to provide a medium density area containing single-family dwellings along with related recreational facilities protected from intrusion of commercial and industrial activity. Permitted uses are designed to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of the area and permit certain home occupations as set forth in this LDC. 
F.  R-6MFA, multifamily residential district. The R-6MFA district is intended to provide for urban residential development, which is designed to provide for medium density areas for multifamily, triplex, duplex and single-family units with related recreational facilities protected from intrusion of commercial and industrial activity. Permitted uses are designed to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of the area and permit certain home occupations as set forth in this LDC. 
G.  Reserved. 
H.  MHP, manufactured home park district. The district is intended to provide for urban residential development, which is designed for medium density residential areas for individual manufactured homes and additional open areas where similar residential development will be a viable land use. Permitted uses are designed to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of the area and permit certain home occupations as set forth in this LDC. 
I.  PDR, planned density residential district. The planned density residential district (PDR) is established to allow for design flexibility of development and is intended to encourage efficient use of the land and public services and to promote high quality design that will provide a variety of dwelling types as well as support services and open space for the residents of the development. These regulations are intended to permit integration with adjacent non-residential uses and to promote compatibility with existing and emerging patterns of development. 
Sec. 406. - Commercial district intent statements. 
    Regulations for the commercial districts are designed to encourage stable and efficient commercial areas to meet the needs of various trade areas for commercial goods and services. The regulations are also designed to minimize the adverse effects of commercial uses on other land uses and provide opportunities for investment. 
A.  OI, office and institutional district. The OI district is intended to provide for the conduct of general and professional office, medium or high-density housing and related activity to meet the professional services, institutional function office and residential accommodation needs of the community. It is intended that this district be located so as not to introduce traffic onto solely residential streets or become an intrusion into a residential district, but to serve as a buffer between residence districts and more intensive commercial activities. 
OI-2, Office mixed use district (combination of business, office and residential). This is a mix-use district that allows office, residential and limited business. The business and office uses allow and fulfill service and convenience needs of the surrounding neighborhood. These uses are primarily pedestrian oriented. The district is intended to be established along the following corridors: Sunset Avenue (Halifax Road to Wesleyan Boulevard), Benvenue Road (Peele Road to Jefferys Road), Goldrock Road (Benvenue Road to Greyson Road), Raleigh Street (Parker Street to Springfield Road), Raleigh Road (Wesleyan Boulevard to the foot of the bridge that runs over Main Street) and Cokey Road (Marigold Street to Fairview Road). In addition this district is encouraged for parcels abutting proposed or existing subdivisions/neighborhoods. 
B.  MA, medical arts district. The MA district is for the conduct of hospitals, medical and dental clinics, medical and dental offices and labs; pharmacies, blood-collection facilities and related activity to meet the needs of the community. It is intended that this district be located so as not to introduce traffic onto solely residential streets or become an intrusion into a residential district, but to serve as a community asset located away from residence districts and closer to more intensive commercial activities. 
C.  B-1, neighborhood commercial district. The B-1 district is intended for local retail and personal services of limited size and service area that provide for the regular needs and convenience of those residing in the adjacent residential neighborhoods. These are generally small in area and contain businesses that deal in "convenience goods" such as groceries, drugs and household supplies, and the furnishing of personal services. It is intended that neighborhood commercial uses be developed as a unit with adequate off street parking space for customers and employees and with appropriate landscaping and screening and are therefore subject to all planned building group requirements and standards of this LDC. 
D.  B-2, commercial corridor district. The B-2 district is established for major retail and service activities removed from the central business district, with major arterial access and with adequate open space and parking. This district is intended to serve the resident, non-residents and transient traffic using major arterials that run through or around the city. 
E.  B-3, regional commercial district. The B-3 district is intended for regional retail and personal services of significant size and service area that provide for the larger needs and convenience of those residing in the community and surrounding areas. It is intended that regional commercial uses be developed as a unit with adequate off street parking space for customers and employees and with appropriate means of access, ingress and egress with landscaping and screening and are therefore subject to all planned building group requirements and standards of this LDC. 
F.  B-4, central business district. The CBD district is intended for the conduct of personal and business services and the general retail trade of the core business center of the community. It is designed to accommodate a wide variety of commercial uses in the traditional downtown business area and related areas of mixed commercial enterprises. It is designed to maintain, support and facilitate compatible redevelopment of existing and new uses within the core area. Residential uses may be appropriate above the ground floor of commercial, office or other uses within the CBD district. 
G.  B-5, business service district. This B-d District is intended for business and warehouse support services that support the regular needs of the primary activities in the B-4 district, along rail sidings and primary streets. It is designed to support a wide variety of commercial uses in the adjacent rail sidings and primary streets adjacent to the traditional downtown central business district and related areas of mixed commercial enterprises. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-2, § 2, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 407. - Industrial district intent statements. 
    Regulations for the industrial districts are designed to make available a range of suitable sites for all types of manufacturing and related activities while protecting residential areas by separating them from manufacturing activities and by prohibiting the use of industrial space for new residential development. 
A.  I-1, light industrial district. The purpose of the IL district is to provide a location for industries that do not, by their nature, create nuisances. It is designed to preserve land for industry in a location beneficial to industries and to prohibit non-industrial uses. Due to the traffic generated and other potentially objectionable influences created in this district, special buffer or setback area may be required. The environmentally protective nature of this district is designed to limit uses to those that produce a minimum of gaseous emissions, noise and objectionable external effects. 
B.  I-2, heavy industrial district. The purpose of the IH district is to provide a location for manufacturing and related industries that may, by nature, create nuisances. The intent is to preserve land for such industry in locations with access to major streets as designated on the arterial plan, as well as locations generally accessible to railroad transportation and to prohibit non-industrial uses. Due to the objectionable impacts that may be created in this district, special buffer or setback areas will be required. 
C.  I-P, industrial park district. The purpose of the IP district is to provide for the competitive location of high quality industries. The intent is to prohibit non industrial use and to preserve land for such industry in locations with access to arterial streets as designated on the arterial plan, as well as locations generally accessible to railroad transportation. Due to the process, manufacturing or employment base certain impacts that may be created in this district, special design, buffer or setback areas requirements may be required. 
Sec. 408. - Overlay districts. 
A.  CU, conditional use overlay district. It is recognized that certain types of zoning districts would be inappropriate at particular locations in the absence of special conditions. Where the applicant for rezoning desires property to be rezoned to such a district in such situations, the conditional use district is a means by which such special exceptions can be imposed in the furtherance of the purpose of this ordinance. The conditional use district classification will be considered only upon request of the applicant for rezoning. If for any reason any condition imposed pursuant to these regulations is found to be illegal or invalid, it is the intent of this ordinance that the authorization of that particular conditional use shall be null and void. All other authorized conditions associated with the request shall remain in effect. 
    Within a conditional use district, (sometimes referred to as CUD), only those uses authorized by section 503, "General Use Table," as permitted in the zoning district with which the CUD corresponds shall be permitted, and all other requirements of the corresponding district shall be met. In addition, within a CUD no use shall be permitted except pursuant to a conditional use permit authorized by the city council, which shall specify the use or uses authorized. Such permit may specify the location on the property of the proposed use or uses, the number of dwelling units, the location and extent of supporting facilities such as parking lots, driveways, and access streets, the timing of development, the location and extent of right-of-way and other areas to be dedicated for public use, and other such similar conditions as the applicant may propose as conditions upon the request but not to include architectural review or controls. 
    The authorization of a conditional use permit in any CUD for any use which is permitted only as a special use as authorized in section 503 in the zoning district which corresponds to the CUD shall preclude any requirement for obtaining a special use permit for any such use from the board of adjustment or city council. 
B.  HP, historic preservation overlay district. The historic preservation (HP) district and its regulations may be applied to property located in any other zoning district, whether residential, commercial, industrial or agricultural, in accordance with the provisions of the historic preservation LDC. The historic preservation zoning district is an overlay zoning district, and the regulation imposed by such district shall be in addition to the regulation of the underlying zoning district applicable to the subject parcel or area. These regulations are designed to protect against destruction of or encroachment upon such areas, structures and premises: to encourage uses which will lead to the continuance, conservation and improvement in a manner appropriate to the preservation of the heritage of the city. (See chapter 10). 
C.  LHL, local historic landmark overlay designation. The local historic landmarks overlay (LHL) designation and its regulations may be applied to buildings only located in any other zoning district, whether residential, commercial, industrial or agricultural, in accordance with the provisions the chapter 10. The local historic landmarks zoning district is an overlay zoning district, and the regulation imposed by such district shall be in addition to the regulation of the underlying zoning district applicable to the subject parcel or area. These regulations are designed to protect against destruction of or encroachment upon such buildings and structures: to encourage preservation of structures which will lead to the continuance, conservation and improvement in a manner appropriate to the preservation of the heritage of the city. (See chapter 10). 
D.  CED, community enterprise district. The community enterprise district overlay (CED) and its regulations may be applied to property located in any other zoning district, in accordance with the provisions of this LDC. The CED includes 2000 Census Blocks 202.1, 202.2, and 202.5, located in the corporate limits as of March 25, 2002 and not within any national, state or local historic districts. These regulations are designed to create an overlay district for sustainable community development, to advance the creation of livable and vibrant community through comprehensive approaches that coordinate economic, physical, environmental, community and human development. The CED permits specific activities that support the revitalization of the defined area, and identifies the conditions under which such activities can occur. Establishment of this CED enable the board of adjustment to permit childcare centers in residential zoning districts on a case-by-case basis. 
E.  DBOD, Douglas Block Overlay District. The Douglas Block Overlay District (DBOD) and its regulations may be applied to property located in the defined area outlined in Chapter 15 of this LDC. The DBOD is an overlay zoning district, and the regulations imposed by such district shall be in addition to the regulations of the underlying zoning district applicable to the subject parcel or area. These regulations are designed to promote mixed use, infill development and adaptive reuse of historic properties. (See Chapter 15). 
F.  RDOD, redevelopment overlay districts. Some neighborhoods in the city were developed before current zoning and subdivision standards were established. Thus, some of these neighborhoods need assistance with meeting current setback and lot dimensional requirements due to their nonconforming design. These regulations are designed to assist with improving the quality housing while maintaining the character of the neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2009-10, § 1, 2-9-09; Ord. No. O-2017-4, § 1, 1-11-17) 
CHAPTER 5. - ZONING USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 501. - Zoning use classifications. 
A.  Basis for use classifications. Use categories presented in chapter 5 are designed to classify land uses and activities into common use categories based on functions, product, or physical characteristics. Characteristics include the type, size, quantity or impacts of activity; the type of customers or residents; how goods or services are sold or delivered and site conditions. The use categories provide a systematic basis for assigning present and future land uses into appropriate zoning districts. 
B.  Principal uses. Principal uses are assigned to the use category that most closely describes the nature of the principal use. 
1.  Development projects with multiple principal uses. When all principal uses of a development fall within one (1) use category, the entire development is assigned to that common use category. A development that contains a coffee shop, bookstore and bakery, for example, would be classified in the retail sales and Service category because all of the development project's principal uses are in that category. When the principal uses of a development project fall within different use categories, each principal use is classified in the applicable category and each use is subject to all applicable regulations for that use category. 
2.  Accessory uses. Accessory uses are allowed by right in conjunction with a principal use unless otherwise stated in the regulations. Also, unless otherwise stated, accessory uses are subject to the same regulations as the principal use. Common accessory uses are listed as examples in section 506, Table 5-3 of this LDC. 
C.  Similar use interpretation criteria. Section 506 of this LDC identifies examples of accessory uses. Because the examples may not be all inclusive, the director or the director's designee shall consider the following in making reasonable similar use category interpretations: 
1.  The actual or projected characteristics of the activity in relationship to the stated characteristics of each use category; 
2.  The relative amount of site area, floor space and/or equipment devoted to the activity; 
3.  Relative volume or amounts of sales from each activity; 
4.  The customer type for each activity; 
5.  The relative number of employees in each activity; 
6.  Hours of operation; 
7.  Building and site arrangement; 
8.  Vehicles used with the activity; 
9.  The relative number of vehicle trips generated by the use; and 
10.  How the use advertises itself. 
Sec. 502. - Zoning use tables, interpretation. 
    The following tables list the category of uses allowed within each district by symbols set forth below: 
A.  Use categories. All of the use categories listed in the tables are defined in section 503. 
B.  Uses permitted by right ("X"). An "X" indicates that a use category is allowed by right in the respective district. These permitted uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of this LDC. 
C.  Special uses ("S"). An "S" indicates that a use category is allowed only on review and approved as a special use in accordance with the special use review procedures of section 506. Special uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of this LDC. 
D.  Uses not allowed ("blank cell"). A "-" indicates that a use type is not allowed in the respective zoning district, unless it is otherwise expressly allowed by other regulations of this LDC. 
E.  New or unlisted uses. If an application is submitted for a use type that is not listed in the use table, the Director shall be authorized to make a similar use interpretation based on the use category descriptions of section 501 and the similar use interpretation criteria of subsection 501.C. If the director determines that the proposed use does not fit any of the use category descriptions of section 503, no similar use interpretation shall be made and said use shall be prohibited in that district. The director shall provide a letter to the applicant regarding use interpretation decisions and maintain an official written file of all such interpretation decisions. 
Sec. 503. - Zoning use tables. 
    The legend that follows provides the definition of symbols to interpret the list of uses and means by which they are permitted to locate within various zoning districts: 
A.  By right. Uses permitted by right are indicated by the "x" symbol. 
B.  Special use permit. Uses requiring a special use permit are indicated by the "s" symbol. The approving authority will be indicated by a BOA (Board of Adjustment) or CC (City Council). 
C.  A "c" placed in the zoning column opposite any entry designated as a special use with an "s" means that the special use is only permitted if the site lies within the community enterprise district. 
Table 5-1: General Use Table 
Residential Districts 
Single-Family Districts Multi-Family Districts Planned Developments Permitted Uses A-1 R-15 R-10 R-8 R-6 R-6 MFA MHP PDR Accessory dwelling x x x x x x x x Accessory structure x x x x x x x x Accessory use x x x x x x x x Adult day center in CED s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA Adult day center in an institutional structure s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA Adult day home occupation (see note 2) x x x x x x x x Agriculture or farm use x Airport operations x Alcoholic beverages, packaged, retail store, including ABC store x Assembly: armory, assembly hall, bar, coliseum, movie theater, stadium, etc. x Automobile off-street parking s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA Automobile/vehicle wash (automatic or hand wash) (see note 4) x Bakery, on-premises and retail only x Beauty shop/barber service x Bed and Breakfast 
(see section 506.C.6) s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA Boardinghouse operation (see note 7) x s/CC Cemetery/Columbarium s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA Childcare center in CED s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC Childcare center in an institutional structure s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC Childcare home occupation (see note 9 & 13) x x x x x x x x Church/religious institution 
(see note 18) s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA x Continuing care retirement community (see note 25) x Convenience store x Dwelling, manufactured (HUD) home - SF residential occupancy x x x Dwelling, manufactured home park x Dwelling, multifamily x x x Dwelling, multistory high density, Central City area and adaptive reuse of historic properties (see note 10) x x Dwelling, single-family x x x x x x x x Dwelling, duplex (two-family) x x x Fairground activities (including carnivals and circuses) x Family care home (see note 11) x x x x x x x x Farmers' market x Financial institutions (bank, savings and loan companies, and other financial activities) x Fire station operation x x x x x x x x Flea market (indoor or outdoor) x Fortune telling 
(see definitions) x x x x x x x Golf course and related uses s/BOA x Government operation x x x x x x x x Grocery/food sales x Group care facility 
(see note 11) s/BOA Group home for developmentally disabled adults (see note 11) x x x x x x x x Health club/gym spa x x x Historical preservation commercial use s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC Home for the aged s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA Home occupation 
(see notes 2, 9 and 13) x x x x x x x x Kennel operation 
(see note 16) s/BOA Landfill, c&d s/BOA Landfill, yardwaste s/BOA Library s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA Museum/art gallery x Nightclub, Bar & Tavern x Nursery operations - retail/wholesale (see note 12) x Nursing home 
(see section 503C.19) s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA Office use (of a doctor, dentist, osteopath, chiropractor, optometrist, physiotherapist, or other medically-oriented profession) x Office use (with no on-premise stock of goods for sale to the general public and the operations and services of which are customarily conducted by means of written, verbal, or mechanically reproduced communication material) (see note 26) x Open/passive space x x x x x x x x Overnight accommodations x Private recreation club or swimming club s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA x Public recreation, such as community center building, parks, museum, playgrounds, and similar facilities operated on a nonprofit basis x x x x x x x x Quarry operations x Railroad yard operations (see note 32) x Residential Cluster Development x x x x x x x x Restaurant x School: elementary, junior high, and high school (see note 27) s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC Service and supply (see note 30) x Shelter for women, families, and/or children s Shelter home for women, families, and/or children (see note 7) x x x x x x x x Temporary use (see section 508) x x x x x x x x Theater production, outdoor s/BOA Utility station or substation s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA Wireless communication tower less than 100 feet in height (see note 23) x s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA Wireless communication tower 100 feet or greater in height (see note 23) x s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA Yard sale (attic sale, lawn sale, or garage sale) as an accessory use to a residence or church or civic, cultural, educational, charitable, or similar organization (see note 24) x x x x x x x Youth development center s/CC  
Table 5-2: General Use Table 
Transitional, Business and Industrial Districts 
Transitional 
Districts Business Districts Industrial Districts Permitted Uses O-I O-I(2) MA B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 B-5 I-1 I-2 IP Accessory building x x x x x x x x x x x Accessory use x x x x x x x x x x Adult day center in nonresidential district(see note 1) x x x x x x x x x x Adult day center in an institutional structure x x x x x x x x x x Adult day home occupation (see note 2) x x Adult establishment (see note 3) x x Airport operation x Alcoholic beverages, packaged, retail store, including ABC store x x x x x x Ambulance service, non govern-mental x x x x Animal medical care, including kennel operation (see note 16) s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA Architectural Feature Sales x x x Assembly: armory, assembly hall, coliseum, movie theater, stadium, etc. s/BOA x x x x Auction sales, excluding livestock auctioning x x Automobile off-street parking s/BOA x x x x x x x Automobile off-street parking deck/garage commercial x x x Automobile truck, trailer rental x x x x x Automobile repair and/or body work excluding commercial wrecking, dismantling, or storage of junked vehicle x x x x Automobile sales, new and used x x x x Automobile service station operation (see note 5) x x x x Automobile/vehicle wash (automatic or hand wash) (see note 4) x x x x x Automobile wrecker service (towing and storage only) x x x Bakery production and wholesale sales x x x x x Bakery, on-premises and retail only x x x x x x Beauty shop/barber service x x x x x x x Bed and breakfast 
(see section 503C.6) x x x x x Boardinghouse operation (see note 7) x x Boats and accessories, retail sales, and service x x x x x Bus station activities x x x Cemetery/Columbarium s/BOA s/BOA Childcare center in nonresidential district (see note 8) x x x x x x x x x x x Childcare center in an institutional structure x x x x x x x x x x Childcare home occupation (see note 9) x x Church/religious institution (see note 18) x x x x x x College or university s/CC x Contractor, excluding outside storage of equipment or supplies x x x x x Contractor, with outside storage of equipment or supplies x x x Convenience store x x x x x Crematory x x x x Dormitory s/BOA Dwelling, multifamily s/CC x x Dwelling, multistory high density, Central City area and adaptive reuse of historic properties (see note 10) x x x x Dwelling, single-family x x x Dwelling, duplex (two-family) x x x Fabrication, light manufacturing x x x x x Family care home (see note 11) x Farmers' market x x x x x x x Financial Institutions (bank, savings and loan companies, and other financial activities) x x x x x x x Fire station operations x x x x x x x x x x Flammable material (distribution/storage/bulk storage x x x Flea market (indoor or outdoor) x x Funeral home s x x Government operation x x x x x x x x x x x Grocery/food sales x x x x x x Group care facility (see note 11) s/BOA s/BOA Group home for developmentally disabled adults (see note 11) x x Health club/gym spa x x x x x x x x x x x Historical preservation commercial use s/CC s s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC Home for the aged s/BOA s/BOA Home occupation (see notes 2, 9 and 13) x x Hospital (see note 15) x x x Hospital, General (see note 14) x x x Industrial operations not otherwise listed herein, except the uses listed x x s/BOA Industrial sales of equipment or repair service x x x x Kennel operations (see note 16) x x x x Laboratory operations, medical or dental x x x x x x x Laboratory research x x x Landfill, c&d s/BOA s/BOA Landfill, hazardous s/BOA Landfill, yardwaste s s Library x x x x x x x x Lodge (fraternal organizations) x x x x Manufactured home sales (but excluding any residential occupancy) (see note 17) x x x x Motel, hotel, or motor court operations 
(see note 16) s/CC x x x Monument sales x x x x Monument works x x Museum/art gallery x x x x x x x Newspaper publishing x x x x Nightclub, Bar & Tavern x x x x Nursery operations - retail/wholesale (see note 12) x x x x x Nursing home 
(see section 503C.19) s/BOA s/BOA Office use (of a doctor, dentist, osteopath, chiropractor, optometrist, physiotherapist, or other medically-oriented profession) x x x x x x x x Office use (with no on-premise stock of goods for sale to the general public and the operation and services of which are customarily conducted by means of written, verbal, or mechanically reproduced communication material)(see note 26) x x x x x x x x x Open/passive space x x x x x x x x x x x Pawn shop x x x x Prison (minimum custody facility) s/CC Private recreation club or swimming club s/BOA s s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA Prison (minimum custody facility) s Public recreation, such as community center building, parks, museum, playgrounds, and similar facilities operated on a nonprofit basis x x x x x x x Public utility works, shops or storage yards x x x Quarry operation x x Radio or television studio activities only x x x x x x x Railroad station operations x x x x Railroad yard operations x x x Recreation or amusement enterprise (conducted outside a building and for profit, and not otherwise listed herein) x x Recreation or amusement enterprise, racquet facilities (conducted inside a building for profit) (see note 20) x x x x Recreational vehicle park s/BOA s/BOA Recycling center ` x x x Residential cluster development x Restaurant x x x x x x Retailing or servicing 50,000 or less gross sq. ft. per unit with operations conducted and merchandise displayed inside and/or outside a building and not otherwise listed herein 
(see note 12 and 22) x x x x x x Retailing or servicing with operations conducted and merchandise displayed inside and/or outside a building and not otherwise listed herein 
(see note 12 and 22) x x x Salvage operation or junk yard (see note 21) x x x School: commercial, trade or vocational x x x x x x x x x School: elementary, junior high and high school (see note 27) s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC s/CC Shelter for women, families, and/or children s/CC s/CC Shelter home for women, families, and/or children (see note 7) x Storage, flammable 
(see note 22) x x x Storage, outside 
(see note 12 & 22) x x x x Storage, warehouse x x x x Tattoo parlor/studio x x x Taxicab/limousine operations x x x x x Temporary use (see section 508) x x x x x x x x x x Theater production, outdoor s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA Therapeutic community s/BOA s/BOA Tobacco sales warehouse x x x x Tobacco processing x x x Transient/homeless shelter s/CC s/CC Truck terminal activities repair and hauling and/or storage x x x Utility station or substation s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA Wholesale sale (with operations conducted and merchandise stored entirely within a building and not otherwise listed herein) x x x x Wireless communication tower less than 100 feet in height (see note 23) x x x x x x x x x x Wireless communication tower 100 feet or greater in height (see note 23) s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA s/BOA Yard sale (attic sale, lawn sale, or garage sale) as an accessory use to a residence or church or civic, cultural, educational, charitable, or similar organization (see note 24) x x x x x x x x x x Youth development center s/CC s/CC  
C.  Notes to the zoning use tables. This section includes use-related regulations that apply to land uses allowed in one (1) or more zoning districts as a use-by-right. 
1.  Adult day center in nonresidential districts. Adult day center which is permitted by right in zoning districts outside the community development enterprise overlay areas shall comply with the following: 
a.  The center shall meet all applicable state requirements for standards, licensing and inspections. 
b.  If the total site is greater than two (2) acres, only those buildings and structures located within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed care center, parking area and play/recreation yard are required to be shown on the site plan. 
c.  In zoning districts where permitted by right, care centers may operate between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. and additional hours between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., depending upon the nature of the request and the nature of the adjoining property. The certificate of occupancy/compliance issued for operation between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall be valid for a period of twenty-four (24) months, after which the certificate shall be considered for renewal upon a similar finding of facts. 
d.  Bufferyards shall be in accordance with section 704 of this LDC. 
e.  Driveways and drop off areas shall be provided so that traffic associated with the use does not impede the flow of traffic on adjacent streets. 
f.  Spatial distribution: There shall be a minimum seven hundred fifty (750) foot radius, measured from the proposed building to an existing adult care center's lot line(s), between adult care centers. This separation requirement is not applicable to "adult care home occupations". 
g.  The exterior lighting plan is required and shall meet the following guidelines. Exterior lighting shall be less than three thousand (3,000) lumens, including spotlights and floodlights, and shall be angled so that the center of the beam will strike the ground within the property line. Any light with less than three thousand (3,000) lumens may be used without restriction to light distribution or mounting height, except that no spot or flood light may be aimed, directed, or focused such as to cause direct light from the fixture to be directed toward residential buildings on adjacent or nearby land, or to create glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public or private street rights-of-way. 
h.  Noise from activities conducted on the care center site shall not exceed a noise level which is clearly audible (eighty-five (85) decibels) at a distance of more than one hundred (100) feet from the care center's lot line, measured in a straight line. 
i.  Adult day centers may not care for more than twenty (20) adults at any time between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. A special use permit shall be required to increase the center's capacity beyond twenty (20) or to increase the center's operating hours to include hours between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
2.  Adult day home occupation. Adult day home occupations uses must comply with subsection 503.C.13., home occupations. 
3.  Adult entertainment establishment. It is the intent of this provision to establish reasonable regulations to prevent a concentration of adult establishments within the city and to provide a buffer between adult establishments and the protected uses specified below. Adult establishments are permitted in B-2 and B-5 districts subject to the following standards: 
a.  Separation from other adult entertainment uses. Any structure in which an adult establishment is the principal or accessory use shall be separated by a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet (determined by a straight line and not street distance, without regard to intervening structures or objects) from any other adult establishment. 
b.  Separation from other uses. Any structure in which an adult establishment is the principal or accessory use shall be separated by a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet (determined by a straight line and not street distance, without regard to intervening structures or objects) from any residential zoning district, or other zoning district in which residential use is a use by right, any school, church, childcare center, public park, or playground. 
c.  Prohibited activities. An adult entertainment use shall not be conducted in any manner that provides the observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," from any public right-of-way. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration or show window. 
d.  The distance for the separation from residential zoning and other protected uses shall be measured from the closest edge of the building occupied by an adult establishment to the nearest property line of the residential zoning district or other zoning district in which residential use is a use by right, or to the property line of a protected use. The distance for the separation between adult establishments shall be measured from the closest edges of the buildings occupied by adult uses. 
e.  No more than one (1) adult establishment may be located within the same structure. 
f.  Adult establishments are permitted in any district within an enclosed retail shopping mall without regarding to separation provided such establishments have their only frontage upon the enclosed mall isolated from view from public streets, churches, childcare centers, schools, public parks, and public playgrounds. An adult establishment within an enclosed retail shopping mall shall not display any signs, graphics, or other depictions or descriptions that are in any way related to "specified sexual activities" or specified "anatomical areas" and are visible from the interior or exterior of the mall. 
4.  Automobile/vehicle wash facilities. All automobile and truck wash facilities require site development plan review prior to granting of any building permit. In addition, the following standards shall be met. 
a.  All new or enlarged car or truck washing facilities shall provide paved parking for all areas used by vehicles for washing, drying, parking and access. Adequate area must also be provided for vehicles after washing. 
b.  For facilities with ten (10) bays or less, parking or waiting space in lanes shall be provided for three (3) vehicles behind each bay. For facilities with eleven (11) bays or more, parking or waiting space in lanes shall be provided for two (2) vehicles behind each bay. All such waiting lanes shall be provided on private property. 
c.  When any such facility is located on a lot abutting a residential zoning district, there shall be a ten (10) foot landscaped buffer provided along with an eight (8) foot opaque fence adjacent to the residential district. 
d.  Any entrance to or exit from the car or truck wash facility shall be by way of a major street. 
e.  Any storage of materials and supplies used in conjunction with the wash facilities shall be enclosed within a building or totally screened from view from a public right-of way or adjacent residential property. 
f.  All federal, state or local requirements for pretreatment of wastewater disposal into the public sanitary sewer system shall be met prior to issuance of building permits. 
g.  Drainage from the washing at the facility shall not be discharged into the street or storm-water drainage system. 
5.  Automotive service station and vehicle repair. Automobile service stations and vehicle repair shops shall be permitted provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Reserved. 
b.  The service station is limited in function to dispensing gasoline, oil, grease, antifreeze, tires, batteries and automobile accessories directly related to motor vehicles; to washing, polishing and servicing motor vehicles, only to the extent of installation of the above-mentioned items; and to selling at retail the items customarily sold by service stations; 
c.  The service station shall not overhaul motors, provide upholstery work, auto glasswork, painting, welding, bodywork, tire recapping or auto dismantling; 
d.  The service station shall not rent or sell motor vehicles, trailers or major replacement parts; 
e.  The service station shall provide a screen planting and/or fence along the property lines that abut residential properties. Lighting facilities shall be arranged and of such nature that nearby residential properties are not disturbed; 
f.  Service stations shall extinguish all floodlights at the close of daily operation or 11:00 p.m., whichever is earlier; 
g.  Automobile service stations located within the City shall have no gasoline or oil pump located within twelve (12) feet of any street right-of-way line. Outside the city, no such pump shall be located within fifteen (15) feet of any street right-of-way line; 
h.  In zoning districts where trucks or other vehicles are displayed as an accessory use for rent, the site plan shall indicate the area to be used to display rental vehicles. Spaces for rental vehicles shall be in addition to any parking spaces required for operation of the other activities. Rental activities may not occupy more than fifty (50) percent of the site area; 
i.  Storage of vehicles for fifteen (15) days or more or junking of vehicles shall be prohibited. Vehicle sales shall also be prohibited; 
j.  Replacement parts or accessories shall be stored inside. Discarded parts shall not be allowed to accumulate in open storage. Service station repair shall be limited to minor work. Painting or other bodywork shall be prohibited in service stations; 
k.  Vehicles associated with the use shall not be stored or repaired within federal, state, or local public rights-of-way, including streets and sidewalks. Uses not covered by an existing site plan shall organize the off-street parking areas to provide adequate customer parking and access for emergency vehicles; 
l.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as allowing properties designated as service stations or vehicle repair shops to be involved in disassembling, tearing down, or scrapping of a vehicle or to permit one (1) vehicle to be scavenged or stripped for parts for use on another vehicle. 
6.  Bed and breakfast inns. When allowed, bed and breakfast inns shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
a.  An approved floor plan shall be kept on file with the inspections division; 
b.  The owner shall reside on site. An owner shall be an individual with a twenty-five (25) percent or greater interest in the inn; 
c.  The use is considered a commercial activity and requires site plan approval; 
d.  Parking shall not be detrimental to nearby properties due to excess noise, odor, glare or other factors; 
e.  Nothing which contributes to the historic nature of the neighborhood in which the bed and breakfast inn is located may be removed to provide additional space for the inn or parking for the inn; 
f.  There shall be no other bed and breakfast inn within four hundred (400) feet of the property. This distance requirement may be reduced by the approving authority with a determination that public health, safety and welfare shall be preserved. Inside the corporate limits, the inn shall be located only in a historically significant structure; 
g.  There shall be no substantial modifications to the exterior appearance of the structure; however, fire escapes, handicapped entrances and other features may be added to protect public safety; 
h.  No interior modifications shall be injurious to the historic character of the structure, including but not limited to, floors, woodwork, chair rails, stairways, fireplaces, windows, doors, cornices, festoons, moldings, and light fixtures; 
i.  Breakfast shall be served on the premises only for guests and employees of the inn. Rooms may not be equipped with cooking facilities. No other meals shall be provided on the premises; 
j.  Parking shall not be allowed in any front yard; 
k.  Signs shall conform to the requirements of the section 708 of this LDC; 
l.  No more than one (1) employee who is not a full-time resident of the dwelling shall be allowed; 
m.  A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces, plus one (1) space per guest room shall be provided; 
n.  A maximum of five (5) guest rooms are provided; 
o.  No exterior evidence of the bed and breakfast shall be allowed, except for one (1) attached sign no larger than three (3) feet by six (6) feet; 
p.  No food preparation, except beverages, is allowed within individual guest rooms and meal service shall be restricted to overnight guest only; 
q.  The resident operator shall keep a current guest register including names, permanent addresses, and dates of occupancy and motor vehicle licenses for all guest. 
7.  Boardinghouses, rooming houses, and commercial dorms. When allowed, boardinghouses, rooming houses, and commercial dorms shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
a.  A site plan is required for boardinghouses, rooming houses, and commercial dorms; 
b.  The site plan shall include as an additional requirement an approved floor plan showing the number of rooms and the proposed number of tenants. The floor plan shall be kept on file with the inspections division; 
c.  Off-street parking shall be provided in conformance with the standards of this LDC; 
d.  In granting any use permit, the approving body shall find that the use will not be detrimental to adjacent uses due to noise, glare, traffic or other factors; 
e.  In cases where the use is a special use, the approving body may require additional conditions to protect public health, safety, and welfare. 
8.  Childcare centers in nonresidential districts. Childcare centers which are permitted by right in zoning districts outside the community development enterprise overlay areas shall comply with the following: 
a.  The center shall meet all applicable state requirements for standards, licensing and inspections; 
b.  If the total site is greater than two (2) acres, only those buildings and structures located within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed care center, parking area and play/recreation yard are required to be shown on the site plan; 
c.  Care centers shall provide one hundred (100) square feet of outdoor recreation space per child client; 
d.  Outdoor recreation areas shall be enclosed by a solid or open fence or wall at least five (5) feet in height. Where the outdoor recreation area is directly adjacent to a street or a residentially used or zoned lot, a solid fence or wall at least six (6) feet high or the maximum applicable fence/wall height limitations, or an open fence at least four (4) feet high and a vegetative buffer as detailed in section 704 of this LDC shall be erected. In addition to standards in section 704, shrubs required shall be a minimum of three (3) feet in height when planted and shall reach a minimum height of six (6) feet within three (3) years of planting; 
e.  All outdoor recreation space shall be useable for recreation and play purposes (as an example, streams, marsh land or other unsuitable areas shall not be credited toward the play space requirement.) Outdoor recreation areas must be fenced in accordance with the standards herein; 
f.  All care centers and nursery schools shall provide a six (6) foot high fence between their lot and any adjacent properties. Open fencing may be provided next to public rights-of-way and nonresidential districts; 
g.  Driveways and drop off areas shall be provided so that traffic associated with the use does not impede the flow of traffic on adjacent streets; 
h.  Spatial distribution: There shall be a minimum seven hundred fifty (750) foot radius, measured from the proposed building to an existing childcare center's lot line(s), between childcare centers. This separation requirement is not applicable to "childcare home occupations"; 
i.  The exterior lighting plan is required and shall meet the following guidelines. Exterior lighting shall be less than three thousand (3,000) lumens, including spotlights and floodlights, and shall be angled so that the center of the beam will strike the ground within the property line. Any light with less than three thousand (3,000) lumens may be used without restriction to light distribution or mounting height, except that no spot or flood light may be aimed, directed, or focused such as to cause direct light from the fixture to be directed toward residential buildings on adjacent or nearby land, or to create glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public or private street rights-of-way; 
j.  Noise from activities conducted on the care center site shall not exceed a noise level which is clearly audible (eighty-five (85) decibels) at a distance of more than one hundred (100) feet from the childcare center lot line, measured in a straight line; 
9.  Childcare home occupations. Childcare home occupations uses must comply with subsection 503C.13., home occupations. In addition, childcare home occupations shall be limited to providing supervisory care for no more than five (5) preschool children and three (3) school-aged children at any one (1) time (including preschool aged children who reside in the home and not including the provider's own school-aged children). 
10.  Dwelling, multistory, adaptive reuse of historic properties. For projects involving the adaptive reuse of a historic structure listed or eligible for nomination to the National Register, the following provisions for multistory residential high density uses shall apply: 
a.  Minimum lot area. Within the central city area: One-half (1/2) acre. All other properties: Two (2) acres minimum and ten (10) acres maximum lot area. 
b.  Allowable density: For projects with less than four (4) stories, the maximum allowable density shall be thirty-two (32) units per acre. For projects, which have four (4) or more stories, the maximum allowable density shall be determined by the mathematical relationship of the number of parking spaces and maximum lot coverage to the land area within the project. 
c.  Building height. Within the central city area the principal buildings shall not be less than three (3) stories. No building height shall exceed eighty-five (85) feet. For historic properties, height of associated new construction shall be compatible with the height of the existing historic structure. 
d.  Parking requirement. Same as provided in section 707, except that the parking ratio may be reduced to one (1) space per two (2) dwelling units for projects used exclusively by the elderly. In the event that an "elderly" project converts to a "non-elderly" project, the parking provisions of section 707 shall apply. 
e.  Lot coverage. Not more than eighty (80) percent of the total plot area shall be covered by parking and buildings. The remaining twenty (20) percent shall be landscaped and maintained as open space or developed for recreational uses in accordance with the anticipated needs of the intended occupants. The maximum percentage of lot coverage may be increased by that amount of floor area devoted to open-air recreation use either on the roof or balconies. In such cases, the maximum lot coverage shall not exceed ninety (90) percent of lot area. 
f.  Yards: The minimum front, side, and rear yards shall be in conformance with the applicable district regulations. For each story above three (3) stories, an additional five (5) foot setback shall be added to the required front, side, and rear yards. 
11.  Family care or group home. Neither a family care home nor a group home for developmentally disabled adults shall be permitted to be located within a seven hundred fifty (750) foot radius of any existing family care home; group home for developmentally disabled adults; group care facility; shelter for women or families, with or without children; transient shelter, or rehabilitation facility (as classified under the previous LDC). 
12.  Garden centers and businesses with permanent outdoor displays of merchandise. When allowed, those displays such as garden centers or home building supplies, not including vehicle sales and rentals or heavy equipment sales and rentals, shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
a.  The area displaying the merchandise shall be an accessory to an enclosed retail sales or rental area which is the primary retail business area. The outdoor display area shall be immediately adjacent to the primary sales or rental area and shall be shown on an approved site plan; 
b.  The merchandise shall not be located in the front yard or designated parking lot; 
c.  The area displaying the merchandise must be screened from any adjoining residential use or zone. Refer to buffers in section 703 for additional information; 
d.  Permanent displays may not block sidewalks or parking areas, and may not impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
13.  Home occupation. Where allowed, home occupations shall be subject to the following additional regulations: 
a.  Only members of the family residing on the premises and one (1) nonresident employee shall engage in the home occupation; 
b.  The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the primary use as a residence. The home occupation use shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the livable portion of the dwelling or five hundred (500) square feet, whichever is less, except for child or adult care (home occupations), and room and/or board operations, all of which are not subject to the floor area limitation. Room and/or board operations may provide lodging for no more than three (3) persons. Internal alterations or construction modifications not customary in dwellings shall be prohibited. Exterior modifications to the dwelling to accommodate the home occupation shall be prohibited; 
c.  There shall be no trade or display of merchandise carried on inside or outside of the dwelling. No outside storage shall be used in connection with the home occupation. Any storage of wholesale or retail stock or materials used in conjunction with the home occupation shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the area devoted to the home occupation, shall be stored totally within the dwelling or inside an accessory structure, and shall be out of view from the street and neighboring properties; 
d.  No external evidence of the operation of the home occupation shall be displayed or created outside the building or displayed through means of windows or openings in the structure except for one (1) unanimated, non-illuminated accessory identification sign no greater than one (1) square feet, placed flat against a wall or door or displayed in a window, one (1) sign for each street on which the building is located; 
e.  Parking associated with the use shall be on site and in the rear yard; 
f.  No occupation shall be permitted that in combination with the associated residential use generates more than the average of eighteen (18) daily vehicle trips (ADT) per day, as specified in the Institute of Traffic Engineer's Trip Generation Manual for trips per residence; 
g.  No goods, products or commodities bought or secured for the express purpose of resale on-premises shall be sold at retail or wholesale on the premises. Distributor home occupations providing home pick-up or infrequent product demonstrations primarily for associated distributors on site are permitted; 
h.  No machinery that causes noises or interference with radio or television reception shall be permitted; 
i.  No hazardous materials may be manufactured, stored, processed or disposed of on the premises; 
j.  No equipment or process shall be used in connection with the home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference which is detectable off-site; 
k.  Vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted in connection with the home occupation. Only one (1) commercially licensed vehicle shall be allowed. This vehicle may not exceed one (1) ton capacity. Not more than one (1) home occupation-related vehicle shall be permitted to be parked on the lot of the dwelling. The vehicle must not be greater than twenty (20) feet in length or eight (8) feet in height; 
l.  No mechanical equipment shall be used or activity conducted that creates any noise, dust, fumes, odor, vibration, glare or electrical disturbance detectable to the normal senses off the lot on which the home occupation is conducted. Power shall be limited to electric motors with a total limitation of three (3) horsepower per dwelling unit; 
m.  All home occupations shall be required to obtain an annual home occupation permit from the city renewable each year after initial application. The required permit fee shall be in accordance with the adopted Rocky Mount fee schedule. Failure to comply with this provision shall be grounds for revocation; 
n.  Professional services such as the offices of an accountant, architect, beautician, engineer, lawyer, medical practitioners or photographer shall be permitted providing all the other requirements of home occupations are met. 
o.  A home occupation shall not be construed to include, among other like uses, personal and business services such as massage, cosmetology, barber and beauty shops with more than one (1) chair or station, tea rooms, restaurants, rest homes, clinics, medical offices, childcare center, bed and breakfast homes, kennels, dog grooming, radio and television repair, furniture or cabinetmaking, food processing for sale, auto servicing or repair, lawn mower or other lawn equipment servicing or repair, or metal fabrication. 
p.  Any home occupation use permits granted prior to the adoption of this LDC shall remain as valid nonconforming occupations. 
14.  Hospital, general. A general or similar hospital shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Street access (other than a service entrance on an alley) shall be on an arterial or on a collector street within fifty (50) feet of its intersection with an arterial; 
b.  No building, work area or recreation area shall be within fifty (50) feet of a resident district boundary. 
15.  Hospital. When allowed, hospitals and convalescent centers shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
a.  Street access (other than a service entrance on an alley) shall be on an arterial or on a collector street within fifty (50) feet of its intersection with an arterial; 
b.  No building, work area or recreation area shall be within fifty (50) feet of a resident district boundary. 
c.  Side and rear yards shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet or the minimum required by the zoning district, whichever is greater. Building setback shall be at least fifty (50) feet. 
d.  Convalescent centers: The minimum lot area shall be five hundred (500) square feet for each bed. All yards shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet or the minimum required by the zoning district, whichever is greater. 
e.  Service facilities: Such as gift shops, snack bars and personal service shops may be provided if the facilities are completely within the building and designed to serve patrons of the facility and their visitors only. 
16.  Kennels and veterinary establishments. In addition to the requirements found elsewhere in the LDC, kennels and veterinary establishments, if allowed, shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  A kennel main facility shall not be constructed or maintained within three hundred (300) feet of a property line adjoining a residential zoning district. 
b.  A kennel with outdoor runs that are constructed or maintained within two hundred (200) feet of a residential zoning district shall be enclosed by a solid fence or a wall, a minimum of six (6) feet high. 
c.  All kennels must also conform to all of the provisions of this LDC and animal control provisions, of the City Code. 
17.  Manufactured housing sales. In addition to the requirements found elsewhere in the LDC, manufactured home sales, if allowed, shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  Separation from residential. A landscaped buffer shall be provided between a manufactured home sales facility and any residentially zoned or used property. The buffer shall contain plant materials that conform to the standards for a Class 5 buffer [eighty (80) foot]. 
b.  Landscaping. In addition to the landscaping requirements found elsewhere in the LDC, the following landscaping shall be provided. 
i.  between the manufactured homes used for display and any street: a) a hedge which is at least twenty-four (24) inches in height; 
ii.  adjacent to nonresidential zoned or used property: Landscaping which conforms to the requirements for landscaping on the perimeter of parking lots. Adjustments to the landscaping which results in the same or better performance shall be allowed by the development review committee [DRC]. 
c.  Floodways. Manufactured home sales facilities shall not be located within the floodway fringe. 
d.  Site plan. In addition to the site plan requirements found elsewhere in this LDC, the site plan shall define display areas, storage and repair areas, office, and parking areas, landscaping materials, and materials used to obstruct off site views. Other accessory uses, for example, rental vehicles or storage building sales may not locate on the site unless the use has been designated on the site plan. All travel lanes, access lanes, storage areas, pedestrian areas, parking spaces and display home footprint spaces shall be covered with a dust free, all weather surface. The approving authority may add additional conditions to the site plan to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
e.  Parking. Parking spaces shall be provided at a rate of five (5) per one thousand (1,000) square feet of office space. 
f.  Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage allowed is eighty (80) percent. 
g.  Setbacks. The nearest edge of the manufactured homes shall be set back from the ultimate right-of-way of all adjacent streets, at least twenty-five (25) feet or the distance of the front yard requirement of the zoning district, whichever is greater; and at least ten (10) feet from adjacent nonresidential property lines for the requirements of the zoning district, whichever is greater. Office structures shall observe the setback requirements of the zoning district in which they are located. 
h.  Storage and repair. Storage and repair activities shall be screened for off-site views. Replacement or discarded parts and accessories shall be screened from off-site views. 
i.  Signs. Signs shall conform to the sign regulations of the zoning district in which the use of located. In addition, each display home may have a sign not to exceed three (3) square feet in area, which gives information about the home. 
j.  Display homes. A minimum separation of at least ten (10) feet shall be maintained between display homes. Display homes shall be level and blocked. Display homes, visible off-site, shall be provided with some type of material and/or landscaping around the base which will prevent open views underneath the manufactured home. Access to the display homes shall be through a stairway or other means that has a permanent appearance. 
k.  Manufactured home (individual) for residential occupancy. Manufactured homes to be used for residential occupancy on individual lots in R-8 zones must conform to the definition of a Type A manufactured home, except that the parallel orientation of the unit to the lot frontage may be waived by the building inspector if it is determined that a different orientation would be more compatible with existing homes in the immediate vicinity. Such a determination shall be made only where it is clear that the parallel orientation is not compatible with the surrounding existing homes. 
18.  Church/religious institution. When allowed, all churches and religious institutions shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
a.  In all zoning districts churches and religious institutions shall have adequate lot size to meet the yard requirements of the zoning district in addition to the area used to meet parking requirements. Yard space may not be counted toward required parking spaces. In the central business district, residential district parking standards shall apply. 
b.  The parking lot landscaping standards found elsewhere in this LDC apply. 
c.  Belfries or steeples shall be exempt from the height requirement. 
d.  At site plan approval, additional conditions may be imposed to protect nearby property from any detrimental effects due to traffic, noise or other factors. 
e.  A church, synagogue, temple, or other religious institution including Sunday school facilities located in or adjacent to any residential district shall have its principal vehicular entrance and exit on a major street or on another arterial within one hundred fifty (150) feet of its intersection with a major street. 
19.  Nursing home. When allowed, nursing homes shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
a.  Residential suites or assisted living units are considered to be rooms or suites with bathrooms but without cooking facilities designed for habitation by one (1) or two (2) individuals in a project designated for senior housing. They shall be permitted to be constructed at the same density as the base density for dwelling units. In some situations described in this Section the density of these units may be increased to twice the base density. 
b.  The dwelling unit density shall not exceed the dwelling unit density of the underlying zoning district, for the purposes of this section, called the "base density" except in the following circumstances: 
c.  If the nursing home has the following on-site common use facilities: dining, recreation, health care, and a convalescent center; the density for any associated multi-family units shall not exceed two (2) times the allowed multi-family base density for the zone. 
d.  If the nursing home has the following on-site common use facilities: dining, recreation, health care, a convalescent center, and multi-family units; the density for any associated single-family detached units shall not exceed one and one-half (1.5) times the allowed multi-family base density of the zone. 
20.  Recreation or amusement enterprise (conducted inside a building and for profit and not otherwise listed herein): 
a.  Location: The lot shall be located a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) feet, measured from lot line to lot line, from an existing single-family dwelling unit. 
b.  Parking: One (1) parking space per each two hundred (200) square feet of building area. 
c.  Plans are required and must show: 
Structures: Location and size of all existing and proposed buildings and site improvements and on lot adjacent thereto. 
d.  Other requirements: 
1)  The use is limited to physical fitness centers, exercise and weight rooms, health clubs and health spas, and gymnasiums. 
2)  The use is operated on a membership basis and payments for the recreational facilities and services are made on an installment basis of not less than monthly, rather than on any pay for use, hourly, daily, or weekly basis. 
3)  If an outdoor swimming pool is to be provided, it shall be enclosed by a protective fence a minimum of five (5) feet in height. If the fence is not a solid fence, in addition to the fence, an evergreen plant screen of not less than five (5) feet in height shall abut the fence. 
4)  Plans must be approved by the planning board before the special request is submitted to the board of adjustment. 
21.  Salvage operations and junkyards. Any junkyard, salvage or auto wrecking yard, or other facility for storage or processing of used machinery, building materials, plumbing fixtures or appliances shall be subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Any exterior storage or processing area of a junkyard, salvage or auto wrecking yard, or facility for storage or processing of used machinery, building materials, plumbing fixtures or appliances located within one hundred (100) feet of any street shall be screened by a solid, opaque wall or fence at least eight (8) feet high located visibility from any street. The fence shall be eight (8) feet high, measured from the lowest point of grade. The fence shall be maintained in good condition. No stored materials shall be visible from ground level immediately outside the fence. 
b.  The screening wall or fence shall not be used for advertising purposes, with the exception of an identification sign not to exceed ten (10) square feet in size. 
c.  The applicant shall demonstrate that the stored materials will not pose a danger to surrounding properties, or residents, due to noise, runoff, animal or insect populations or other factors. 
d.  The site may not be located adjacent to residentially zoned property. 
e.  A landscape screen shall be provided in conformance with section 703. 
22.  Storage of flammables and liquids. The storage of flammables shall not be permitted or considered a use-by-right except when such authorization for said use is given, stating compliance with the provisions contained in the current State of NC Fire Prevention Code and as subsequently adopted by the city council, by the Fire Chief of the City of Rocky Mount for those properties within the city or those under contract for fire protection services with the City of Rocky Mount, or by the respective county fire marshal relative to other properties in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. However, the permitted use of bulk storage of bottled gas (distribution) or storage of flammables is prohibited in the fire limits within the City of Rocky Mount on file with the city clerk. 
23.  Wireless communications towers. Wireless communications towers shall be a permitted use in any zoning district when attached to or located on an existing tower, facility or structure (excluding a single-family residence), provided such addition does not add more than twenty (20) feet to the height, nor protrude more than eighteen (18) inches from the vertical plane of any existing tower, non-residential structure or facility. No equipment cabinets required to support these antennas shall be permitted to encroach upon a required yard setback. Towers/antennas shall blend with the structure to which they are attached. Location of a wireless communications tower on a building or substantial structure, such as a water tower or non-residential building, shall not require a special use permit for the antenna or the primary structure. 
For new towers less than one hundred (100) feet in height, towers must be set back far enough to prevent the tower fall zone from encroaching onto adjacent lands. Security fencing six (6) feet in height shall be installed around the base of the tower or the tower shall be equipped with an engineered certified anti-climb device. Any tower that ceases to be used for communications broadcasting and/or broadcast receiving for a period of more than six (6) months shall be removed by the property owner at his/her expense. 
24.  Yard sales, procedures and regulations. A yard sale, as defined in Chapter 14, shall be limited to the daylight hours of no more than two (2) consecutive days four (4) times during a calendar year. No more than two (2) signs of not more than six (6) square feet each may be displayed on the property of the residence where the sale is held. Permits are not required for such signs. Signs may not be exhibited for more than two (2) days prior to the day the sale is to commence and must be removed at the completion of the sale. The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect the following persons or sales: 
a.  Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
b.  Any person conducting an incidental sale of one (1) or two (2) separate items when such sale is not part of a general sale of a number of items or personal property. 
25.  Continuing care retirement community. When allowed, CCRCs shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
a.  CCRC shall be included in an approved PDR development plan. 
b.  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, a copy of all required licenses from any state agencies shall be submitted to the director of development services or designee for review. 
c.  Residential facilities may include single family, multi-family, apartments, town homes, and condos. 
d.  Incidental uses may include retail, restaurant, and recreation, pharmacy and 24-hour health care services. 
e.  24-hour onsite supervision for residents shall be required (security and medical care). 
f.  Parking and signage shall comply with approved development plan or city sign requirements. 
26.  Office use (with no on-premise stock of goods for sale to the general public and the operation and services of which are customarily conducted by means of written, verbal, or mechanically reproduced communication material). A certificate of occupancy/compliance may be issued for a mobile office, for use as a temporary field office for contractors, by the supervisor of inspection services or his authorized agents without approval of the board of adjustment, if the mobile office: 
a.  And the structure under construction are located on the same property; 
b.  Is not moved to the site more than thirty (30) days prior to construction and is not removed later than thirty (30) days after construction has been completed; 
c.  Is not used for any other purpose other than that connected with on-site construction; 
d.  Is justified by the size and nature of the construction project; 
e.  Is to be used for a period not to exceed eighteen (18) months; 
f.  Is utilized only incidental to on-site construction during daylight hours and not for residential living quarters; 
g.  Is parked in a location approved in advance by the supervisor of inspection services or his authorized agents; 
h.  Sanitary facilities are connected with an approved sewer system; 
i.  Electrical facilities are connected in compliance with regulations as set forth in the 1971 National Electrical Code, and as subsequently adopted by the city council. 
27.  School: elementary, junior high and high school. A certificate of occupancy/compliance may be issued for a mobile office for use as a mobile classroom by a public or private school, for a school administrative mobile office and for a manufactured home sales office without approval of the board of adjustment, if the mobile office's: 
a.  Sanitary facilities are connected with an approved sewer system. 
b.  Electrical facilities are connected in compliance with regulations as set forth in the 1971 National Electrical Code, and as subsequently adopted by the city council. 
c.  Provisions pertaining to a mobile office foundation and anchorage of the mobile office to the foundation, as contained in the state of North Carolina Regulations for Mobile Homes, 1972 edition, as subsequently adopted by the city council, are adhered to. 
28.  Reserved. 
29.  Fabrication, light manufacturing. Fabrication facilities shall be permitted provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  No outside storage of products or materials used to be assembled shall be allowed. 
b.  In a B-2 or B-5 zoning district the subject parcel shall have a minimum lot area of four (4) acres. 
30.  Service and supply: A building/compartment in a building or designated yard area used by the owner for the deposit and safekeeping of supplies and equipment. Storage of supplies and equipment shall be permitted provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  The subject parcel shall have a minimum lot area of three (3) acres. 
b.  Any exterior storage of supplies or equipment shall be screened from view along the entire length of the right-of-way and any adjoining property by a solid, opaque wall or fence. The fence shall measure at least six (6) feet above grade along its entire length. The fence shall be maintained in good condition. 
c.  Commercial sales of merchandise shall be prohibited. 
31.  Crematory: Documentation shall be submitted indicating that all North Carolina state licensing requirements associated with the crematory have been fulfilled prior to the operation of the facility. 
32.  Railroad yard operations. In the A-1 zoning district, railroad yard operations shall be permitted provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Area: The subject site shall have a minimum lot area of one hundred (100) acres; 
b.  Landscaping: The subject site shall install and maintain a landscaping buffer between adjacent properties in accordance with section 704 of this LDC. The railroad yard operations shall be classified as a class V land use for this purpose; 
c.  The subject site shall be contiguous to an existing railroad right-of-way or other property used for railroad yard operations; 
d.  The subject site shall be located in its entirety within three thousand five hundred (3,500) feet of the railroad right-of-way; and 
e.  Site development plans for railroad yard operations shall be considered a level III project subject to review and approved by the DRC. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-2, § 1, 1-10-05; Ord. No. O-2005-30, § 1a.-c., 4-25-05; Ord. No. O-2005-82, § 1a.-c., 9-12-05; Ord. No. O-2005-34B, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. 0-2006-1, §§ 3, 4, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 0-2006-18, § 2, 2-13-06; Ord. No. O-2006-28, §§ 4a.-c., 4-24-06; Ord. No. 0-07-13, §§ 2a, 2b, 3-12-07; Ord. No. O-2007-107, §§ 3, 4, 10-8-07; Ord. No. O-2008-1, § 2, 1-14-08; Ord. No. O-08-28, §§ 2-4, 4-14-08; Ord. No. O-08-108, § 2, 8-11-08; Ord. No. O-2009-2, § 3, 1-12-09; Ord. No. O-2009-107, § 2, 10-12-09; Ord. No. O-2010-20, § 3, 3-22-10; Ord. No. O-2010-79, § 2, 9-13-10; Ord. No. O-2011-29, §§ 2, 3, 3-28-11; Ord. No. O-2011-117, § 2, 12-12-11; Ord. No. O-2013-89, §§ 2, 3, 9-23-13; Ord. No. O-2014-61, §§ 2, 3, 7-14-14; Ord. No. O-2016-32, § 3, 5-9-16; Ord. No. O-2016-60, § 3-5, 7-25-16; Ord. No. O-2016-62, § 3, 4, 8-8-16; Ord. No. O-2018-71, § 3, 7-9-18; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 3, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 504. - Historic preservation and landmark overlay district. 
A.  Purpose of historic districts. Historic districts are defined as "districts which overlay other zoning districts." All uses permitted in any such district, whether by right or as a special use, shall be permitted in the historic district, unless specifically otherwise. 
B.  Local historic landmarks. Upon complying with the required landmark designation procedures set forth in this LDC, the city council may adopt and from time to time amend or repeal an LDC designating one (1) or more local historic landmarks. No property shall be recommended for designation as a local landmark unless it is deemed and found by the commission to be of special significance in terms of its historical, archeological, architectural or cultural importance, and to possess integrity of design, setting, workmanship, materials, feeling and/or association. 
C.  Enforcement and remedies. Compliance with the terms of the certificate of appropriateness shall be enforced by the administrator. Failure to comply with the certificate shall be a violation of the zoning LDC and is punishable according to established procedures and penalties for such violations. In case any building, structure, site, area or object designated as a landmark or within a historic district is about to be demolished, whether as a result of deliberate neglect or otherwise, materially altered, remodeled, removed or destroyed except in compliance with this division, the city council, the commission, or other party aggrieved by such action may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful demolition, destruction, material alteration, remodeling or removal, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such a building or structure. 
Sec. 505. - Community enterprise district overlay. 
A.  General. The location and boundary of the overlay districts shall be shown on the "Official Zoning Map, City of Rocky Mount and Extraterritorial Area". These maps, together with everything shown thereon and all amendments, thereto, are hereby adopted and are declared to be an integral part of this local ordinance. All overlay districts must be defined by area and by eligibility criteria in this section. 
B.  Community enterprise district (CED). 
1.  The purpose: To create an overlay district for sustainable community development, to advance the creation of livable and vibrant community through comprehensive approaches that coordinate economic, physical, environmental, community and human development. The community enterprise district permits specific activities that support the revitalization of the defined area, and identifies the conditions under which such activities can occur. Establishment of this CED enables the board of adjustment to permit on a case-by-case basis the following special use: 
a.  Childcare centers in residential zoning districts. 
2.  Criteria for establishment of district boundaries: 
a.  Eligibility of an area to be included in the community enterprise overlay district is based upon conditions of pervasive poverty, unemployment and general distress. All calculations shall be based upon the most recent available census data, or verifiable local or state government statistics for the specific census or block group being considered. 
b.  Community enterprise overlay district: District boundaries shall follow 2000 census block group boundaries in blocks 202.1, 202.2, 202.5. 
c.  District boundaries must be continuous and contiguous. Satellite districts are not permitted. 
d.  Eligibility of an area shall be established as follows: 
1)  Poverty rate calculation: 
a.  In each census tract within a nominated area, the poverty rate shall not be less than twenty (20) percent; 
b.  For at least ninety (90) percent of the population census tracts within the nominated area, the poverty rate shall not be less than twenty-five (25) percent; and 
c.  For at least fifty (50) percent of the population census tracts within the nominated area, the poverty rate shall not be less than thirty-five (35) percent. 
2)  Unemployment rate standard; An unemployment rate at one hundred fifty (150) percent of the national unemployment rate, as calculated by the most recent available census data for each proposed block group. 
3)  General distress standard; A minimum of three (3) supporting general distress indicators other than poverty rate and unemployment rate indicating sustained or increasing distress must be provided for the census block group boundary. 
e.  This community enterprise district boundary shall not be expanded or amended under this LDC. 
f.  Criteria for approval of childcare centers in the community enterprise district: 
Meet all special use permit requirements for childcare center in chapter 7, table of regulations for special uses. 
Sec. 506. - Zoning special use permit standards and conditions. 
    Special uses are uses requiring approval of the board of adjustment or the city council, which has jurisdiction over the property where the proposed use is to be located. In considering whether to approve an application for a special use permit the city council shall follow the same procedures specified herein for the board of adjustment, except that no vote greater than a majority vote shall be required for the city council to issue such permit. The uses categorized as special uses are generally considered to be appropriate in a particular zoning district but because of their complexity and potential for off-site conflicts, require individual review by the board or the city council. Permitted special uses add flexibility to the zoning LDC. Subject to high standards of planning and design, certain property uses are allowed in the several districts where those uses would not otherwise be acceptable. By means of controls exercised through the special use permit procedures, property uses that would otherwise be undesirable in certain districts can be developed to minimize any negative effects they might have on surrounding properties. 
A.  General findings. Applications for Special Use Permits shall be approved only if the Board of Adjustment (BOA) or the City Council (CC) finds that the use as proposed, or the use as proposed with conditions: 
1.  Will not materially endanger the public health, safety or general welfare if located where proposed and developed according to the plan as submitted and approved; 
2.  Meets all required conditions; 
3.  Will not adversely affect the use or any physical attribute of adjoining or abutting property, or that the use is a public necessity; and 
4.  The location and character of the use, if developed according to the plan as submitted and approved, will be in harmony with the area in which it is to be located and in general conformity with the plan of development of Rocky Mount and its environs. 
If the board or council fails to find conformance with the conditions listed above, then the proposed permit shall be denied. 
B.  Considerations. The applicant shall demonstrate that the applicable considerations for findings specific to a particular use as set forth in this section have been addressed. If an application is denied, the board of adjustment or city council shall specify which of these considerations, if any, were not addressed. The board of adjustment or city council may place conditions on the use as part of the approval to assure that adequate mitigation measures are associated with the use. The conditions shall become a part of the special use permit approval. Violations of any of the conditions shall be treated in the same manner as other violations of this LDC. 
1.  Circulation. Number and location of access points to the property and the proposed structures, with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or catastrophe. 
2.  Parking and loading. Location of off-street parking and loading areas. 
3.  Effect on adjacent property. Effects of the proposed use on nearby property, including but not limited to the effects of noise, glare, odor, and traffic. 
4.  Service entrances and areas. Locations of refuse and service areas with particular reference to ingress and egress of service vehicles. 
5.  Utilities. Location and availability of utilities. 
6.  Screening and landscaping. Installation of screening and fencing where necessary to protect adjacent property. 
7.  Signs and lighting. Locations of exterior lighting and signs with reference to glare, traffic safety, economic effect and compatibility with other property in the area. 
8.  Open spaces. Location of required yards and other open spaces and preservation of existing trees and other natural features. 
9.  Compatibility. The level of general compatibility with nearby properties and the appropriateness of the use in relationship to other properties. 
10.  Any other review factors which the board of adjustment or city council considers to be appropriate to the property in question. 
C.  Coordination with site plans. In cases where a site plan is required, site plan applications shall be filed concurrently with special use applications and the information shall be provided to the board or council during its deliberations. However, all approvals of special use permits shall be conditioned on approval of the site plan. No building permits may be issued until the site plan and special use permit are approved. Site plan approval may be conditioned on the approval of variances. 
D.  Coordination with variances. Applications for variances may be filed with the board of adjustment under standard procedures, at any time prior to the issuance of a building permit. If the board of adjustment grants a variance prior to approval of the special use, the city council shall be advised of the variance approval. Any approved variance shall be determined to be null and void if the special use is not approved by the board. 
E.  Special use permits, BOA. Procedures for handling special uses are based upon the nature of the use. Where the possible harmful effects of the use are likely to be limited to a relatively small area, approval of a special use permit is made the duty of the board of adjustment. The uses for which special use permit approval by the board of adjustment is required are listed in Table 5, section 503, along with a detailed description of the requirements associated with the approval of each such permit. Uses specified in certain districts as special uses under sections 503 and 510 shall be permitted only upon the issuance of a special use permit. 
1.  Procedure for special use permits approved by the board of adjustment. A special use permit may be issued by the director of development services or designee after approval by the board of adjustment for the uses as designated in the table of regulations for special uses found in section 503. The application for a special use permit shall accompany the application for a building permit and/or a certificate of occupancy/compliance. With the exception of special use permit requests for the occupancy of individual mobile homes under the "hardship," "agricultural areas exception," or "office and exhibition" provisions of this LDC, the board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing prior to rendering a decision on the approval of a special use permit. The special use permit, if approved, shall include approval of such plans as may be required. In approving the permit, the board of adjustment shall find: 
a.  That the use will not materially endanger the public health, safety or general welfare if located where proposed and developed according to the plan as submitted and approved; 
b.  That the use meets all required conditions; 
c.  That the use will not adversely affect the use or any physical attribute of adjoining or abutting property, or that the use is a public necessity; and 
d.  That the location and character of the use, if developed according to the plan as submitted and approved, will be in harmony with the area in which it is to be located and in general conformity with the plan of development of Rocky Mount and its environs. 
2.  Approval. In approving the special use permit, the board of adjustment may designate such conditions in addition and in connection therewith as will, in its opinion, assure that the use in its proposed locations will be harmonious with the area in which it is proposed to be located and with the spirit of this LDC. All such additional conditions shall be entered in the minutes of the meeting at which the special use permit is granted, and also [on] the special use permit and on the plans submitted therewith. All conditions shall run with the land and shall be binding on the original applicant for the special use permit, the heirs, successors and assigns. In order to ensure that such condition and requirements of each special use permit will be fulfilled, the petitioner for the special use permit may be required to enter into a contract with the city providing for the installation of the physical improvements required as a basis for the issuance of the special use permit. Performance of said contract shall be secured by cash or surety bond which will cover the total estimated cost of the improvements as determined by the director of engineering; provided, however, that said bond may be waived by the city council within their [its] discretion. If the board of adjustment denies the special use permit, the reasons therefore shall be entered in the minutes of the meeting at which the permit is denied. In addition to the specific conditions imposed by section 503 and whatever additional conditions the board of adjustment deems reasonable and appropriate, a special use shall comply with the height, yard, area and parking regulations of the zone in which they are located. No building permit shall be issued if not in conformance to the site plan and special use permit conditions. 
F.  Resubmissions. An application for a special use that has been denied may be resubmitted only if there has been a substantial change in circumstances as determined by the director or the director's designee. 
G.  Amendments. Field alterations to approved special uses may be approved by the development review committee (DRC) if the special use still meets the intent of the standards established with the original approval. The applicant may appeal a decision of the DRC to the board of adjustment. Changes to approved special uses shall require submittal of a new application. 
H.  Special use permits common submission requirements. All special use permit applications shall include a site plan which illustrates the following: 
1.  Boundaries of the lot or parcel. 
2.  Location of buildings, signs and sign location where applicable. 
3.  Circulation: proposed points of access, egress and pattern of internal travel lanes where applicable. 
4.  Parking layout. 
5.  Lighting plan including wattage and illumination. 
6.  Screening and fencing as specified in section 704 of this LDC, however, if not otherwise required, there shall be a minimum six (6) foot high solid fence or wall or dense plant material where lot abuts a residential lot, as applicable. 
I.  Findings specific to a particular use. 
1.  Adult day center in an institutional structure. 
a.  Special use districts: A-1, R-15, R-10, R-8, R-6,, R-6MFA, MHP, PDR, and IP. However, adult day centers in A-1, R-15, R-10, R-8, R-6,, R-6MFA, MHP, and PDR districts must be located outside of a designated historic district (national and local) or a national or local landmark. 
Adult day centers in the A-1, R-15, R-10, R-8, R-6,, R-6MFA, MHP, and PDR districts shall be in an institutional structure, such as a church, school, or community center. The center shall be located within the main building (including educational building) of the institutional structure. 
1)  Parking and loading: Layout of parking spaces. One (1) space for every six (6) adults or fraction thereof. In residential zones (A-1, R-15, R-10, R-8, R-6, R-6MFA, MHP), off-street parking for the adult day center shall not be located in the front or side yard. The required off-street parking shall be located in the rear yard. The parking lot shall provide a design that all vehicles shall exit the site in a forward moving direction. No parking shall be provided that would necessitate a vehicle backing onto any street right-of-way. Parking spaces provided in the abovementioned zones shall provide an opaque screen to shield view of the parking spaces from any public and/or any adjacent residentially used or zoned properties. Minimum height of said opaque screen shall be six (6) feet. 
b.  Minimum lot area: 0.5 acre (21,780 sq. feet) 
c.  Spatial distribution: There shall be a minimum seven hundred fifty (750) foot radius, measured from the proposed building to existing adult day center building line(s), between adult day centers. This separation requirement is not applicable to "adult day center (home occupations)". 
d.  Screening and fencing: Refer to parking requirement and other requirements below. 
e.  Plans are required and must show: 
1)  Structures: Location and approximate size of all existing proposed buildings and structures within the site and on the lots adjacent thereto. If the total site is greater than two (2) acres, only those buildings and structures located within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed adult day center, parking area, and outdoor area required to be shown. 
2)  Circulation: Proposed points of access and egress and pattern of internal circulation. 
3)  Parking and loading: Layout of parking spaces. One (1) space for every six (6) adults or fraction thereof. In residential zones (A-1, R-15, R-10, R-8, R-6, MFA, R-6MFA, MHP), off-street parking for the adult day center shall not be located in the front or side yard. The required off-street parking shall be located in the rear yard. The parking lot shall provide a design that all vehicles shall exit the site in a forward moving direction. No parking shall be provided that would necessitate a vehicle backing onto any street right-of-way. Parking spaces provided in the abovementioned zones shall provide an opaque screen to shield view of the parking spaces from any public and/or any adjacent residentially used or zoned properties. Minimum height of said opaque screen shall be six (6) feet. 
f.  Other details requirements: 
1)  Location and extent of outdoor area. 
2)  Community centers, schools, churches and other institutional uses in residential zones (i.e. A-1, R-15, R-10, R-8, R-6, R-6MFA, MHP and PDR) must comply with the requirements listed in the following subsections (a) and (b): 
a)  In A-1, R-15, R-10, R-8, R-6, R-6MFA, MHP and PDR zones (when the subject property is contiguous to a residential land use), the special use applicant shall provide a signed written statement of support from a majority of property owners of properties within one hundred (100) feet of the subject property lines. 
b)  The exterior lighting plan is required and shall meet the following guidelines. Exterior lighting shall be less than three thousand (3,000) lumens, including spotlights and floodlights, and shall be angled so that the center of the beam will strike the ground within the property line. Any light with less than three thousand (3,000) lumens may be used without restriction to light distribution or mounting height, except that no spot or flood light may be aimed, directed, or focused such as to cause direct light from the fixture to be directed toward residential buildings on adjacent or nearby land, or to create glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public or private street rights-of-way. 
c)  Adult day centers located in a residential zone may not operate between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
2.  Adult day center in the CED. Adult day center require a special use permit. A special use permit shall be required to increase the center's operating hours between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
a.  Special use districts: A-1, R-15, R-10, R-8, PDR, IP and O-I. However, adult day centers in A-1, R-10, R-8, R-6, R-6MFA, PDR, I-P and O-I districts must be located outside of a designated historic district (national, state or local). 
b.  The operator of a adult day centers which is characterized by the following three (3) criteria must reside in the dwelling unit containing the care center: 
1)  Located in A-1, R-15, R-10, R-8, R-6, R-6MFA and PDR, districts; 
2)  Located in an existing or former residential building; and 
3)  Operates between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
c.  Minimum lot area: None 
d.  If the total site is greater than two (2) acres, only those buildings and structures located within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed care center, parking area and play yard are required to be shown on the site plan. 
e.  Spatial distribution: There shall be a minimum seven hundred fifty (750) foot radius, measured from the proposed building to existing center building line(s), between childcare centers. This separation requirement is not applicable to "adult day center (home occupations)". 
h.  Structures: Location and approximate size of all existing proposed buildings and structures within the site and on the lots adjacent thereto. If the total site is greater than two (2) acres, only those buildings and structures located within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed adult day center, parking area and recreation are required to be shown. 
i.  Circulation: Proposed points of access and egress and pattern of internal circulation. 
j.  Screening and fencing: Refer to Parking requirement and other requirements below. 
k.  Parking and loading: Layout of parking spaces. One (1) space for every six (6) adults cared for or fraction thereof. In residential zones (A-1, R-15, R-10, R-8, R-6, R-6MFA, PDR, zones), off-street parking for the adult care center shall not be located in the front yard. The required off-street parking shall be located in the side and/or rear yards. The parking lot shall provide a design that all vehicles shall exit the site in a forward moving direction. No parking shall be provided that would necessitate a vehicle backing onto any street right-of-way. Parking spaces provided in the abovementioned zones shall provide an opaque screen to shield view of the parking spaces from any public and/or any adjacent residentially used or zoned properties. Minimum height of said opaque screen shall be six (6) feet. 
l.  Other details requirements: 
1)  Location and extent of open recreation area. 
2)  Community centers, schools, churches and similar non-residential uses in residential zones (i.e. A-1, R-15, R-10, R-8, R-6, R-6MFA, PDR) zones are exempt from requirements listed in the following subsections (a), (b), and (c). All other applicants must comply. 
a)  In A-1, R-15, R-10, R-8, R-6, R-6MFA, PDR, and O-I (when the subject property is contiguous to a residential land use) zones, the special use applicant shall provide a signed written statement of support from a majority of property owners of properties within one hundred (100) feet of the subject property lines 
b)  The exterior lighting plan is required and shall meet the following guidelines. Exterior lighting shall be less than three thousand (3,000) lumens, including spotlights and floodlights, and shall be angled so that the center of the beam will strike the ground within the property line. Any light with less than three thousand (3,000) lumens may be used without restriction to light distribution or mounting height, except that no spot or flood light may be aimed, directed, or focused such as to cause direct light from the fixture to be directed toward residential buildings on adjacent or nearby land, or to create glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public or private street rights-of-way. 
c)  Noise from activities conducted on the childcare center site shall not exceed a noise level which is clearly audible, eighty-five (85) decibels, at a distance of more than one hundred (100) feet from the childcare center lot line, measured in a straight line. 
d)  Adult day centers: Inclusive of those established within a dwelling unit utilized as a permanent residence, may not care for more than twenty (20) adults at any time between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. The special use permit shall specifically state whether adult day center will operate between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
3.  Animal medical care (including kennel operations). Screening and fencing: A solid fence or solid wall not less than six (6) feet high or the maximum applicable fence height limitation where the lot abuts a residential lot. It is mandatory that animal medical care facilities situated in an O-I zone have all kennel areas (living quarters for animals) confined within a building. Open kennel areas are prohibited. 
4.  Assemblies (assembly hall, armory, stadium, coliseum). Screening and fencing: A solid fence or solid wall not less than six (6) feet high or the maximum applicable fence height limitation where the lot abuts a residential lot. 
5.  Automobile off-street parking lot in residential districts. 
a.  Shall meet the regulation requirements set forth in section 708. 
b.  A site plan shall be submitted showing the following: 
1)  General layout and total number of spaces. 
2)  Required landscaping. 
3)  Applicable buffering. 
4)  Points of ingress and egress. 
5)  Location of proposed lighting. 
6)  Sidewalks (if required). 
6.  Bed and breakfast. 
a.  Shall meet the regulation requirements set forth in section 503C., note 6. 
7.  Boardinghouse operation. 
a.  Shall meet the regulation requirements set forth in section 503C., note 7. 
8.  Cemetery/Columbarium. 
a.  Parking and loading: Adequate off-street parking facilities for funeral procession. 
b.  Screening and fencing: A screen of dense plant material not less than six (6) feet high where cemetery abuts a residential lot. 
c.  Other details: 
1)  Proposed restrictions, if any. 
2)  Maximum size of sign shall be thirty-six (36) square feet, and there is a limit of one (1) sign per street frontage. 
3)  For columbarium: 
i.  Columbarium shall only be allowed on property occupied by the primary church building and owned by the church. 
ii.  The columbarium shall comply with all district setbacks and shall not be located in the front yard of the church. 
iii.  The columbarium shall not be lighted. 
iv.  No sign shall be permitted. Name markers shall not be counted as signs. 
v.  The columbarium shall be screened from the public right of way by landscaping, wall or fencing or shall be located in a courtyard interior to the structure. 
9.  Childcare centers in the CED. Childcare centers require a special use permit. A special use permit shall be required to increase the center's operating hours between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
a.  Special use districts: A-1, R-15, R-10, R-8, R-6, R-6MFA, PDR, IP and O-I. However, childcare centers in A-1, R-10, R-8, PDR, I-P and O-I districts must be located outside of a designated historic district (national, state or local). 
b.  The operator of a childcare center which is characterized by the following three (3) criteria must reside in the dwelling unit containing the care center: 
1)  located in A-1, R-15, R-10, R-8, R-6, R-6MFA, and PDR, districts; 
2)  located in an existing or former residential building; and 
3)  operates between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
c.  Minimum lot area: None 
d.  If the total site is greater than two (2) acres, only those buildings and structures located within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed care center, parking area and play yard are required to be shown on the site plan. 
e.  Childcare centers shall provide one hundred (100) square feet of outdoor play space per attendee. If the total site is greater than two (2) acres, only those buildings and structures located within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed childcare center, parking area and play yard are required to be shown. 
f.  Outdoor recreation area of one hundred (100) square feet shall be enclosed by a solid or open fence or wall at least five (5) feet in height. Where the outdoor recreation area is directly adjacent to a street or a residentially used or zoned lot, a solid fence or wall at least six (6) feet high or the maximum applicable fence/wall height limitations, or an open fence at least four (4) feet high and a screen planting designed to grow three (3) feet thick and six (6) feet, shall be erected. 
g.  Spatial distribution: There shall be a minimum seven hundred fifty (750) foot radius, measured from the proposed building to existing childcare center building line(s), between childcare centers. This separation requirement is not applicable to "childcare (home occupations)". 
h.  Structures: Location and approximate size of all existing proposed buildings and structures within the site and on the lots adjacent thereto. If the total site is greater than two (2) acres, only those buildings and structures located within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed childcare center, parking area and recreation are required to be shown. 
i.  Circulation: Proposed points of access and egress and pattern of internal circulation. 
j.  Screening and fencing: Refer to parking requirement and other requirements below. 
k.  Parking and loading: Layout of parking spaces. One (1) space for every six (6) adults cared for or fraction thereof. In residential zones (A-1, R-10, R-8, R-6, R-6MFA, PDR, zones), off-street parking for the childcare center shall not be located in the front yard. The required off-street parking shall be located in the side and/or rear yards. The parking lot shall provide a design that all vehicles shall exit the site in a forward moving direction. No parking shall be provided that would necessitate a vehicle backing onto any street right-of-way. Parking spaces provided in the abovementioned zones shall provide an opaque screen to shield view of the parking spaces from any public and/or any adjacent residentially used or zoned properties. Minimum height of said opaque screen shall be six (6) feet. 
l.  Other details requirements: 
1)  Location and extent of open recreation area. 
2)  Childcare centers shall provide one hundred (100) square feet of outdoor recreation space per attendee. 
3)  Outdoor recreation area shall be enclosed by a solid or open fence or wall at least four (4) feet in height. Where the outdoor play area is directly adjacent to a residentially used or zoned lot, a solid fence or wall at least six (6) feet high or the maximum applicable fence/wall height limitations, or an open fence at least four (4) feet high and a screen planting designed to grow three (3) feet thick and six (6) feet high, shall be erected. The city council may at its discretion require additional screening and/or fencing to be located adjacent to abutting nonresidential land uses. 
4)  Community centers, schools, churches and similar non-residential uses in residential zones (i.e. A-1, R-10, R-8, R-6, R6MFA,PDR,) zones are exempt from requirements listed in the following subsections (a), (b), and (c). All other applicants must comply. 
a)  In A-1, R-10, R-8, R-6, R-6MFA, PDR, and O-I (when the subject property is contiguous to a residential land use) zones, the special use applicant shall provide a signed written statement of support from a majority of property owners of properties within one hundred (100) feet of the subject property lines. 
b)  The exterior lighting plan is required and shall meet the following guidelines. Exterior lighting shall be less than three thousand (3,000) lumens, including spotlights and floodlights, and shall be angled so that the center of the beam will strike the ground within the property line. Any light with less than three thousand (3,000) lumens may be used without restriction to light distribution or mounting height, except that no spot or flood light may be aimed, directed, or focused such as to cause direct light from the fixture to be directed toward residential buildings on adjacent or nearby land, or to create glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public or private street rights-of-way. 
c)  Noise from activities conducted on the childcare center site shall not exceed a noise level which is clearly audible, eight-five (85) decibels, at a distance of more than one hundred (100) feet from the childcare center lot line, measured in a straight line. 
d)  Childcare centers: Inclusive of those established within a dwelling unit utilized as a permanent residence, may not care for more than twenty (20) children at any time between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. The special use permit shall specifically State whether childcare center will operate between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
10.  Childcare center in institutional structure in residential zones. 
a.  Special use districts: Special use districts: A-1, R-15, R-10, R-8, R-6, R-6MFA, PDR, and IP. However, childcare centers in A-1, R-10, R-8, R-6, R-6MFA, and PDR (residential) districts must be located outside of a designated historic district (national or local) or a national or local landmark. 
b.  Childcare centers in the A-1, R-15, R-10, R-8, R-6, R-6MFA, PDR, and IP districts shall be allowed in an institutional structure, such as a church, school, or community center. The center shall be located within the main building (including educational building) of the institutional structure. 
c.  Minimum lot area: .5 acre (21,780 sq. feet) 
d.  Spatial distribution: There shall be a minimum seven hundred fifty (750) foot radius, measured from the proposed building to existing childcare center building line(s), between childcare centers. This separation requirement is not applicable to "childcare (home occupations)". 
e.  Screening and fencing: Refer to parking requirement and other requirements below. 
f.  Plans are required and must show: 
1)  Structures: Location and approximate size of all existing proposed buildings and structures within the site and on the lots adjacent thereto. If the total site is greater than two (2) acres, only those buildings and structures located within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed childcare center, parking area and play yard are required to be shown. 
2)  Circulation: Proposed points of access and egress and pattern of internal circulation. 
3)  Parking and loading: Layout of parking spaces. One (1) space for every six (6) children or fraction thereof. In residential zones (R-15, R-10, R-8, R-6, R-6MFA, and PDR zones), off-street parking for the childcare center shall not be located in the front or side yard. The required off-street parking shall be located in the rear yard. The parking lot shall provide a design that all vehicles shall exit the site in a forward moving direction. No parking shall be provided that would necessitate a vehicle backing onto any street right-of-way. Parking spaces provided in the abovementioned zones shall provide an opaque screen to shield view of the parking spaces from any public and/or any adjacent residentially used or zoned properties. Minimum height of said opaque screen shall be six (6) feet. 
g.  Other details requirements: 
1)  Location and extent of open play area. In a residential zone, the play area shall be located in the rear yard. 
2)  Childcare center shall provide one hundred (100) square feet of outdoor play space per pupil. 
3)  Outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a solid or open fence or wall at least four (4) feet in height. Where the outdoor play area is directly adjacent to a residentially used or zoned lot, a solid fence or wall at least six (6) feet high or the maximum applicable fence/wall height limitations, or an open fence at least four (4) feet high and a screen planting designed to grow three (3) feet thick and six (6) feet high, shall be erected. The city council may at its discretion require additional screening and/or fencing to be located adjacent to abutting nonresidential land uses. 
4)  Community centers, schools, churches and institutional uses in residential zones (i.e. A-1, R-15, R-10, R-8, R-6, R-6MFA, R-6 and PDR zones) must comply with the requirements listed in the following subsections (a) and (b). 
a)  The exterior lighting plan is required and shall meet the following guidelines. Exterior lighting shall be less than three thousand (3,000) lumens, including spotlights and floodlights, and shall be angled so that the center of the beam will strike the ground within the property line. Any light with less than three thousand (3,000) lumens may be used without restriction to light distribution or mounting height, except that no spot or flood light may be aimed, directed, or focused such as to cause direct light from the fixture to be directed toward residential buildings on adjacent or nearby land, or to create glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public or private street rights-of-way. 
b)  Noise from activities conducted on the childcare center site shall not exceed a noise level which is clearly audible (eighty-five (85) decibels) at a distance of more than one hundred (100) feet from the child care center lot line, measured in a straight line. 
5)  Childcare centers may not care for more than twenty (20) children at any time between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. The special use permit shall specifically state whether the childcare center will operate between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
11.  Church/religious institution. 
a.  Shall meet the regulation requirements set forth in section 503C., note 18 
12.  College or university. 
a.  Minimum lot area: Three (3) acres. 
b.  Loading: One (1) loading bay for each thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of administrative space and one (1) loading space for the school cafeteria. 
c.  Screening and fencing: Screening and/or fencing may be required at the discretion of the city council. 
d.  Structures: Location and approximate size of all existing and proposed buildings and supporting facilities (e.g. recreational areas, open space areas, etc.) within the site and all buildings and structures within five hundred (500) feet, in addition to public or private easements or rights-of-way adjoining or intersecting such property. 
e.  Proposed pedestrian walkways (paved or unpaved) to all existing and proposed buildings and supporting facilities. 
f.  Other details: 
1)  Location height of all fences, walls and hedges. 
2)  Proposed solid waste storage facilities. 
3)  Projected maximum student enrollment. 
4)  Number of dormitory beds. 
13.  Dwelling, multiple-family. 
a.  Multiple-family dwellings in the office and institutional district shall meet all requirements of section 712(3). 
b.  Multiple-family dwellings developed for use as a senior assisted living facility, senior village, or continuing care retirement community (CCRC) shall be exempt from any play area requirement. 
14.  Funeral homes. 
a.  Screening and fencing: A screen of dense plant material designated to grow at least three (3) feet thick by six (6) feet high and a fence at least three (3) feet high shall be installed where the proposed funeral home site abuts a residential lot or an area zoned for residential purposes. 
b.  Other requirements: The board of adjustment may provide additional requirements as it deems necessary in order to make the proposed project more compatible with adjacent areas and existing or proposed traffic patterns. 
15.  Group care facility. 
a.  Location: Group care facilities shall not be located within a seven hundred fifty (750) foot radius of an existing group care facility; rehabilitation facility (as classified under the previous ordinance); a transient shelter facility; a shelter home for women or families, with or without children; a group home for developmentally disabled adults; or a family care home. 
b.  Parking: One (1) off-street space for every five (5) temporary residents or fraction thereof plus one (1) parking space for each employee on the premises. 
c.  Other requirements: A copy of the license and licensing requirements by the state shall be submitted with the application for the special use permit. 
16.  Reserved. 
17.  Golf course and related uses. 
a.  Supporting uses: Supporting commercial activities shall be designed for patrons of the use only, i.e. restaurant and retail shall be designed only for use by patrons. 
b.  Screening and fencing: Section 704, landscape regulations, apply. Furthermore, the use shall be located so that adjoining properties are not adversely affected by the activity due to noise, glare, traffic or other factors. Additional buffers may be required, when necessary, to mitigate any nuisance caused by the use. 
c.  Setbacks: In addition to district setbacks set forth in See VII.B. Table of area, yard and height requirements, no structure shall be closer than one hundred (100) feet to any residential use. 
18.  Historical preservation commercial use. 
a.  Parking: Layout of adequate parking spaces to meet the standard off-street parking requirements in section 708 of the Land Development Code. 
b.  [Lighting.] All parking areas must be lighted. 
c.  Other requirements: 
1)  In order to be considered for the issuance of a special use permit, the site must be either nominated for or listed on the National Register of Historic Places or included in the "study list," or other document identifying properties eligible for the National Register of Historic Places, compiled by the Division of Archives and History, North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources, or have been previously designated as a local historic landmark or located within a local historic district. 
2)  Any allowed commercial use operated under a historic preservation special use permit must be operated at a property which is listed on or nominated for the National Register of Historic Places or the "study list," or other document identifying properties eligible for the National Register of Historic Places, compiled by the Division of Archives and History, North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources, or have been previously designated as a local historic landmark or located within a local historic district, and may only be open during days and daily hours as approved by the city council. In the determination of the days and daily hours of operation, the city council shall consider, but not be limited to consideration of, the following determining factors: potential of the subject site to support the proposed activity, traffic patterns and volumes, and impact of proposed use on surrounding land uses. 
3)  Only the following uses will be allowed: bed and breakfast; eating or drinking facilities/restaurant (drive-ins excluded); grocery/food sales; health club/spa; hotel; office; recreational amusement conducted inside a building and for profit, and not otherwise listed herein; retailing; school, trade or vocational. As a prerequisite to the establishment and continued operation of eating or drinking facilities (drive-ins excluded), there shall be no noxious odors emitted from the facility as determined by the city council. 
4)  Sign. All proposed signs will conform with section 709 of the Land Development Code. 
5)  The commercial use may occupy up to one hundred (100) percent of the gross floor area of the building in which it is located, provided such building has met the other criteria set forth above in paragraphs 1), 2), 3) and 4), as well as the parking standards and other applicable standards of the City Code. In addition, the city council shall require any proposed alterations to the building's exterior features be reviewed and approved for appropriateness per section 1003 of the Land Development Code to insure that any exterior renovation will not destroy or detrimentally alter the historic or architectural integrity of said building facade. The city council shall utilize the city historical preservation commission in making such a determination. 
19.  Home for the aged. 
a.  Minimum lot area: Minimum lot area of district in which located plus one thousand (1,000) square feet for each person to be accommodated. 
b.  Parking and loading: One (1) space for each regular employee plus one (1) space for each four (4) persons to be accommodated. 
c.  Other requirements: Must meet all requirements for licensing by the State of North Carolina. 
20.  Industrial operations not otherwise listed herein. 
a.  Special use district: IP. The admission of any industry to the park shall be subject to approval by the board of adjustment after recommendation by the planning board; provided, however, that the board shall be uniform in its treatment of each class or kind of building or use in the district. No industry or other business shall be established, maintained or permitted thereon which may be or become an annoyance or nuisance by the reason of unsightliness or the excessive emission of smoke, dust, glare, odor, fumes or vibrations. Determination of whether an industry or business is or may be objectionable for any of the above reasons shall be by the judgment of the board of adjustment. No property shall be used for storage, distribution or sale of a material or products which shall increase the insurance rates over the standard industrial rates set by the insurance services office. 
b.  Minimum IP area: Fifty (50) acres. No buildings or other structures including off-street parking areas shall be built or maintained which in the aggregate cover more than fifty (50) percent of the total industrial park zone. 
c.  Parking and loading: Off-street parking facilities shall be provided for employees, customers and visitors through application of the following ratios: 
1)  One (1) shift-One (1) space for each one and five-tenths (1.5) employees. 
2)  Two (2) or more shifts-One (1) space for each one and five-tenths (1.5) employees, [using] the sum of the two (2) work shifts which constitute the largest work force. 
3)  Plus one (1) space for each managerial employee; one (1) visitor space for each ten (10) managerial staff. 
The parking area may be provided anywhere on the premises except in the minimum front yard. In the event that the side or rear property lines abut residential, medical arts or office-institutional zones, the off-street parking area can extend no closer than twenty-five (25) feet to said zones and a planting screen must be maintained along such property line of such type and height as to obscure from view any vehicles parked thereon. Whenever parking is provided between the front of the building and the required minimum front yard, it shall be screened from the view from the street. The maneuvering of trucks and trailers shall be confined to the premises of each establishment. Minimum requirements for off-street loading facilities shall be one (1) loading space at least ten (10) feet by sixty (60) feet with a fourteen (14) foot height clearance, if covered, for every ten thousand (10,000) square feet, or fraction thereof, of floor area, except that all establishments must have a minimum of one (1) space. Loading bays shall be located only on those sides of the building not facing streets and at least sixty (60) feet from the nearest street right-of-way. Whenever a loading dock is to be located partially or wholly within a building, such loading dock and every part thereof shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from the nearest street right-of-way. The actual depth of such loading dock within the building or structure shall be determined in connection with the building plans or improvement plans. All areas subject to wheeled traffic shall be paved with all-weather surfacing. 
d.  Structures: Location and approximate size of all existing and proposed structures within the site and all buildings and structures within five hundred (500) feet, in addition to all public or private rights-of-way and easements adjoining or intersecting such property. 
e.  Circulation: Proposed points of access and egress and proposed pattern of internal automobile and pedestrian circulation. 
f.  Design of parking and loading: Location and extent of proposed parking and loading areas. Parking areas shall have a stabilized surface with parking space and traffic lanes clearly marked. 
g.  Lighting: Lighting plan, inclusive of wattage and illumination. 
h.  Timing: Proposed schedule of development, including stages likely to be followed. 
i.  Other details: 
1)  Proposed provision for sanitary sewerage, approved by the director of engineering. 
2)  Size and proposed location of any signs. 
3)  Proposed solid waste storage facilities. 
4)  Proposed water system and firefighting facilities such as hydrants or sprinkler connections. 
5)  Types of surfacing; slope, grade and cross-section of drives, sidewalks, malls, etc. 
6)  The location and heights of all fences, walls and hedges shall be shown. 
7)  Complete landscaping plan for the site. 
8)  Type of construction of all structures to be located on the site. 
9)  A report in written form completely describing the manufacturing process, including types of products, raw materials, byproducts, sanitary waste, solid waste, atmospheric emissions, noise levels and proposed employment levels and shift operations. 
10)  Profiles of publicly maintained water and sewer lines. 
11)  Profiles, cross section and slopes of on-site and off-site ditches carrying water runoff. 
12)  Erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
13)  Lighting plan, inclusive of wattage and illumination. 
14)  All plans and construction details must meet the current specifications of the city. 
j.  Other requirements: 
1)  Industrial parks shall be located with direct access to a major arterial and major utilities. 
2)  Points of access and egress shall consist of driveways or roadways at least twenty (20) feet in width and shall be set back a sufficient distance from highway intersections to minimize traffic hazards, inconvenience and congestion. All points of ingress and egress shall be subject to the approval of the traffic engineer. 
3)  The property shall not extend across any major arterial street. 
4)  Building placement: 
a)  Exterior walls of opposite buildings shall be located no closer than a distance equal to the height of the taller building. 
b)  Any courtyard created by the placement of the buildings shall have at least twenty-five (25) percent of its perimeter open for access by emergency vehicles. 
5)  Building setback lines: All building sites shall face an interior (within the industrial park) street. Property facing all streets within the park shall have a building line setback of fifty (50) feet from the street right-of-way. No structures or buildings shall be located closer than thirty (30) feet to any side property line, it being the intent that an open area of at least sixty (60) feet shall exist between all adjacent but separately owned improvements within said industrial park and that adequate protection is ensured to surrounding property owners. No building shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet to any rear lot line of an interior lot. No building shall be located closer than two hundred (200) feet to any exterior line of the IP zone. 
6)  Site requirements: It is hereby declared that said area between the side and rear building lines and property lines is to be used either for open landscaped areas or for off-street parking areas. If said area is to be landscaped, it shall be done attractively with lawn, trees, shrubs, etc., according to plans first approved by the board of adjustment. Any landscaped areas shall be properly maintained thereafter in a sightly and well-kept condition. Parking areas shall likewise be maintained in good condition. The maximum height of any structure shall be regulated as provided in the table of area, yard and height requirements. 
7)  Front yard: Required front yards of building sites shall be maintained in grass, except walks, drives, planting and flagpoles. No driveway parallel to the street shall be permitted in the required minimum front yard. 
8)  Unpaved portion of site: Any area not paved shall be maintained in grass and landscaped, including any such property which may be in a street or utility right-of-way. 
9)  Power used in, or developed or obtained for the operation of, any establishment within the confines of the site shall be confined to electrical or a substantially equivalent type of power using only oil, gasoline, gas or liquid petroleum products or other approved combustible materials in its production, or other products which meet the requirements of the Division of Water and Air Resources, North Carolina Department of Natural and Economic Resources. 
10)  The storage of flammable materials within the industrial park shall conform to the appropriate regulations as set forth by the Fire Prevention Code, 1970 edition, and as subsequently adopted by the board of adjustment. 
11)  No billboards or advertising signs other than those identifying the name, business and products of the person or firm occupying the premises shall be permitted, except that plaques, directional signs and a sign offering the premises for sale or lease may be permitted in accordance with this LDC. 
12)  Signs identifying the industrial park shall be limited to one (1) per industrial park entrance and must be shown by location and size on plans to be approved by the board of adjustment. 
13)  Outside storage shall not be permitted unless it is completely screened from public view by an opaque screen of sufficient height to hide the materials. Finished or semi-finished products and other materials placed temporarily outside of the plant will be placed on the rear half of the property. All fencing for screening, security or other purposes shall be attractive in appearance, well maintained, and shall be of a durable type approved by the board of adjustment. 
14)  All utility lines shall be installed underground, including primary. 
k.  Exceptions. The following industrial uses shall not be allowed: 
1)  The manufacturing, processing, fabrication and/or bulk storage of acetylene gas (except for use on premises) ammunition, explosives, fireworks, gunpowder, jute or matches; 
2)  The manufacturing, processing and/or fabrication of acids (except non-corrosive acids), ammonia, ammonium nitrate, animal by-products, bleaching powder, cellulose, chlorine, creosote and creosote treatment, detergents, enamels, lacquers, linoleum, oilcloth, paints, paper pulp, pigments, lime, plastic, rubber (except tire re-cappers), soaps, tannery products, turpentine, varnishes, whiting and/or wood fillers. The fabrication of plastics is exempt from this prohibition. 
3)  Screening and fencing: May be required at the discretion of the board of adjustment. 
4)  Details: 
a)  The industry shall not emit any undue or unnecessary noise, smoke, dust, odor or electrical interference with radio and TV reception. 
b)  The industry will not generate undue or unnecessary amounts of traffic. 
c)  The intent of the requirements is that the permitted pilot operation will not adversely affect the surrounding area as a whole nor be a detriment to adjoining land uses. 
21.  Industry, pilot operation. 
a.  Parking and loading (Must meet required parking ratios). 
b.  Screening and fencing: May be required at the discretion of the board of adjustment. 
c.  The industry shall not emit any undue noise, smoke, dust, odor or electrical interference with radio and TV reception. 
d.  The industry will not generate undue amounts of traffic. 
e.  The intent of the requirements is that the permitted pilot operation will not adversely affect the surrounding area as a whole nor be a detriment to adjoining land uses. 
22.  Kennel operation. 
a.  A kennel operation which is operated in an A-1 district and is not connected to a public sewer system must provide adequate means of disposing animal wastes, which must be approved by the county health department. 
b.  All animal storage areas must be completely inside a building, except that animal exercise areas may be located outside provided they are only used between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
c.  Where there is a residence on the same tract in an A-1 district, kennels shall be considered an accessory use. Kennels must meet the requirement of this section. 
23.  Landfill, construction/demolition (C&D). 
a.  A site plan shall be submitted illustrating the following: 
1)  Square footage and location of all proposed storage area and buildings. 
2)  All adjacent land uses. 
3)  Points of ingress and egress. 
b.  All storage areas must be setback at least one hundred (100) feet from all exterior lot lines. 
c.  If subject property is adjacent to a residential use, installation and maintenance of a vegetative buffer with fence shall be required. 
d.  Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, applicant shall provide documentation of all applicable permits received from any state agencies. 
24.  Landfill, yardwaste. 
a.  A site plan shall be submitted illustrating the following: 
1)  Square footage and location of all proposed storage areas and buildings. 
2)  Points of ingress and egress. 
b.  All storage areas must be setback at least fifty (50) feet from all exterior lot lines. 
c.  If the subject property is adjacent to a residential use, installation and maintenance of a vegetative buffer with a fence shall be required. 
25.  Library. (Must meet the general criteria for a special use). 
26.  Manufactured home (individual) for residential occupancy; hardship special use. 
a.  Parking: Two (2) spaces for each manufactured home. 
b.  Individual manufactured homes: Manufactured homes, as defined, when used for dwelling purposes may be located only within an approved manufactured home park, R-8, or A-1 zoning lot which does not have another dwelling unit erected on its premises, except when a hardship exception is approved by the board of adjustment as provided below. 
c.  Hardship exception: A temporary certificate of occupancy/compliance for parking a manufactured home for use for dwelling purposes to the rear or side of a dwelling and located on the same residential lot as said dwelling may be issued by the director of development services or designee, in certain hardship cases, where the board of adjustment finds each item below as a fact: 
1)  That the person or persons occupying the manufactured home are physically dependent upon the person or persons occupying all or a portion of the dwelling house, or that the person or persons occupying all or a portion of the dwelling house are physically dependent upon the person or persons occupying the manufactured home; and 
2)  That the person or persons occupying the manufactured home and/or dwelling house cannot, because of financial or other conditions, move to avoid hardship, necessitating parking the manufactured home adjacent to the dwelling house; and 
3)  That the parking of the manufactured home adjacent to the dwelling house will not create unhealthy or unreasonable living standards; and 
4)  That applicable health, sanitation, manufactured home foundation, tie-downs, electrical, and any other applicable LDC and laws are fully met. 
d.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the board of adjustment for parking a manufactured home(s) for dwelling purposes within property owned or leased by the housing authority of the city for the sole purpose of being substitute temporary housing for the public housing residents (tenants) who are displaced from the permanent public housing for the purpose of renovation or rehabilitation of the existing public housing dwelling unit(s). In this specific hardship case, the board of adjustment shall find each item below as a fact: 
1)  That the proposed location of the manufactured home(s) is on property owned or leased by the housing authority of the city upon which there exist a number of dwelling units not to exceed the proposed number of manufactured home(s); and 
2)  That the person or persons occupying the manufactured home are certified and approved by the housing authority of the city as public housing residents; and 
3)  That the relocation of the public housing residents into the manufactured home(s) is due to renovation or rehabilitation of existing public housing units located on the same lot of record as the proposed location of the manufactured home(s); and 
4)  That the standard applicable yard setbacks per section 601. Table 6 of area, yard and height requirements and a minimum twenty (20) foot separation between any two (2) adjacent existing or proposed dwelling units are complied with; and 
5)  That applicable health, sanitation, manufactured home foundation, tie-downs, electrical, and any other applicable LDC and laws are fully met. 
All such certificates of occupancy/compliance shall be valid for a period of eighteen (18) months, after which they shall be renewed only upon a similar finding of facts by the board of adjustment. If, during any time that a certificate of occupancy/compliance is valid and outstanding, any of the foregoing conditions cease to be complied with or the hardship is removed, the certificate of occupancy/compliance shall automatically be revoked and the manufactured home removed. 
27.  Reserved. 
28.  Motel, hotel or motor court. 
a.  Loading: One (1) space for each one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of motel floor area or fraction thereof. 
b.  Screening and fencing: A screen of dense plant material designed to grow at least three (3) feet thick by six (6) feet high and a fence at least three (3) feet high where the proposed site of the motel (hotel) abuts a residential lot or an area zoned for residential purposes. 
c.  Proposed provision for storm drainage approved by the director of engineering; sanitary sewerage approved by director of engineering or county health department, whichever is applicable. 
d.  Proposed solid waste storage facilities. 
e.  Proposed water system and firefighting facilities such as hydrants or sprinkler connections. 
f.  The location and heights of all fences, walls and hedges shall be shown. 
29.  Nursing home. 
a.  Minimum lot area: Minimum lot area of district in which located plus one thousand (1,000) square feet for each person to be accommodated. 
b.  Parking: One (1) space for each regular employee plus one (1) space for each four (4) persons to be accommodated. 
c.  Other requirements: Must meet all requirements for licensing by the State of North Carolina. 
30.  Private recreation club or swimming club, not operated as a business for profit. 
a.  Minimum lot area: Swimming club, one (1) acre for each forty (40) club members (or families). Private nonprofit clubs having only a swimming pool with bathhouse facilities and open only during the swimming season are exempt from the minimum lot area requirement if all activities and facilities (other than parking) are located no closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line. 
b.  Parking: One (1) space for each five (5) members (or families). 
c.  Screening and fencing: The swimming pool area shall be enclosed by fencing not less than five (5) feet in height. 
d.  Other requirements: 
1)  There shall be provided, in any swimming pool, water area at a depth of five (5) feet or less in the ratio of seven and two-tenths (7.2) square feet per member (or family). Water areas deeper than five (5) feet shall not be included as a part of the minimum pool area to satisfy this requirement. 
2)  No improvements, structures, sidewalks or play areas or equipment shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any adjoining property lines. Parking areas may be permitted within twenty (20) feet of any adjoining property line if the above-mentioned twenty (20) foot strip is used for planting designed to grow at least three (3) feet thick and six (6) feet high. 
3)  Adjacent to swimming pools there shall be provided paved patio area(s) in the ratio of two (2) square feet of paving for each square foot of water area that is five (5) feet or less in depth. 
4)  Lights shall be located and shielded so as not to adversely affect adjacent property. 
31.  Reserved. 
32.  Recreation of [or] amusement enterprise (conducted inside a building and for profit, and not otherwise listed herein). 
a.  Location: The lot shall be located a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) feet, measured from lot line to lot line, from an existing single-family dwelling unit. 
b.  Parking: Four and four-tenths (4.4) parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of building area. 
c.  Other requirements: 
1)  The use is limited to physical fitness centers, exercise and weight rooms, health clubs and health spas, and gymnasiums. 
2)  The use is operated on a membership basis and payments for the recreational facilities and services are made on an installment basis of not less than monthly, rather than on any pay for use, hourly, daily, or weekly basis. 
3)  If an outdoor swimming pool is to be provided, it shall be enclosed by a protective fence a minimum of five (5) feet in height. If the fence is not a solid fence, in addition to the fence, an evergreen plant screen of not less than five (5) feet in height shall abut the fence. 
4)  Plans must be approved by the planning board before the special request is submitted to the board of adjustment. 
33.  School: Elementary, junior high and high school. 
a.  Minimum lot area: The minimum lot area for the school shall be computed based upon the highest grade within the school. The minimum lot area shall be as follows: 
1)  Kindergarten through seventh grade-Two hundred (200) square feet of land area per student in all grades. 
2)  Kindergarten through ninth grade-Three hundred (300) square feet of land area per student in all grades. 
3)  Kindergarten through twelfth grade-Four hundred (400) square feet of land area per student in all grades. 
For schools located in A-1, R-15, R-10, R-8, R-6S, R-10, R-6, MHP, PDR, O-I, B-2, B-3, and B-5 zoning districts, the minimum area shall be computed using the total square footage of the lot on which the school is proposed. For schools located in the B-4, Central Business District, the minimum area shall be computed using the gross square footage of the building in which the use is proposed. 
b.  Structures: Location and approximate size of all existing and proposed buildings and structures within the site and on lots adjacent thereto. 
34.  Shelter home for women or families, with or without children. 
a.  Location: A shelter home for women or families, with or without children, shall not be permitted to be located within a seven hundred fifty (750) foot radius of an existing family care home, or group home for developmentally disabled adults, group care facility, transient shelter or rehabilitation facility (as classified under the previous LDC). 
b.  Sign: One (1) sign, not exceeding one (1) square foot in area, which shall be flat-mounted against the building or fence. 
c.  All rehabilitation residences shall be licensed and/or sponsored by the appropriate state or local agency. 
35.  Storage, outdoor & warehouse. Plans are required and must show: Refer to requirements for special use permit-industrial operations Not Otherwise Listed Herein, all outdoor storage shall be enclosed by a six (6) high solid, opaque fence. 
36.  Signs, outdoor advertising (billboards). 
a.  Plans are required and must show: Structure location and approximate size of all existing and proposed structures within the site and three hundred (300) feet there from. Also the plan must show points of access and egress within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed sign location. 
37.  Storage, outdoor and warehouse. Plans are required and must show: Refer to requirements for special use permit-industrial operations not otherwise listed herein, all outdoor storage shall be enclosed by a six (6) high solid, opaque fence. 
38.  Therapeutic community. (Must meet the general criteria for a special use). 
39.  Transient shelter facility. 
a.  Plans are required and must show: 
1)  Structures: Location and size of all existing and proposed buildings and appurtenants on the lot. 
2)  Parking: Two (2) off-street parking spaces. 
3)  Circulation: Proposed points of access and egress and pattern of internal pedestrian circulation. 
b.  Staff: Paid and volunteer staff expected to be needed to operate the facility. 
c.  Hours of operation: Hours which the facility will be available for public use. 
d.  Meals: Meals expected to be served. Indicate whether morning, noon and/or evening meals will be served each day. 
e.  Maintenance: Procedures for keeping the facility and grounds in good order. 
f.  Floor plan: Floor plan of the facility showing the expected use for each room, the capacity of dining area, capacity of sleeping area, number of bathrooms and showers. 
g.  Recreational facilities: If any recreational facilities are to be provided, describe the facilities or activities expected to be provided. 
h.  Counseling service: If counseling service is to be provided, describe the level of expected assistance. 
i.  All special use permits shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months. 
j.  Requests for renewals of a special use permit issued by city council shall be filed with the director. 
k.  If the director determines that the facts of the requested renewal are the same as considered and approved by the city council, he shall notify adjoining property owners of the request for a renewal. If no objections are received from the public, the director shall recommend the special use permit renewal to the city council. 
l.  If the director determines that any of the facts as considered by the city council have changed, or if the director has received written notice of an objection to the renewal, he shall place the special use permit renewal application on the next planning board agenda for the board's consideration. 
40.  Utility station or substation. 
a.  Minimum lot area: One-half (1/2) acre for staffed utility station or substation. Unmanned, equipment-only substations must comply with applicable dimensional requirements if located in an A-1, R-15, R-10, R-8, R-6, or R-6MFA zone. Unmanned, equipment-only substations in PDR, MA, B-1, B-3, and IP districts are exempt from minimum lot area requirements. 
b.  Parking and loading: One (1) space for each regular employee employed primarily at the site at any given time. 
c.  Screening and fencing: A screen of not less than six (6) feet in height of dense plant material shall be provided where the lot abuts a residential lot. Electrical substations shall be enclosed by a fence not less than eight (8) feet in height with three (3) strands of barbed wire turned out at the top. 
d.  Plans are required and must show: 
Structures: Location and approximate size of all existing and proposed structures within the site and all buildings and structures within one hundred (100) feet. 
41.  Wireless communications towers. 
a.  Parking: One (1) off-street parking space. 
b.  Screening/fencing: A solid fence or opaque vegetative screen comprised of approved plant materials shall be shown on the plan and shall be maintained as a condition of the permit. The board of adjustment may modify or waive this requirement based on specific site conditions. A wireless communications tower shall be exempted from the requirements of section 707 parking lot and driveway landscaping, section 707 loading area and HVAC equipment screening regulations and section 707 bufferyard requirements, in the landscaping regulations. 
c.  Security fencing shall be required around all or part of the complex, as determined by the board of adjustment. 
d.  Plans are required and must show: 
1)  Structures: Towers and equipment cabinets are subject to the setbacks of the zoning district in which the tower is located. Towers must be setback far enough to prevent the tower fall zone from encroaching onto adjacent lands. This determination shall be based upon professional engineering certification that the structure's construction will not fall onto the adjacent lots. All supporting cables and anchors must be contained within the property. The proposed location of all anticipated equipment cabinets necessary to support antennas shall be shown on the site plan accompanying the application. 
2)  Structural integrity: Written assurance must be provided at the time of special use permit review, that: (1) the proposed tower will be designed and constructed to accommodate more than one (1) user; and (2) that documentation from a registered engineer will be submitted to certify that the requirement has been met. Documentation from a registered engineer must be submitted (prior to or with application for a building permit for a new tower) indicating that the tower has sufficient structural integrity to accommodate more than one (1) user. This engineering certification of structural integrity of the proposed tower will be required at the time of initial permitting and every five (5) years of use thereafter. 
3)  Utilities: Any utilities that are required to service a new tower site must be placed underground. 
4)  Lighting: Wireless communications towers shall not be illuminated, except as needed for security purposes or as required by the FCC or FAA. Lighting shall not project onto surrounding lots. 
5)  Signage: One (1) business identification sign, not exceeding two (2) square feet, shall be permitted to be attached to a security fence, tower or equipment cabinet, identifying the operating company and emergency telephone number. 
e.  Other requirements: 
1)  Tower appearance: All co-located antennas and accessory equipment must blend with the surrounding buildings in architectural character and/or color. The color of new towers shall be neutral, unless otherwise required by the FAA. 
2)  Obsolete and abandoned towers: The tower owner must provide the city with a copy of the notice to the FCC of intent to cease operations and shall remove the identified obsolete tower and equipment within one hundred eighty (180) days of said notice. 
3)  Towers not used or maintained for one hundred eighty (180) days shall be considered abandoned, whether the owner intends to make use of the tower. Upon final abandonment determination by the director of development services or designee, the property owner shall have one hundred eighty (180) days to either re-establish the approved use, or dismantle and remove the tower. If the tower is not removed within one hundred eighty (180) days, the governing authority may remove such tower at the owner's expense and place a lien upon the property to cover the cost of the removal expenses, if necessary. 
4)  New towers must be designed to handle co-location. The owner must submit a Statement with the permit request indicating that future co-location on the proposed tower will be allowed. 
5)  Area-wide analysis/proof of need: Applicant must attempt to co-locate on existing towers or structures before seeking permission to construct a new tower. Such structures may include existing wireless communications towers, church steeples, transmission line towers, utility/light poles, water towers, etc. When a new wireless communications tower is proposed, documentation shall be required to substantiate why the proposed antenna(s) and/or equipment cannot be accommodated on an existing tower or other structure due to one (1) or more of the following reasons: 
a)  The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of previously approved towers, considering their existing and planned use, and those towers cannot be reinforced to accommodate the planned or equivalent equipment at reasonable cost; or 
b)  The planned equipment would cause RF interference with other existing or planned equipment for these towers, and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost; or 
c)  Previously approved towers do not have space on which the planned equipment can be placed so it can function effectively and reasonably in parity with the existing and/or planned equipment of the present user(s); or 
d)  Other reasons that make it impractical to place the planned equipment on previously approved towers (explain and document in detail). 
f.  Reserved. 
g.  The board of adjustment may require additional conditions, as it deems necessary in order to make the proposed project more compatible with adjacent areas and consistent with long-range plans. 
42.  Youth development center-Approved by city council. 
1.  Youth development centers shall comply with the requirements set forth in the regulations for planned building group. A site plan shall be forwarded to the planning board for approval. 
2.  Maximum number of beds-Forty (40). If the appellant desires to exceed forty (40) beds then appellant must amend their special use permit. If at any time the facility exceeds forty (40) beds, city council approval is required. 
3.  Parking and loading: One (1) space for each regular employee and one (1) space for each four (4) residents. One (1) loading bay required. 
4.  In addition to district setbacks set forth in section 601, Table 6-1: Lot and Yard Dimensional Standards, no structure shall be closer than one hundred (100) feet to any residential use. 
5.  The city council may provide additional requirements as it deems necessary in order to make the proposed project more compatible with adjacent areas and existing or proposed traffic patterns. 
6.  Other requirements: Must meet all requirements for licensing by the State of North Carolina. 
43.  Dormitory. 
1.  Minimum lot area: None. 
2.  Minimum setbacks: All applicable setbacks for the B-2 district. 
3.  Minimum parking: One-half (1/2) space per bedroom. 
4.  Operations: A resident assistant must be on site during hours of operation. 
5.  Screening: All dumpster areas must be screened from public view. 
6.  Lighting: All parking areas must be lighted. 
44.  Recreational vehicle park. 
a.  Area and density. 
1)  The minimum lot area shall be four (4) acres. The park shall be permitted a maximum of thirty (30) recreational vehicle sites. 
2)  Each recreational vehicle site shall have a minimum area of two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet and minimum width of thirty (30) feet at some point on the site. Each recreational vehicle site shall be clearly established by permanent monuments or markers. 
3)  All recreational vehicle sites shall be located at least forty (40) feet from the perimeter of the park boundary. 
4)  Each recreational vehicle shall be setback at least ten (10) feet from any private road within the park. 
5)  The recreational vehicles shall be separated from each other and other structures by at least fifteen (15) feet. Any attached structures, such as awnings, carports, or storage facilities shall be considered part of the vehicle. 
b.  Parking. 
1)  Each site shall accommodate one (1) recreational vehicle and provide two (2) automobile parking spaces meeting the standards set forth in LDC section 708, off-street parking and loading. 
2)  Adequate parking for any accessory use must be provided at a ratio of one (1) parking space per four hundred (400) square feet. 
3)  No roadway parking shall be permitted. 
c.  Recreational area and accessory uses. 
1)  There shall be at least one (1) recreational area not less than ten (10) percent of the total site area. 
2)  The park may provide and operate accessory facilities for the convenience and use of campground residents and their invited guests only. The permitted accessory facilities may include: laundry facilities, concessions, grocery, produce, and retailing. 
d.  Access and site design. 
1)  Roadways, proposed points of ingress and egress, and proposed pattern of internal circulation shall be constructed of asphalt paving meet the minimum design and improvement requirements set forth in LDC chapter 13. 
2)  All water, sewer, electric, and/or natural gas utilities shall be made accessible to each recreational vehicle site in accordance with the requirements set forth in LDC chapter 13. 
3)  A site development plan shall be reviewed and approved in accord with LDC section 712. 
e.  Landscaping and buffering. 
1)  A "Type D," thirty-foot wide landscape buffer, as set forth in LDC section 704, shall be installed along all perimeter property boundaries of the park, including any boundaries adjacent to a public or private right-of-way. A six-feet opaque fence shall be installed where the park abuts a property that has a residential use or residential zoning. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34B, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2005-82, § 2, 9-12-05; Ord. No. 0-2006-1, §§ 5, 6, 1-9-06; Ord. No. O-2006-28, §§ 4d., 4e., 4-24-06; Ord. No. O-08-28, § 5, 4-14-08; Ord. No. O-08-108, § 3, 8-11-08; Ord. No. O-2011-117, § 2, 12-12-11; Ord. No. O-2016-32, § 4, 5-9-16; Ord. No. O-2016-63, § 2, 8-8-16; Ord. No. O-2018-2, § 2, 1-8-18; Ord. No. O-2018-71, § 4, 7-9-18; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 3, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 507. - Accessory uses. 
A.  General. Permitted and approved uses shall be deemed to include accessory uses and accessory structures. Accessory uses and structures will be subject to the same regulations as apply to principal uses and structures in each district, unless otherwise stated in this LDC. Examples of customary accessory uses can be found in the use category descriptions of Table 5-3. 
B.  Accessory uses. Accessory uses, which are permitted by right in zoning districts, shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  In MA, O-I, B-1, B-2, B-3 and B-4 districts, there shall be no outside storage as an accessory use, except for the open display of merchandise for sale in the B-1, B-2, B-3 and B-4 districts provided approval has been granted by the DRC or the planning board as applicable. In B-5 and I-2 districts, outside storage as an accessory use shall be permitted, provided that it is enclosed by a solid, opaque fence not less than six (6) feet in height. The requirements for the solid or opaque fence shall be waived for the open display of merchandise for sale provided approval has been granted by the DRC or planning board as applicable. 
2.  No permanent residential occupancy shall be allowed as an accessory use in MA, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-5, I-1, I-2 and IP districts with the following exception. One (1) permanent dwelling unit may be attached to or included within an office, or portion thereof, strictly limited for residence of a twenty-four (24) hour operator of a mini-storage warehouse or "motel, hotel, or motor court operation." 
3.  [Reserved.] 
4.  Swimming pools as accessory uses in A-1, R-15, R-10, R-8, R-6,, O-I, PUD or B-4 districts shall be enclosed by protective fencing not less than five (5) feet in height. 
C.  Accessory dwellings. When allowed, a single accessory dwelling or apartment may be constructed, provided it meets the following requirements: 
1.  The accessory dwelling shall be self-contained. Both the apartment and the principal dwelling shall contain cooking, living, sleeping and sanitary facilities and shall not contain less than four hundred (400) square feet. 
2.  The accessory dwelling unit is maintained in the same ownership and is located on the same lot as the main dwelling unit. 
3.  The accessory dwelling unit may not be used or occupied by anyone except the property owner, members of the owner's family or caregivers employed on the premises. 
4.  The owner may grant permission for a guest to temporarily use the accessory dwelling; provided the accessory dwelling unit may not be occupied for more than six (6) months in any year by any guest. 
5.  Only one (1) additional unit will be permitted on a single-family lot. 
6.  The accessory dwelling shall not exceed fifty (50) percent the gross floor area of the principal dwelling. 
7.  Every effort should be made to avoid visible changes that indicate the presence of an accessory apartment on the facade that faces the street. 
8.  Necessary modifications to the principal dwelling shall, to the extent possible, conform to the design of the original house. 
9.  One (1) parking space shall be provided to serve the accessory apartment. Tandem parking, where feasible, shall be permitted. 
10.  The accessory dwelling shall not encroach on required yards, nor exceed the minimum lot coverage for the district. For accessory dwellings designed and constructed prior to (insert date), the dwelling unit may not be required to meet the required setbacks, but must be located no closer than five (5) feet from the property line. 
11.  The accessory dwelling must meet the provisions of the Building Code. 
D.  Accessory structures. 
1.  An accessory structure may be erected detached from the principal building or, except when a stable or other structure for housing animals may be erected as an integral part of the principal building. 
2.  An accessory structure attached to the main building shall be made structurally a part and have a common wall with the main building and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this LDC applicable to the principal building. 
3.  Except for open-sided carports, all accessory structures not attached to the main building in a residential district shall be located on the rear one-half (1/2) of the lot and at least ten (10) feet from any dwelling existing or under construction on the same lot or adjacent lot. However garages and accessory buildings to a residential use may be constructed in the rear yard provided they are detached from the primary structure or attached only by a covered walk, carport, porch or similar structure opened on two (2) sides and located no closer than five (5) feet to any adjoining lot line, except on street side yard of a corner lot where the setback shall be one-half (1/2) of the distance of the required front yard setback up to a maximum of twenty (20) feet. Accessory buildings located in a side yard shall meet the requirements for the principal structure in the district in which it is located. 
4.  No accessory structure shall be located closer than five (5) feet to any interior lot line, but such building may be located within five (5) feet of any alley where such alley abuts on the rear line of the lot. In the case of a corner lot, said accessory building shall not project beyond the building line required or existing on the adjacent lot. 
5.  Accessory structures shall not cover more than thirty (30) percent of the area of the rear yard. 
6.  The structure shall not be located in any front yard. The only exception shall be when the lot is over two (2) acres in size, in which case the building may be located in front but not in the required front yard. 
7.  Accessory structures in the rear or side yards of corner lots whose rear or side yards are adjacent to a front yard of the adjacent lot, shall maintain a setback equivalent to the required front yard setback of the adjacent lot and outside the required rear yard of the lot where the accessory building is to locate. 
8.  In residential areas the height of an accessory structure shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet when the building is within ten (10) feet of the property line. 
9.  No accessory structure shall be utilized unless the primary structure is also utilized. 
10.  [Reserved.] 
E.  Satellite or dish antenna. Satellite television or dish antennas of four (4) feet in circumference or larger may only be placed in residential and other zoning districts as follows: 
1.  Residential districts. 
a.  Satellite receiving systems are permitted within the allowable building area of any lot defined by the required front, side, and rear building lines, but shall not be installed in front yards. 
b.  Said structure shall be a minimum of five (5) feet from rear or side yards. 
c.  Said structure shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet from side yards when the installation is on a corner lot. 
d.  Said structure shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any residence on an adjacent lot. 
e.  Said structure shall not exceed the height limitations for structures in the district in which it is located, and shall not be mounted on roofs. 
2.  Nonresidential districts. 
a.  Where placement is adjacent to a residential area, a setback of one (1) foot for each one (1) foot of height shall be required and a screening fence or vegetation buffer be installed. 
b.  Roof-mounted antennas shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from the exterior wall. Roof-mounted applications shall submit supporting documentation to enable a structural analysis of the roof supporting the antenna. 
c.  Roof-mounted antennas shall not be erected near electrical lines. 
Table 5-3: Accessory Uses. 
Primary Use Accessory Use examples Agriculture or farm use Sell of produce, eggs, and livestock. Farm office Airport operations Retail sales and service, warehousing, restaurant Animal medical care Retail sales and service of items related to animal care Automobile service station Retail sales and service, food sales, restaurant Bus station Retail sales and service, food sales, restaurant Beauty/barber shop Retail sales of beauty/barber related items Church/religious institution Retail sales and service, restaurant, kindergarten, assembly, gymnasium College or university Alcohol sales, auditorium, church, gymnasium, food sales, private recreation, museum, medical office, retail sales and service, restaurant, stadium Convenience store Alcohol sales, vehicle car wash, gasoline filling station Fairground activities Retail sales and service, restaurant, assembly, stadium Farmers' market Restaurant Flea market Restaurant Funeral home and crematorium Retail sales and service of items related to function Grocery store Alcohol sales, restaurant, retail sales and service, financial institution Health club, gym, spa Alcohol sales, retail sales and service, restaurant Hospital Retail sales and service, offices (including medical), church, food sales, restaurant, warehousing Kennel operations Retail sales of kennel related supplies. Motel, hotel Assembly rooms, office, alcohol sales, retail sales and service, food sales, restaurant Multifamily dwelling building Assembly, office, restaurant Nursing home Retail sales and service, restaurant Office use, medical Retail sales and service of items related to specific practice Outside storage Retail corral space/enclosed with a fence Parsonage Dwelling used for church pastor or bishop Prison or other detention center Agriculture, food sales, office, retail sales and service, office, assembly, gym, stadium, warehousing, light manufacturing Private recreation and swimming Alcohol sales, retail sales and service, restaurant Public recreation and swimming Alcohol sales, retail sales and service, restaurant Restaurant Retail sales and service School After school, assembly, gym, recreation area, restaurant, stadium Theatre production Alcohol sales, restaurant, retail sales and service Therapeutic community Retail sales and service, food sales, restaurant, assembly rooms, office, gym  
F.  Nonresidential vehicles and trailers. It is the intent of this section to prohibit the parking of certain vehicles and trailers on residential properties and in residential neighborhoods utilizing the requirements below. It is not the intent of this section to prohibit vehicles, regardless of size or gross vehicle weight from performing emergency work, and construction or maintenance for residents provided this work is of a short duration. 
1.  License required. No nonresidential mobile trailer shall be permitted in the city unless a license for its operation is issued by the city clerk. Such license shall specify the permitted use of the nonresidential mobile trailer, the location of such operation and the termination date of the permit. No license shall be used for a use, which would violate city, state, or federal LDC, law or regulation. 
2.  Exemption for construction trailers. Operation of nonresidential trailers by contactor on construction projects for which building trades permits have been issued or which are otherwise approved by governmental units is permitted during the term of such construction project without issuance of a license. 
3.  Caretakers or watchman. Operation of a nonresidential trailer for the explicit use of a caretaker or night watchman on a permanent basis is permitted provided all other regulations of this LDC are complied with. 
4.  Camping or vacation trailer. A camping or vacation trailer not exceeding eight (8) feet in width, and thirty-five (35) feet in length may be stored in the rear yard on any lot, provided that no living quarters shall be maintained or any business conducted in connection therewith while such trailer or mobile home is so parked or stored. 
5.  Commercial vehicles and trailers. The parking of vehicles and/or trailers in excess of twenty-five (25) feet in length, or ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) shall be prohibited on properties in a residential zone, with the following exceptions: 
a.  Commercial vehicles and/or trailers directly associated with and parked onsite of an allowed nonresidential use in a residential district; 
b.  Associated with or actively engaged in performing an emergency service or public utility first response; 
c.  Being actively loaded or unloaded; or 
d.  Commercial vehicles associated with an active construction or maintenance project for which building trades permits have been issued or which are otherwise approved by governmental units, provided no parking takes place beyond a period of forty-eight (48) hours within a thirty-day period. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2018-71, § 5, 7-9-18) 
Sec. 508. - Temporary uses. 
A.  Authority to approve. Temporary uses are prohibited, except that the director of development services or designee shall have the authority and responsibility to grant permits for certain temporary uses as provided in this section. 
B.  Definition. A temporary use is a use of property conducted from an area, structure or facility that does not require a building permit from the city and which may not comply with the use or dimensional standards of this LDC. Such area, facility area, facility, or structure may include parking lots, lawns, trucks, tents or other temporary structures. 
C.  Time limit. Temporary uses will be permitted for a maximum period as established below in subsection H., temporary use types. Upon expiration of a temporary use permit, another permit for the same premises may not be obtained for a period of at least ninety (90) days. 
D.  Permit required. A permit must be obtained from the inspection services administrator before establishment of a temporary use. Any temporary use must meet the requirements of this LDC and the requirements of the building code. 
E.  Application. An application for a temporary use permit shall include the following: 
1.  A written description of the proposed use or event, the duration of the use or event, the hours of operation, anticipated attendance, and any buildings/structures signs or attention-attracting devices used in conjunction with the event, as well as a response to each of the criteria established in subsection. 
2.  A sketch plan showing the location of proposed structures (including onsite rest rooms and trash receptacles), parking area, activities, signs and attention attracting devices in relation to existing buildings, parking areas, streets and property lines; 
3.  Written confirmation from the property owner agreeing to the temporary use; 
4.  Any additional information deemed necessary by the inspection services administrator. 
F.  Procedure. The application for a temporary use permit must be submitted to the office of the director of development services or designee. No application will be processed until the complete application is submitted, including the required fee, in accordance with the city's fees and charges schedule. The application shall be returned to the applicant for revision as necessary until all requirements of this LDC are accomplished. 
G.  Review and action by director of development services or designee. 
1.  Application should be made at least ten (10) days in advance of the request start date for a temporary use. 
2.  The director of development services or designee shall make a determination whether to approve, approve with conditions or deny the permit within five (5) working days after the date of application. Any applicant denied a permit by the inspection services administrator should be notified in writing of the reasons for the denial and of the opportunity to appeal the denial to the board of adjustment. 
H.  Temporary use types. Temporary uses shall be deemed to include short-tem or seasonal uses that are not otherwise allowed by the regulations of this LDC. The following uses and activities shall be considered temporary uses. 
1.  Residential. 
a.  Fundraising activities (non-profit). Fundraising or noncommercial events for nonprofit religious, educational or community service organizations where the public is invited to participate in the activities and which last not longer than forty-eight (48) hours. This description shall not preclude the use of existing religious institutions or other not-for-profit or nonprofit facilities for events conducted entirely within a building, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
2.  Non-residential. 
a.  Business promotional events. Promotional activities lasting not longer than ten (10) days intended to attract attention to a specific place, business, organization, event or district, through the use of signs and attention attracting devices, as determined by the director of development services or designee. 
b.  Special and seasonal sales events. Significant commercial activities lasting not longer than thirty (30) days intended to sell, lease, rent or promote specific merchandise, service or product lines, including but not limited to warehouse sales, tent sales, trade shows, flea markets, farmers' markets (including horticultural products), Christmas tree lot sales, product demonstration or parking lot sales of food, art work or other goods (non-profit sale events are exempt). 
1)  Special and seasonal sales events shall only be conducted as part of an existing, operating, allowable and permanent business use which is in a permanent structure (farmer's market/produce and Christmas tree sales shall be exempt from this requirement). 
2)  The frequency at a location for special or seasonal sales event shall be limited to six (6) times during a calendar year. 
3)  An itinerant merchant (as defined in the Code) shall be limited to five (5) special or seasonal sales events in a calendar year. 
c.  Commercial entertainment or amusement events. Short-term cultural and entertainment events operating on a non profit basis including public or private events lasting not longer than forty-five (45) days. 
I.  Temporary use approval criteria. Temporary uses shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Land use compatibility. The temporary use must be compatible with the purposes and intent of this LDC and the zoning district in which it will be located. The temporary use shall not impair the normal, safe, and effective operation of a permanent use on the same site. The temporary use shall not endanger or be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to property or improvements in the immediate vicinity of the temporary use, given the nature of the activity, its location on the site, and its relationship to parking and access points. 
2.  Compliance with other regulations. A building permit or temporary certificate of occupancy may be required before any structure used in conjunction with the temporary use is constructed or modified. All structures and the site as a whole shall meet all applicable building code, zoning district, and fire code standards and shall be promptly removed upon the cessation of the use or event. Upon cessation of the event or use, the site shall be returned to its previous condition (including the removal of all trash, debris, signage, attention attracting devices or other evidence of the special event or use). 
3.  Hours of operation and duration. The duration and hours of operation of the temporary use shall be consistent with the intent of the event of use and compatible with the surrounding land uses. The director of development services or designee shall establish the duration and hours of operation at the time of approval of the temporary use permit. 
4.  Traffic circulation. The temporary use shall not cause undue traffic congestion or accident potential given anticipated attendance and the design of adjacent streets, intersections and traffic controls. 
5.  Off-street parking. With exception for the central business district adequate off-street parking shall be provided for the temporary use in all other zoning districts, and it shall not create a parking shortage for any of the other existing uses on the site. 
6.  Public conveniences and litter control. Adequate onsite restroom facilities shall be required. Adequate onsite solid waste containers shall also be required. The applicant shall provide a written guarantee that all litter generated by the event or use shall be removed at no expense to the city. 
7.  Appearance and nuisances. The temporary use shall be compatible in intensity, appearance and operation with surrounding land uses in the area, and it shall not impair the usefulness, enjoyment or value of adjacent property due to the generation of excessive noise, dust, smoke, glare, spillover lighting, or other forms of environment or visual pollution. 
8.  Signs and attention-attracting devices. The director of development services or designee shall review all signage in conjunction with the issuance of the permit. The inspection services administrator may approve the temporary use of attention attracting devices. The number and types of signs and attention-getting devices allowed shall be evaluated on the following criteria: 
a.  The type and size of the proposed event or use; 
b.  Safety considerations (sight distance setbacks, sidewalks in area etc); 
c.  Lighting considerations (disturbance or nearby residents or adverse affects to traffic on adjacent streets); and 
d.  Aesthetic concerns (appearance, illumination, number and size of signs and attention-getting devices proposed). 
9.  Other conditions. The director of development services or designee may establish any additional conditions deemed necessary to ensure land use compatibility and to minimize potential adverse impacts on nearby uses, including, but not limited to, time and frequency of operation, temporary arrangements for parking and traffic circulation, requirements for screening/buffering, and guarantees for site restoration and cleanup following the temporary use. Conditions may include, but shall not be limited to: 
a.  Modifications or restrictions to the hours of operation, duration of the event, size of the activity or other operational characteristics. 
b.  The posting of a performance bond to help ensure that the operation of the event or use and the subsequent restoration of the site are conducted according to required stipulations. 
c.  If the permit applicant requests the city to provide extraordinary services or equipment or if the director of development services or designee otherwise determines the extraordinary services (e.g., traffic control or security personnel) or equipment should be provided to protect the public health or safety, the applicant shall be required to pay to the city a fee sufficient to reimburse the city for the cost of these services if not provided by the applicant. 
d.  Obtaining liability and personal injury insurance in such form and amount as the director of development services or designee finds necessary to protect the safety and general welfare of the community. 
J.  Specific temporary use standards. 
1.  [Reserved.] 
2.  Temporary religious services. Temporary facilities for religious services (such as tent revivals) shall ensure provisions for parking do not infringe on the surrounding residential neighborhood. In addition, restrictions on hours of operation may be imposed to ensure compatibility with neighboring uses. 
3.  Church, temporary disaster recovery housing. Temporary housing under post-disaster conditions shall be allowed as an accessory use to a church, subject to the following: 
a.  The temporary housing use must follow a presidentially-declared disaster that directly affected property in Rocky Mount's planning jurisdiction. 
b.  Temporary housing must be located on the active primary church site of the sponsoring church, not at a remote location owned by the sponsoring church. 
c.  Temporary housing is permitted only for visiting workers from outside the Twin County area who are actively involved in reconstruction activities related to the specific qualifying disaster. 
d.  A sponsoring church must apply for and receive a certificate of occupancy for the housing activity, including a review of applicable information and scheduling of required inspections. Application must include the maximum number of persons to be housed at the facility at one (1) time, whether meals are to be prepared/served regularly, an on-site parking plan designating spaces reserved for recovery workers and for church functions, to ensure adequate on-site parking for all activities, and other information deemed necessary. 
4.  All applicable fire and building safety codes apply for the temporary housing occupancy. 
5.  Any temporary structure(s) must be located to minimize view from the public street and the front yard and must be removed from the site within thirty (30) days of expiration of the temporary housing certificate or within thirty (30) days of cessation of the temporary housing use. 
6.  A temporary housing certificate is valid for six (6) months from the date of issuance, but shall be renewed for up to four (4) three (3) month intervals following the initial certificate. Renewal shall be made only upon a finding by the city inspections services office that the magnitude of consistent reconstruction activity requires the continued use of the church facilities. 
7.  The temporary housing use must be vacated within thirty (30) days of a determination by the city that the disaster-related recovery work by the tenants is substantially concluded. 
K.  Appeal. Appeals of temporary use permits denied by the director of development services or designee shall be taken to the board of adjustment within thirty (30) days of mailing of the denial, in accordance with procedures in this LDC. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2009-101, § 2, 9-14-09; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 3, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 509. - Zoning variance provisions. 
A.  Applicability. The board of adjustment is authorized to grant variances from the zoning district provisions, dimensional standards and off-street parking and loading standards of this LDC that will not be contrary to the public interest or the spirit of this LDC where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this LDC would result in unnecessary physical (not economic) hardship to the property owner. Appeals from the director's decision to approve or deny an administrative adjustment application shall be considered as a variance before the board. The board shall have authority to grant variances from the stormwater management regulations as set forth in chapter 8 of this LDC. 
B.  Application. An application for a variance shall be submitted to the director, along with such accompanying material as is required to ensure compliance with the criteria in subsection D. below. 
C.  Review and action by board of adjustment. The board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing on the variance request, and, at the close of the public hearing act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application based on the review criteria set out in this subsection A. concurring vote of at least four-fifths ( 4/5 ) of the members of the board of adjustment shall be required to approve any variance request. 
D.  Review criteria. A variance may be granted by the board of adjustment upon an affirmative finding that all of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The requested variances arises from conditions that are unique to the subject property, that are not ordinarily found in the same zoning district and that are not a result of the owner's intentional action; 
2.  The granting of the permit for the variance will not adversely affect the rights of adjacent property owners or residents; 
3.  The strict application of the applicable standards will constitute an unnecessary physical hardship (not economic hardship) or practical difficulty because the property cannot be used for an otherwise allowed use without coming into conflict with applicable site development standards. 
4.  The variance is the minimum action necessary to alleviate the hardship or practical difficulty and observes the spirit of this LDC; and 
5.  The variance desired will not adversely affect the public health, safety or general welfare or impair the purposes or intent of this LDC or the comprehensive plan. 
E.  Findings of fact. The board of adjustment shall make a determination on each approval criterion and enter its findings in the official record. Findings of fact shall be based on evidence presented at the public hearing on the variance request. 
F.  Use variances prohibited. The board of adjustment may not grant use variances, which are variances that have the effect of allowing a use within a specific zoning district that is not allowed by the use tables of section 503. 
G.  Variance affecting rights-of-way prohibited. The board of adjustment may not grant a variance that will have the effect of allowing a structure to extend into a public right-of-way or easement. 
H.  Variance findings. 
1.  Variances to zoning provisions. 
a.  The board of adjustment shall be responsible for reviewing and taking final action to approve, approve with conditions or deny any zoning provision variance application, not including a use variance. A zoning variance may be granted to authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms and requirements of the zoning provisions as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of the zoning LDC will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of this LDC shall be observed and substantial justice done. In considering all proposed variances to this LDC the board shall, before making any finding in a specified case, first determine that the proposed variances will not constitute any change in the district boundaries shown on the zoning map and will not impair any adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property or materially increase the public danger of fire and to safety, or physical attributes of property within the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the public health, safety and general welfare. 
b.  In granting a zoning provision variance the Board may impose thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure or use as it may deem advisable in furtherance of the purposes of this LDC. Before such a variance is granted it shall be shown that special circumstances attach to the property that are unique and do not generally apply to other property in the neighborhood. A zoning provision variance may be granted only when the practical difficulty of undue or unnecessary hardship complained of is due to the particular characteristics of the property, are not self-imposed by the applicant and are not general conditions of the neighborhood which may reflect a stringency of the LDC itself. A hardship peculiar to the applicant's property as distinguished from others affected by the general rule must be shown. 
c.  The board may grant a variance in the dimensional yard requirements of this LDC only where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific piece of property, or where due to the topographical conditions of a piece of property the strict application of the said dimensional requirements of this LDC would result in practical difficulties or undue or unnecessary hardship of such nature as described in the preceding paragraph. 
d.  The Board may grant a variance from the required dimensional yard setback to permit construction of handicap access facilities (walk, ramp, etc.) per the North Carolina State Building Code provided such facilities are not enclosed within the standard required yard setback. The variance shall be granted for relief of greater than fifty (50) percent of the required dimensional yard setback. The Board shall consider that no handicap access facility alternative to the building is feasible and vehicular access to the rear and front yards will not be prohibited if a variance is granted. Relief of less than fifty (50) percent of the required dimensional yard setback may be granted by the director of development services or designee in accordance with Section 603. 
2.  Zoning variance findings. Before the board of adjustment may grant a variance it shall make the following three (3) findings, which shall be recorded in the permanent record of the case, and shall include the factual reasons on which they are based: 
a.  There are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the LDC. In order to determine that there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships, the board must find that the following five (5) conditions exist: 
1)  If the provisions of the LDC are complied with, a variance will only be granted if the applicant can secure no reasonable return from, nor make reasonable use of, the property. Merely proving that the variance would permit a greater profit to be made from the property will not be considered adequate to justify the Board in granting a variance. Moreover, the Board shall consider whether the variance is the minimum possible deviation from the terms of the LDC that will make possible the reasonable use of the property. 
2)  The hardship results from the application of the LDC to the property rather than from other factors such as deed restrictions, personal actions, personal circumstances or other hardship. 
3)  The hardship is due to the physical nature of the applicant's property, such as its size, shape, or topography, which is different from that of neighboring property. 
4)  The hardship is not the result of the actions of an applicant who knowingly or unknowingly violates the LDC, or who purchases the property after the effective date of the LDC and then comes to the board for relief. 
5)  The hardship is peculiar to the applicant's property, rather than the result of conditions that are widespread or common to adjoining owners or the general public. If the properties were equally subject to the hardship created in the restriction, then granting a variance would be a special privilege denied to others, and would not promote equal justice. 
b.  The variance is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the LDC and preserves its spirit. 
c.  In the granting of the variance, the public safety and welfare have been assured and substantial justice has been done. The board shall not grant a variance if it finds that doing so would in any respect impair the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
1)  In granting the variance, the board may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed building, structure, or use as it may deem advisable in furtherance of the purpose of this LDC. If a variance for the construction, alteration of use of property is granted, such construction, alteration or use shall be in accordance with the approved site plan. 
2)  The board of adjustment shall refuse to hear an appeal or an application for a variance previously denied if it finds that there have been no substantial changes in conditions or circumstances bearing on the appeal or application. 
3)  A variance, issued in accordance with this section, shall expire when the building permit for such use has not been obtained by the applicant within six (6) months from the date of the decision. 
4)  The board of adjustment shall keep a record of all projects for which it grants a variance. A description of each project receiving a variance by the Board during the previous calendar year and the reason for granting the variance shall be submitted to the division of environmental management on or before the first day of January of the following year. 
5)  If the application calls for the granting of a variance, and if the board of adjustment decides in favor of granting the variance, the board shall prepare a preliminary record of the hearing with all deliberate speed. The preliminary record of the hearing shall include: 
a)  The variance application; 
b)  The hearing notices; 
c)  The evidence presented; 
d)  Motions, offers of proof, objections to evidence, and rulings on them; 
e)  Proposed findings and exceptions; 
f)  The proposed decision, including all conditions proposed to be added to the permit. 
The fact that property may be utilized more profitably will not be considered as a justification for granting a zoning variance by the Board. 
3.  Variances, adult establishments. The Board of Adjustment shall consider all requests for variances in the separation requirements for adult establishments. All of the provisions of subsection 2. above, "variance findings", generally, shall apply to a request for a variance in the separation requirements. In addition, the board of adjustment shall grant such variance only when it finds: 
a.  The proposed use will not be injurious to property values in the affected area; 
b.  The proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a "skid row" area; 
c.  The permitting of an adult establishment in the area will not be contrary to any governmental program of neighborhood conservation, rehabilitation, improvements, or revitalization; 
d.  The proposed use shall be in harmony with the existing uses in the surrounding area; and 
e.  All other applicable provisions of this zoning LDC will be observed. 
4.  Variances, watershed protection. The board of adjustment shall consider all requests for variances from the watershed protection provisions of chapter 8 of this LDC. The board shall have the power to authorize, in specific cases, minor variances from the terms of this LDC as will not be contrary to the public interests where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this LDC will result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this LDC shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. The director or the director's designee shall notify in writing each entity using the Rocky Mount water supply for consumption, as well as each local government having jurisdiction in the watershed. Such notice shall include a description of the variance being requested. Local governments receiving notice of the variance request may submit comments to the inspector prior to a decision by the board. Such comments shall become a part of the record of proceedings of the board. In addition, the city shall notify and allow a reasonable comment period for all entities using the Rocky Mount water supply for water consumption, as well as all other local governments having jurisdiction in the designated watershed where the variance is being considered. Applications for a variance shall be made on the proper form obtainable from the [director of development services or designee] and shall include the following information: 
a.  A site plan, drawn to a scale of at least one (1) inch to forty (40) feet, indicating the property lines of the parcel upon which the use is proposed; any existing or proposed structures; parking areas and other built-upon areas; and surface water drainage. The site plan shall be neatly drawn and indicate north point, the name and address of person who prepared the plan, the date of the original drawing, and an accurate record of any later revisions. 
b.  A complete and detailed description of the proposed variance, together with any other pertinent information that the applicant feels would be helpful to the board of adjustment in considering the application. 
c.  The preliminary record shall be sent to the environmental management commission for its review as follows: 
1)  If the commission concludes from the preliminary record that the variance qualifies as a variance and that (a) the property owner can secure no reasonable return from, nor make any practical use of the property unless the proposed variance is granted, and (b) the variance, if granted, will not result in a serious threat to the water supply, then commission shall approve the variance with conditions and stipulations. The commission shall prepare a Commission decision and send it to the board of adjustment. If the commission approves the variance as proposed, the board shall prepare a final decision granting the proposed variance. If the commission approves the variance with conditions and stipulations, the board shall prepare a final decision, including such conditions and stipulations, granting the proposed variance. 
2)  If the commission concludes from the preliminary record that the variance qualifies as a major variance and that (a) the property owner can secure a reasonable return from or make a practical use of the property without the variance or (b) the variance, if granted, will result in a serious threat to the water supply, then the commission shall deny approval of the variance as proposed. The commission shall prepare a commission decision and send it to the board of adjustment. The board shall prepare a final decision denying the variance as proposed. 
5.  Basis for decision. Variances shall only be issued upon all the following findings, which shall be referenced in the board's decision: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in unnecessary hardship; 
c.  A determination that the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood height, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud or victimization of the public, or conflict with the existing laws or LDC, taking into account the criteria of this LDC. 
I.  Expiration and lapse of approval. Property owners shall have six (6) months from the date of approval of a variance to secure a building permit to carry out the proposed improvements. If a building permit has not been obtained within six (6) months of the date of Variance approval, the approval variance shall lapse and be of no further effect. 
J.  Administrative decisions. Where it is alleged that there is any error in any order, decision or requirements of the director or the director's designee(s), the board shall have the power to hear and decide any appeal relating to the zoning provisions of this LDC taken from the order, decision or requirement of the director or the director's authorized agents. A concurring vote of ten (10) members of the board shall be required to reverse any order, decision or determination of the director of development services, or authorized agents, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter which the board is required to pass under the provisions of this LDC, or to grant any variations in this LDC. In all matters where appeal powers have not been specifically assigned to the planning board or city council, the board of adjustment shall be responsible for hearing appeals of administrative decisions and for taking the final action to uphold or overturn. 
1.  In exercising its powers, the board may, in conformance with the provisions of this LDC, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decisions or determinations as ought to be made and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
2.  In considering all appeals from rulings made under this LDC, the board shall, in making its findings on any specific case, consider any applicable plans and policies of the city, including the comprehensive plan, and determine the effect of the proposed change upon adjacent property, the congestion of the public streets, the public safety from fire and other hazards, and any other factors relating to the public health, safety, comfort, morals and general welfare of the people of the city. 
3.  Every ruling made upon any appeal to the Board shall be accompanied by a written finding of fact based upon the testimony received at the hearing afforded by the board, and shall specify the reason for granting or denying the appeal. 
4.  The board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administration official charged with the enforcement of this LDC. Appeals shall be taken within times prescribed by the board of adjustment by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal, specifying with grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment after notice of appeal has been filed, that because of facts stated in the certification a stay would, in staff's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property or that because the violation charged is transitory in nature a stay would seriously interfere with the enforcement of the LDC. In that case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give due notice thereof to the parties, and decide it within a reasonable time. The board of adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and shall make any order, requirement, decision or determination that in its opinion ought to be made in the premises. To this end, the board shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2009-107, § 3, 10-12-09; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 3, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 510. - Appeal of administrative officer's decision. 
A.  Applicability. Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or commission of the city affected by any zoning related decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the city clerk at the time the notice if filed. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. 
B.  Effect of appeal. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in staff's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order, which may bee granted by the board of adjustment or by a court record on application and notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on the cause shown. 
C.  Review and action by board of adjustment. 
1.  The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the public hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
2.  The board of adjustment shall grant to the administrative official's decision a presumption of correctness, placing the burden of persuasion of error on the appellant. 
3.  In exercising the appeal power, the board of adjustment shall have all the powers of the official from whom the appeal is taken, and the board of adjustment may reverse of affirm wholly or partly or may modify the decision being appealed. 
4.  If the board of adjustment determines that it is necessary to obtain additional evidence in order to resolve the matter, it shall remand the appeal to the official from whom the appeal is taken, with directions to obtain such evidence and to reconsider the decision light of such evidence. 
5.  A concurring vote of ten (10) of the members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative official. 
D.  Review criteria. An appeal shall be sustained only if the board of adjustment finds that the administrative official erred factually in the decision. 
E.  Findings of fact. Every decision of the board of adjustment shall be accompanied by written findings of fact specifying the reason for the decision. These findings shall be filed in the office of the board of adjustment within ten (10) days after the final action. 
Sec. 511. - Rehearing and appeal. 
A.  Rehearing. Rehearing of an action by the board shall be conducted in accordance with the BOA rules and procedures manual. Such rehearing requires only a simple majority vote to approve or deny an application or petition. 
B.  Superior court appeal from decision of the board of adjustment. Any person or persons aggrieved by a decision of the board of adjustment or city council may, within thirty (30) days after the date of the decision of the board or council is filed in the department of development services or a written copy thereof delivered to the appellant by personal service or registered mail, whichever is later, but not thereafter, present to the Superior Court of Edgecombe or Nash County a petition for a writ of certiorari, duly verified, setting forth that such a decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of illegality, whereupon such a decision of the board or council shall be subject to review as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 2, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 512. - Zoning map or text amendment. 
A.  Procedure. 
1.  Amendment by own motion. The city council may from time to time amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the boundaries or regulations herein or subsequently amended. This may be done on the council's own motion or as a result of a recommendation after a public hearing as prescribed below. 
2.  Amendment by petition. The city council may also desire to take such action as a result of a petition presented by a private citizen in accordance with the following procedures. An owner or a duly authorized agent or representative may petition by submission of an application for the amendment of this LDC by filing an application with the director. Such petition along with an application fee, which shall be as established by resolution of the city council and published in the city's manual of city policies, shall be presented to the secretary of the planning board at least ten (10) working days prior to the planning board meeting at which the petition will be heard, not including the date of the hearing. The amendment petition shall contain such information, and shall be presented in such a manner specified by the planning board. No refund of the application fee shall be made unless the petition is withdrawn prior to the planning board hearing. The planning board, after studying the petition, shall prepare a recommendation and submit the same to the city clerk for consideration by city council. Upon receipt of an affirmative recommendation of the planning board to amend the zoning classification with respect to any property or to otherwise amend the zoning LDC of the city, the city clerk shall cause to be published a notice of a public hearing on such proposed change as prescribed by law. Notice of such public hearing shall be given once a week for two (2) successive calendar weeks in a newspaper published in the city. The first such notice shall be published the first time no less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty-five (25) days before the date fixed for the hearing. Such period shall be computed in compliance with N.C.G.S. § 1-594, and shall not be subject to Rule 6(a) of the North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure. In computing the ten (10) day and twenty-five (25) day periods, the date of publication shall be excluded and the date of the hearing shall be included. In cases where the applicant has not submitted the petition by the required date prior to the hearing, he may request the planning board to waive the submission date and consider the petition. Under this procedure, the applicant shall state to the board the nature of the request. The board shall then determine from the secretary whether or not a review of the request has been completed and if the secretary is ready with a recommendation on the applicant's petition. Upon receipt of this information, the board will then vote on the question to waive the submission date deadline requirement. Upon a unanimous affirmative vote of the board, the submission date deadline will be waived and the request will be heard. An affirmative vote to hear the request will not prevent the board from tabling the request in the event that the Board determines it is desirable to do so. The city council will, before rejecting a recommendation of the planning board regarding a request for amendment to this LDC, discuss the recommendation at a joint meeting with the planning board according to a format approved by both the planning board and the city council. Such joint meeting between the city council and the planning board will be held at the beginning of the first regular meeting of the planning board following the public hearing at which the amendment to the LDC was considered or at such other time as the planning board and the city council may determine. 
3.  Time limit between similar petitions. When a petition for a zoning amendment has been denied by city council, no petition requesting the same or essentially the same amendment/conditions which affects the same property or a portion thereof, shall be considered within a period of twelve (12) months, unless the facts and circumstances applying to such case have substantially changed. The twelve (12) month period shall apply regardless of whether the proposed amendment is filed by the same or different petitioner(s). 
4.  Changes and amendments to watershed protection provisions. No amendments, supplements, or changes which would cause this LDC to violate the watershed protection rules adopted by the North Carolina Environmental Management Commission shall be adopted by the city. All amendments to this LDC relating to public water supply watershed protection shall be filed with the North Carolina Division of Environmental Management, the North Carolina Division of Environmental Health and the North Carolina Division of Community Assistance. 
5.  [Covenants.] An applicant may voluntarily submit private covenants for any and all conditions, covenants, deed restrictions and similar limitations regarding the future use of the property. Enforcement of said private covenants and/or restrictions shall not be enforced by the city. 
6.  [Amendment application.] An owner or a duly authorized agent or representative may make application for the amendment of the text of this LDC by filing an application with the director. 
B.  Hearing and recommendation by planning board. After notice and public hearing, the planning board shall vote to recommend to the city council that the amendment be approved as submitted, or be approved subject to modification; or recommend to the city council that the amendment be denied. The planning board has thirty (30) days to take action on such request. If the planning board has taken no action after thirty (30) days then city council may act on the request without a recommendation from the planning board. 
C.  Hearing and action by city council. 
1.  The application shall be transmitted to the city council with the report and recommendation of the planning board at the next scheduled second (2nd) Monday of the month regular city council meeting. 
2.  The city council shall hold a hearing on each application. Following the public hearing, the city council shall approve as submitted, or approve the application subject to modification, or deny the application based upon the criteria below. 
D.  Protest of approval. If a protest against a zoning map amendment is filed three (3) days before the time of the scheduled public hearing by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of the areas of the lots included in such proposal, or five (5) percent of one hundred (100) foot perimeter buffer, such amendment shall become effective by the favorable vote of four-fifths ( 4/5 ) of all the members of the city council. 
E.  Review criteria. 
1.  Zoning districts designations should give consideration to their impacts upon adjacent property and existing land uses. 
2.  Transportation access and vehicular traffic generated must be considered when determining the most appropriate zoning district designation. 
3.  Downzoning to a less intensive use might be recommended in certain areas where the character of development has already changed or will change over time giving consideration to the existing zoning districts classification and resulting permitted land uses which have been in effect for twenty (20) years. 
4.  Land uses should be consistent with the Land Use Element of the Rocky Mount Comprehensive plan and adopted sub-area plans. 
5.  Public schools and parks should be located, as practically and economically feasible, near the clients served and with consideration given to both vehicular and pedestrian access. 
6.  Agricultural land uses should be located at the edge or fringe areas of Rocky Mount so potential land use conflicts can be minimized and so agricultural and other associated uses can be protected from encroaching urban uses. 
7.  High impact uses that create large amounts of noise, odor, traffic, or other forms of identified and verified nuisances on residential land uses should be located as far as possible from residential neighborhoods or, as an alternative, positive measures must be taken to mitigate negative impacts on nearby neighborhoods. 
8.  Commercial and industrial land uses, when located along major transportation entrance corridors to Rocky Mount, shall give care and concern for appearance, design, visual impact and traffic safety. 
9.  Spot zoning, the zoning of a small individual parcel of land different form the majority of other zoning district classifications in the surrounding area, shall be discouraged. 
10.  Single-family residential land uses should include small lots, medium sized lots, and provisions for large estate type lots, and all primary residential uses within neighborhoods should back or side onto arterial streets in order to encourage quiet, safe, and low-volume localized movements. 
11.  Higher intensity land uses should be strategically placed and developed with design features that utilize increased setbacks, landscaping, berms, fencing, buffers uses, and other separations to be compatible with low intensity development. 
12.  Large community-serving shopping areas, major retail and service activities should be located at the intersection of arterial or collector streets. 
F.  Concurrent amendment of future land use map. The city council may process a concurrent amendment to the Future Land Use Map of the Comprehensive Plan, provided that at least one (1) of the following criteria has been met: 
1.  Changed projections from those on which the boundary was based (for example, regarding public services of the extension of utilities); 
2.  Changed assumptions (for example, regarding demographic trends); 
3.  New issues not recognized in the comprehensive plan; 
4.  Recognition of a need for additional detail or comprehensiveness; or 
5.  Data, typographical or drafting errors. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-2, §§ 4a-4c, 1-9-06) 
CHAPTER 6. - DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 

Sec. 601. - Dimensional standards. 
    The table below contains the dimensional standards for the various zoning districts applicable to new structures and/or uses. 
Table 6-1. Lot & Yard Dimensional Standards 
Minimum Lot Size Minimum Yard Regulations District Area 
(in sq. ft., unless otherwise specified) Per Dwelling Unit 
(in square feet) Front Yard Setback 
(in feet) (see note 7) Side Yard Width 
(in feet) Rear Yard Depth 
(in feet) Max. Height of Structure 
(in feet) (see note 6) Lot Width at MBL 
(in feet) Lot Frontage 
(in feet) A-1 Agricultural District Single-family 20,000 20,000 50 15 40 35 100 35 R-15 Very Low Density Residential District Single-family 15,000 15,000 40 15 40 35 100 35 R-10 Low Density Residential District Single-family 10,000 10,000 30 12 30 35 75 35 R-8 Manufactured Residential District Single-family 8,000 8,000 25 9 20 35 90 35 R-6 Single-family Residential District Single-family 6,000 6,000 25 10 20 35 60 35 R-6MFA Medium-High Density Multifamily Residential District Single-family 6,000 6,000 25 10 20 35 60 35 Two-family 7,000 3,500 25 10 20 35 60 35 Multifamily 
(Condos/Townhomes See Section 712.29 of the LDC) 7,000 for the first 2 dwelling units and 1,800 for each add'l dwelling unit 3,500/1,800 25 8 20 60 60 20 MHP Manufactured Home Park Residential District (See Section 712, 31 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A PDR Planned Density Residential District (See Section 713 of this LDC) 200 acres O-I Office and Institutional Residential use (same as R-6) Single-family Office Institutional Use 0 0 25 8 20 60 0 25 Multifamily 7,000 for the first 2 dwelling units and 2,500 for each add'l dwelling unit 3,500/ 
2,500 25 8 20 60 60 20 MA- Med. Arts 10,000 30 15 20 75 35 B-1 Commercial Neighborhood 50 20 20 0 0 B-2 Commercial Corridor 50 20 20 0 0 B-3 Commercial Regional 50 20 20 0 0 O-I(2) Office mixed use district (combination of business, office and residential) 2 acres 30 15 20 60 0 0 B-4 CBD Nonresidential 0 0 0 0 0 Residential (SF) 6,000 6,000 25 10 20 35 60 35 B-5 Commercial Services 25 10 10 0 0 I-1- Industrial Light 75 50 50 0 0 I-2- Industrial Heavy 25 10 10 0 0 I-P- Industrial Park 50 acres 50 50 56  
1.  In the I-1 district above, the space created by the front yard setback line shall remain unobstructed except for landscaping. The rear yard space may be used for off-street parking; provide, however, that in the event the rear and/or side line faces a residential district, the space created by the rear and/or side yard setback shall remain clear and unobstructed, unless a planting screen is maintained along the property line of such type and height as to obscure from view any automobile parked on the lot. 
2.  In the I-P district above, a setback of two hundred (200) feet shall be maintained from all exterior boundaries of the industrial park. This does not refer to interior lots within the park. 
3.  Special use requirements take precedence. Area, yard and height requirements as specified in the issuance of a special use permit shall take precedence over area, yard and height requirements as set forth in chapter 6 herein. 
4.  In all areas within one thousand (1,000) feet of any public aircraft landing field, a structure exceeding thirty-five (35) feet shall be permitted only upon a finding by the board of adjustment after a public hearing that is does not constitute a menace to safety. 
5.  Chimneys, belfries, conveyors, cupolas, derricks, domes, gasholders, fire towers, flagpoles, flues, monuments, smokestacks, transmission towers, ventilators, water towers, tanks, radio towers, poles, antennae, wires, wireless communications towers and similar structures may be erected to any height in accordance with existing or hereafter adopted LDC of the city, provided the foundation guy wires, support or Anchorage of the structure is constructed in an acceptable method and approved by the inspection services administrator, or authorized agents. In locations where Federal Aviation Agency (FAA) regulations are applicable, such structures shall comply with FAA requirements. The provisions of this table of area, yard and height requirements of this LDC do not apply to the enumerated items. 
6.  Within the central city area, the height limitation for buildings within the office and institutional zoning district may be constructed to a maximum height of eighty-five (85) feet. 
7.  Corner lots. Relative to a corner lot, a side yard setback consisting of one-half (1/2) of the distance of the required front yard setback up to a maximum of twenty (20) feet shall be maintained between the prospective building and the side street. This requirement shall not be applied so as to reduce the building width of a residentially zoned corner lot of record at the time of passage of this LDC to less than thirty (30) feet, nor to prohibit the erection of any accessory building where this requirement cannot reasonably be complied with as determined by the board of adjustment. 
8.  Relative only to any buildings being developed under the regulations for attached dwelling units for rental or individual ownership, the side yard or separation between buildings for end dwelling units shall be at least fifteen (15) feet. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. 0-2006-19, §§ 2a-2c, 3a, 3b, 3-13-06; Ord. No. O-2009-2, § 4, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 602. - Prior lots of record. 
A.  Variance for prior lots of record. Notwithstanding the other setback provisions of this LDC a building or structure may be constructed and occupied by one (1) family on any lot meeting all of the requirements of one (1) line of the following table: 
Table 6-2. Prior Lot of Record Variance 
Having a 
Frontage of Made a Lot of 
Record Prior to Having Side 
Yards of Having Front 
Yard of Having Rear 
Yard of Less than 50 feet August 15, 1946 5 feet each side 15 feet 20 feet 50 feet August 15, 1946 5 feet one side, 8 feet opposite side 15 feet 20 feet 60 feet or less August 16, 1975 8 feet each side 15 feet 20 feet 90 feet or less August 16, 1962 10 feet each side 25 feet 35 feet  
B.  Notwithstanding the other setbacks provisions of this LDC, a duplex or multifamily structure in accordance with the table of permitted uses and lot area regulations may be constructed and occupied on a lot having less than sixty (60) feet of lot frontage, provided that side yard setbacks of eight (8) feet and ten (10) feet are adhered to. Required front and rear yard setbacks shall be adhered to as specified in the preceding chart for prior lots of record. 
C.  Regardless of front, rear and side yard setbacks, single-family residential structures existing on or before October 9, 1978, and which are located in a zone allowing duplex construction may be converted to duplex structures within the Central City area, herein, except that this conversion shall not be allowed within the primary fire district. Conversions of single-family dwelling units to duplex dwelling units shall not increase any nonconformities with front, rear or side yard setbacks. The parking provisions and all other applicable provisions of this LDC shall be enforced. The following additional standards shall apply: 
a.  Corner lots. Relative to a corner lot, a side yard setback consisting of one-half (1/2) of the distance of the required front yard setback up to a maximum of twenty (20) feet shall be maintained between the prospective building and the side street. This requirement shall not be applied so as to reduce the building width of a residentially zoned corner lot of record at the time of passage of this LDC to less than thirty (30) feet, nor to prohibit the erection of any accessory building where this requirement cannot reasonably be complied with as determined by the board of adjustment. 
D.  Relative only to any buildings being developed under the regulations for attached dwelling units for rental or individual ownership, the side yard or separation between buildings for end dwelling units shall be at least fifteen (15) feet. 
E.  Front yard setbacks for prior lots of record. If a vacant lot is adjacent a lot where an existing dwelling is located which is constructed less than the required minimum front yard setback, the required minimum front yard setback for the vacant lot shall not be less than the existing front yard setback for the adjacent dwelling. In cases where existing dwellings are located on both sides of the vacant lot, and each is constructed less than the required minimum front yard setback, the required minimum front yard setback for the vacant lot shall not be less than the average of the two (2) existing dwellings. Corner lots shall maintain a front yard setback as set forth in Table 6-2, and the street side yard shall be a minimum of one-half (1/2) of the distance and not less than ten (10) feet required for the front yard setback. 
F.  Annexed Areas. A staff variance may be granted to additions made to buildings or structures that are located in areas annexed by the City or areas added to the extraterritorial jurisdiction. To qualify a building or structure shall be existing on a recorded lot prior to adoption of the annexation ordinance or extraterritorial jurisdiction expansion ordinance. All vacant lots in these designated areas shall comply with Table 6-1. 
Table 6-3, County Zoning Conversion Table 
Prior to city zoning 
(Nash County) After adoption R-40 A-1 50 Front 50 15 Side 15 30 Rear 40 R-30 A-1 40 Front 50 15 Side 15 30 Rear 40 R-30 & RA-30 R-15 40 Front 40 15 Side 15 30 Rear 40 R-20 & R-20CU R-10 35 Front 30 12 Side 12 25 Rear 30 GI A-1 Front 50 Side 15 Rear 40  
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2009-107, § 4, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 603. - Miscellaneous exceptions. 
    Notwithstanding the other setbacks provisions of this Section, the following exception is permitted: 
A.  Steps, fire escapes, stairways, balconies and chimneys may only project into a minimum yard not more than four (4) feet, and an unenclosed porch or deck may project into the required front or rear yard not more than ten (10) feet. 
B.  Sills, cornices, buttresses, ornamental features and similar items may project into a required yard not more than thirty (30) inches. 
C.  Carports open on three (3) sides may encroach on a side yard to a distance of not less than five (5) feet from a side lot line, except on the street side yard of a corner lot where the setback shall be one-half (1/2) of the distance of the required front yard setback up to a maximum of twenty (20) feet. Storage areas may be constructed across the rear of a carport open on three (3) sides that en-croaches on a side yard, provided such storage area shall not contain more than seventy-two (72) square feet nor constitute more than eighteen (18) percent of the area contained in the carport, whichever is less. 
D.  When the adjacent lots of record are under single control by a lease agreement or combination of ownership and lease agreement, temporary structures such as mobile homes, mobile offices, utility buildings, accessory buildings, etc., may extend across any common lot line(s) of the adjacent lots of record under such lease agreement. The location of such structures shall not conflict with any off-street parking requirements, on-site traffic circulation or other applicable regulatory codes. Upon the expiration of the lease agreement, such structures must be moved to conform to the standard side or rear yard setback of the district within sixty (60) days of the expiration of the lease agreement. 
E.  Retaining walls. The setback and yard requirements of this LDC shall not apply to a retaining wall not more than five (5) feet high, as measured from the lowest ground elevation to the top of the wall. The board of adjustment may permit a retaining wall greater than five (5) foot height where it finds that due to the topography of the lot such a wall is necessary. 
F.  In residential zones, inclusive of the O-I zone, fences and walls not over four (4) feet high may project into or enclose any front yard; however, no fence may be constructed on or in a public street right-of-way. Fences and walls over four (4) feet high may be extended no closer to the street right-of-way line, which parallels the front property line, than the front corner of the main building situated on the lot or twenty-five (25) feet from said street right-of-way, whichever is greater. Side and rear yards may be enclosed by fences and walls six (6) feet, six (6) inches high. Fences and walls along side and rear lot lines may be constructed to a maximum height of eight (8) feet if approved by the planning board as part of the residential planned building group review process. 
G.  Only conforming industrial and business land uses (with the exception of an O-I zone) may have a solid or open fence or wall erected to a maximum height of ten (10) feet except as required by this LDC. An open fence or wall is one that has openings through which clear vision is possible from one (1) side to the other on a horizontal plane, and such openings occupy fifty (50) percent or more of the area of the fence or wall. A fence or wall that does not qualify as an open fence or open wall shall maintain a setback at entrances and exits of the site to provide an adequate sight distance easement as determined by the establishment of an isosceles triangle having legs of thirty-five (35) feet in length on each corner side of said entrance or exit, and the same sight distance easement shall be applied to the corner of nonresidential lots which are characterized by a street intersection. 
H.  Fences and walls may be erected for existing dwelling unit(s) in a nonresidential zone under the aforementioned fence and wall specifications applicable in residential zones. 
I.  Outside storage. Any outside storage not enclosed within the confines of a building, such as boxes, crates, trash piles, machinery that results from the commercial operation that is a part of, shall be enclosed or hidden from view along any property lines adjacent to or in residential zones by a wall, solid fence and/or screening at least six (6) feet in height. Open display of merchandise for sale is not required to be screened provided all other applicable provisions of this LDC have been met. 
J.  Accessory buildings. Garages and accessory buildings to a residential use may be constructed in the rear yard provided they are detached from the primary structure or attached only by a covered walk, carport, porch or similar structure opened on two (2) sides and located no closer than five (5) feet to any adjoining lot line, except on street side yard of a corner lot where the setback shall be one-half (1/2) of the distance of the required front yard setback up to a maximum of twenty (20) feet. Accessory buildings located in a side yard shall meet the requirements for the principle structure in the district in which it is located. 
K.  Side yards. Where a lot in a B-4 District abuts a lot in another zone, the side abutting such lot shall maintain a minimum side yard of ten (10) feet. Side yard provided but not required. Where any side yard is provided, though not required, the same shall be not less than three and one-half (31/2) feet. 
L.  Canopies. Any nonresidential land use that incorporates a canopy which is totally or partially supported by a structural pillar (upright support), such as but not limited to canopies over gasoline pumps, said canopy may extend to the street right-of-way line, or property line of a non-residentially used or zoned property if no street right-of-way line is involved, provided that each pillar is located at least ten (10) feet from a property line and the canopy is open on all four (4) sides. Any side of a canopy may be enclosed provided that side meets the required yard setbacks. The canopy roof shall be located horizontally and vertically at least fifteen (15) feet from any electrical conductor (line) and in accordance with NESC National Electric Safety Code, whichever is greater. 
M.  Zero lot line. One (1) of the two (2) side yards required for single-family dwelling units may be eliminated in the PDR, O-I and R-6MFA. Non-residential uses in the O-I zoning district and all approved uses in the business zoning districts which share common party walls may have one (1) or more side yards eliminated; however, end units shall have only the side yard sharing a common party wall eliminated. All zero lot line subdivisions shall comply with the following: 
1.  The zero lot line provision shall be allowed in only subdivisions that are designated by the planning board. The zero lot line provision may be applied only in subdivisions of land that have not been previously placed on record; However, non-residential uses in the O-I zoning district and all approved uses within the business districts may utilize the zero lot line in re-subdivisions subject to approval by the DRC and the planning board. All subdivisions in which the zero lot line provision is utilized shall have written on both the construction and final plates [plats] the following words in letters at least one-half (1/2) inch high: zero lot line provision to be utilized in the subdivision of land. 
2.  All lot lines which are to be designated as zero lot lines must be clearly labeled as zero lot lines on both the construction and final subdivision plats approved by the city. 
3.  Two (2) single-family dwelling units situated on separate lots of record may abut a common lot line and share a common structural wall. 
4.  All lots employing the zero lot line provision must provide for a side yard opposite the designated zero lot line which is at least twice the required minimum of one (1) side yard of the zone in effect. 
5.  Construction is allowed within the area enclosed by the minimum building lines. The building may be constructed up to the zero lot line but is not required to be built on the line. 
6.  When a single-family dwelling unit abuts a zero lot line and does not share a common structural wall with another single-family dwelling unit, a five (5) foot maintenance easement contiguous to the zero lot line wall on the adjoining lot shall be reserved and shown on both the preliminary and final plats approved by the city. This maintenance easement shall be reserved to the property owner for home maintenance purposes and shall be granted by title transfer. 
7.  A two (2) foot eave protrusion shall be permitted across the zero lot line into the adjoining lot when two (2) single-family dwelling units do not share a common structural wall. 
8.  Any dwelling unit wall abutting a zero lot line shall be a structural wall. No porches, open or enclosed by transparent or translucent walls, shall be permitted to be constructed in the wall adjacent to the zero lot line. 
9.  This zero lot line provision may be employed on the properties zoned PDR, R-6MFA and O-I classifications which are lots of record, regardless of any previous subdivision approval by the city. 
10.  These requirements under the zero lot line provision are not applicable to attached dwelling units for individual ownership located on lots having less than sixty (60) feet of street. 
11.  Under no circumstances shall two (2) unattached dwelling units utilize the zero lot line provision on a common lot line. 
12.  In locations where a subdivision proposes to employ the zero lot line concept and said subdivision is adjacent to an existing recorded single-family subdivision not utilizing the zero lot line concept, developed or undeveloped, the planning board may require one (1) tier of lots not employing the zero lot line concept to be developed around the perimeter or portion thereof of the subdivision in which the zero lot line concept is to be employed. 
13.  This zero lot line may not be employed to allow the subdivision of existing structures without meeting the construction regulations of the NC State Building Code. 
14.  When zero lot line subdivisions share common areas as parking lots, freestanding signage and other service components, all plans including the construction and final plats shall be labeled to clearly indicate that such common areas are being shared. When required by the DRC, cross access easements shall be provided. 
15.  Non-residential zero lot line subdivisions that give the appearance of office/shopping complex, etc. shall be limited to one (1) freestanding business identification sign for the entire site. 
N.  Handicap access facilities. The director of development services or designee may grant a relief from up to fifty (50) percent of the required front, side, or rear dimensional yard setbacks to permit construction of handicap access facilities (walk, ramp, etc.) per North Carolina Accessibility Code provided such facilities are not enclosed within the standard required yard setback. The Director shall consider that no handicap access facility alternative to the building is feasible and vehicular access to the rear and front yards will not be prohibited if a relief is granted. The applicant shall provide the Director a letter from a physician indicating the need for a handicap access facility. Relief of greater than fifty (50) percent of the required dimensional yard setback will require approval of the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Section 509. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2009-107, § 5, 10-12-09; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 3, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 604. - Additional arterial setbacks. 
    Special setback lines of ten (10) to fifteen (15) feet on both sides of city council approved arterials for proposed future street widening and improvements are hereby established on the arterials listed in the city council adopted administrative procedures manual. These special setback lines shall be considered a future street right-of-way line. The special setback line provided there herein shall be in addition to the setback required in the yard regulations for the district in which the building is located. These special setback lines shall be observed by all buildings and structures hereafter constructed along both sides of the arterials. The director of engineering may waive the additional setback requirement if the right-of-way needed for proposed street widening and improvement projects is dedicated to the city prior to development. 
Arterial Setbacks (as of October 2003) No. Setback Description 1 Airport Road (SR 1542) from Wesleyan Boulevard (US 301 Bypass) to Centura Highway (US 301 Business), ten (10) feet each side. 2 Bethlehem Road (SR 1714) from Old Halifax Road (SR 1544) to Beechwood Drive (SR 1613), ten (10) feet each side. 3 Bishop Road (SR 1545) from Cummings Road (SR 1537) to Wesleyan Boulevard (US 301), twenty-five (25) feet each side. 4 Cokey Road (SR 1164) from Redgate Avenue to Old Wilson Road (SR 1002), ten (10) feet each side. 5 Country Club Road (SR 1616) from Jeffreys Road (SR 1541) to Hunter Hill Road (SR 1604), ten (10) feet each side. 6 Country Club Road (SR 1616) from Hunter Hill Road (SR 1604) to Ramp Road (US 64 Business), 15 feet each side. 7 Goldrock Road (NC 48) from Red Oak-Battleboro Road (SR 1524) to Homestead Road, fifteen (15) feet each side. 8 Halifax Road (SR 1544) from Hunter Hill Road (SR 1604) to Oak Level Road (SR 1700), fifteen (15) feet each side. 9 Halifax Road (SR 1544) from Oak Level Road (SR 1700) to West Mount Drive (SR 1717), ten (10) feet each side. 10 Hunter Hill Road (SR 1544) from Green Hills Road (SR 1609) to Winstead Avenue (SR 1613), five (5) feet each side. 11 Hunter Hill Road (SR 1544) from Winstead Avenue (SR 1613) to Wesleyan Boulevard (US 301 Bypass), fifteen (15) feet each side. 12 Jeffreys Road (SR 1544) from Sutters Creek Boulevard to Benvenue Road (NC 43), ten (10) feet each side. 13 May Drive (SR 1856) from Wesleyan Boulevard (US 301 Bypass) to Sunset Avenue (US 64 Business), five (5) feet each side. 14 Nashville Road (SR 1714) from Hammond Street to Raleigh Road (NC 97), ten (10) feet each side. 15 Raleigh Street/Tarboro Highway (US 64 Business) from Fairview Road (NC 43 Business) to Cox Avenue (SR 1251), ten (10) feet each side. 16 Raper Drive (SR 1618) from Hunter Hill Road (SR 1604) to Wimberly Avenue, ten (10) feet each side. 17 Raper Drive (SR 1618) from Wimberly Avenue to Northern Boulevard, fifteen (15) feet each side. 18 Sunset Avenue (SR 1770) from Grace Street to Franklin Street (US 301 Business), ten (10) feet each side. 19 Sutton Road (SR 1157) from CSXRR to Arlington Street Extension (SR 1152), fifteen (15) feet each side. 20 Sutton Road (SR 1157) from Arlington Street Extension (SR 1152) to Old Wilson Road (SR 1002), five (5) feet each side. 21 Wesleyan Boulevard (US 301 Bypass) from Tiffany Boulevard (SR 1599) to Harbour West Drive, twenty-five (25) feet each side. 22 Winstead Avenue from four hundred forty (440) feet south of Ridgecrest Drive to Colonial Lane, fifteen (15) feet each side.  
Sec. 605. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 0-2006-19, § 4, adopted March 13, 2006, repealed § 605 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to height restrictions modifications as enacted by Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), adopted May 9, 2005. 
CHAPTER 7. - GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 701. - General. 
A.  Open space. No required open space or required lot area required for a building or structure shall, during its life, be occupied by or counted as open space for any other building or structure. 
B.  Use. No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the uses and dimensional regulations of this LDC, or amendments thereto, for the district in which it is located. 
C.  Only one (1) main building, one (1) main use on lot. In all districts every main building hereafter erected or altered shall be located on a separate lot, as defined in this LDC, and in no case shall there be more than one (1) main building and permitted accessory building on the lot nor more than one (1) main use (e.g., commercial, industrial or residential) per building and lot; provided that this requirement shall not apply to uses that are permitted by the Table of Permitted Uses [section VII.A] within the same zoning district and located in the same building, nor to motels or mobile home parks, nor to planned building groups approved by the planning board, nor to a bona fide farm use, nor to a residential use in a B-4 district, nor to tracts ten (10) acres or greater located in an A-1 district. Tracts of ten (10) or more acres in an A-1 district may have one (1) residence in addition to permitted nonresidential main uses on the same recorded tract. In the case of applications for double occupancy permits involving a residential use and a nonresidential use of the same building in an O-I or B-4 zone, where the building inspector or authorized agents deem that an above-normal safety hazard exists due to the storage of chemicals or explosive commodities, such applications shall be forwarded to the board of adjustment for a determination of whether or not a safety hazard exists which would create a substantial detriment to the proposed residential occupancy, residential occupancy of that building shall be prohibited. 
D.  Minimum yards. The minimum yards or other open spaces required by this LDC, including those provisions regulating intensity of use, for each and every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall not be encroached upon or considered as meeting the yard or open space requirements or the intensity of use provisions for any other building. 
E.  Lot subdivision. No lot shall hereafter be so reduced in area as to cause any open space required by this LDC to be less in any dimension than is herein required by the minimum yard requirements of the zone in which the lot in question is situated. 
F.  Improvements bond. No final certificate of occupancy/compliance for a commercial, residential or mobile home park planned building group will be issued until all required site improvements have been completed. In lieu of completion of all required site improvements, the developer of the planned group may enter into a contract with the city providing for the installation of city improvements within a designated period of time. Performance of said contract shall be secured by a cash or surety bond which will cover the total estimated cost of the improvements as determined by the director of engineering; provided, however, that said bond may be waived by the city council within its discretion. 
Sec. 702. - Building permit. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  Whenever any structure or building is to be improved or erected, moved or structurally altered, a building permit shall be obtained from the inspection services administrator. 
2.  No building permits may be issued for any structure on any lot in a subdivision unless the lot has been included in a final plat which has been recorded or unless the lot qualifies under the following exceptions: 
a.  Unless the prior lot of record fronts on a publicly dedicated and opened street, or; 
b.  Unless such lot is exempt from these regulations. 
3.  Building permits required pursuant to G.S. § 160A-417 may be denied for lots that have been illegally subdivided. In addition to other remedies, a city may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the unlawful subdivision of land, to restrain, correct, or abate the violation, or to prevent any illegal act or conduct. 
B.  Application and site plan. Every applicant for a building permit application shall furnish the following information: 
1.  A plot, drawn to scale, showing the exact size, shape and dimension of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location on the lot of all existing buildings, structures and easements, and the exact size and location on the lot of the structure or building proposed to be repaired, altered, erected or moved, and the size, arrangements, number or parking stalls, movement of vehicles and ingress and egress and egress drives for all off-street parking and loading facilities. 
2.  A declaration of the existing and intended use of each existing and proposed building or structure on the lot and the number of a families and housekeeping units that each existing building currently accommodates and is proposed to accommodate upon completion of construction. 
3.  Any additional information deemed necessary by the director of development services or designee to determine compliance with these regulations. 
4.  The director of development services or designee may require a survey of the boundaries of the lot on which the improvement is proposed to be located. If required, a surveyor registered in the State of North Carolina shall prepare such survey. 
C.  Review and action by inspection. The director of development services and inspection services administrator shall be responsible for conducting reviews to determine if intended uses, buildings or structures comply with all applicable regulations and standards, including this LDC and the building code. The inspection services administrator shall not issue a building permit unless the plans, specification and intended use of such building or structures or part thereof conform in all respects to the provisions of this LDC and the building codes. 
D.  Expiration and lapse of approval. 
1.  If the work described in any building permit has not begun within six (6) months from the date of issuance, the building permit shall expire and be of no further effect. In such cases, no further work shall occur until a new building permit has been obtained. 
2.  If, after commencement of construction, work is discontinued or no substantial work has occurred for a period of twelve (12) months or more, the building permit shall expire and be of no further effect. Work shall be stopped until a new building permit is obtained. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. 0-2006-2, § 3, 1-9-06; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 3, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 703. - Certification of occupancy. 
A.  Applicability. No change shall be made in the use, the reuse or change of occupancy of any existing land, building or structure until a certificate of occupancy is obtained from the inspections services administrator certifying that all of the provisions of this LDC have been met. Furthermore, any change listed above shall cause the applicant to submit a site plan which shall be in compliance with all city requirements, including the zoning provisions of this LDC. 
B.  Application. An application for a certificate of occupancy shall be filed with the inspection services administrator when a structure of use or occupancy is ready for initial use or occupancy and when a change of use or re-occupancy occurs. 
C.  Effect of approval. Any department or official shall issue no permit or license required by the city or other governmental agency or employee unless a copy of an effective certificate of occupancy issued by the inspection services administrator accompanies the application for such. 
D.  Conditional certificate of occupancy. Pending the issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy, a conditional certificate may be issued. The conditional certificate shall be valid for a period established by the inspection services administrator, pending completion of an addition, or during occupancy of a structure. The inspection services administrator may issue a conditional certificate of occupancy as warranted. 
E.  Unlawful to occupy without valid certificate of occupancy. It is unlawful to occupy any building that does not have a valid certificate of occupancy. 
Sec. 704. - Landscaping and buffering. 
    Landscaping and buffering on a specific site may be comprised of a number of separate elements, as set forth below. The standards of this section provide for the preservation of existing vegetation and for the installation and maintenance of new vegetation and other landscape architectural features. The purpose of these standards is to improve property and community appearance, allow for the ecological benefits provided by plant materials, prevent the overcrowding of land and enhance the privacy and welfare of citizens by separating land uses. The landscaping and buffering standards of this section shall apply to all proposed development for which a site plan is required. All requirements shall run with the land use and shall apply against any owner or subsequent owner. Land used toward achieving the requirements of the section need not hold the same zoning designation as the use to which the landscaping and buffer applies but the landscaping shall either be on the same lot or on contiguous property under the same permanent possession or control as the lot on which the use is located. 
A.  Purposes and intent. The purposes and intent of the regulations contained in this section are as follows: 
1.  To aid in stabilizing the environment's ecological balance by helping to reduce soil erosion, stormwater runoff, flooding, and seasonally extreme weather conditions, while at the same time aiding in noise, glare, pollution, and heat abatement; 
2.  To encourage the preservation of existing trees and vegetation; 
3.  To assist in preventing overcrowding of land; 
4.  To provide visual buffering and enhance the beautification of the city; 
5.  To safeguard and enhance property values and to protect public and private investment; 
6.  To preserve, protect and restore the unique identity and environment of Rocky Mount and preserve the economic base attracted to the city by such factors; 
7.  To conserve energy, and to protect the public health, safety and general welfare; 
8.  To provide habitat for living things that might not otherwise occur or be found in urban and suburban environs. 
B.  Application of landscaping requirements. 
1.  Except as otherwise provided, the landscaping requirements of this section shall apply to all land (public and private) located in the planning/zoning jurisdiction of the city. Unless provided otherwise by this section, none of the uses authorized by this LDC shall be permitted until such landscaping requirements are met. However, none of these requirements shall apply to: 
a.  Development existing at the time this section becomes applicable, except as noted in this LDC. 
b.  Lots in the downtown area bounded by Goldleaf Street to the north, Nash and Marigold Streets to the south, Albemarle and Washington Streets to the east, and Church Street to the west. 
2.  The following categories are required to be landscaped: 
a.  Parking lot and driveway landscaping (subsection 704.F); 
b.  Dumpsters and other garbage disposal equipment (subsection 704.G); 
c.  Loading areas (subsection 704.G); 
d.  HVAC equipment (subsection 704.G); 
e.  Buffer areas (subsection 704.H); and 
3.  The intent of buffers is to provide a space to separate differing uses. The buffer width is the specified width of the area devoted to plant materials. The width is dependent on intensity of the use. 
4.  There are four (4) basic plant types referred to in this LDC, and all shall be locally adapted living plants. They include large trees, small trees, shrubs, and ground cover defined as follows: 
a.  Large trees: Large trees which are planted to meet the requirements of this subsection shall have an expected mature height of thirty (30) feet or greater unless subject to a power line overhead, in which case a small tree may be substituted. Sixty (60) percent of the required trees shall be locally adapted natural evergreen species. Evergreen trees used to meet the requirements of this section shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height when planted. Deciduous trees shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in height and six and one-quarter (6.25) inches in circumference (two (2) inches in diameter) measured one-half (.5) foot above ground level when planted. All trees shall be distributed throughout the yards, so that no required tree is closer than ten (10) feet to any other required tree. 
b.  Small trees: Small trees planted to meet the requirements of this subsection shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in height (and in a three (3) gallon container) at the time of planting and have an expected mature height of between ten (10) and thirty (30) feet. Sixty (60) percent or more of these trees shall be evergreen. 
c.  Shrubs: Shrubs planted to meet the minimums standards of this section shall be minimum of one and one-half (1.5) feet in height when planted and be expected to reach a height of six (6) feet or greater within five (5) years of planting. All such shrubs shall be evergreen, except that deciduous shrubs may be used in buffering for perennial watercourses. 
d.  Ground cover. A planting of low plants that grow and cover soil. 
C.  Landscaping procedures and general requirements. 
1.  Landscape plan requirements. When site plan approval is required by this LDC on any land where the landscaping requirements of this section are applicable, the site plan shall contain in addition to the information already required, the information listed in paragraphs (a) through (e) below. When an application is made for a building permit on any land where the landscaping requirements of this chapter are applicable, such building permit application shall be accompanied by a landscape plan. The landscape plan or site plan shall contain the information listed in paragraphs (a) through (e) below, or any additional information as determined by the department of development services, planning board, or city council to enable them to determine whether the permit application or plan should be approved. 
a.  Existing and proposed land uses and buildings on the subject lot, including the location and dimensions of parking areas, driveways, sidewalks, loading and exterior storage areas, and if applicable, HVAC and refrigeration equipment; 
b.  Existing land uses and buildings, on adjoining and adjacent lots or within two hundred (200) feet of the common property line, whichever is less, excluding properties across a public street; and the current zoning classification(s) and the names and addresses of the owners of all adjacent or adjoining properties; 
c.  Existing and proposed landscaping which will be used to comply with the requirements of this LDC including the location and dimensions of planting areas (including bufferyards); the number, location, spacing, species, and height of plants; the size in circumference one-half (1/2) foot above grade of new trees (except small trees); an indication of the size of walls, earth berms and fences; and provisions for watering, soil stabilization, plant protection, and maintenance access; 
d.  The number, location, species, and size in circumference four and one-half (41/2) feet above grade of existing natural trees which are to be maintained and preserved for credit; and the type(s) of trees (small and/or large) and number of each for which credit is being taken; and 
e.  The location and description of any barriers to be erected to protect any vegetation from damage during and/or after construction. 
2.  Standards. All plant material shall meet or exceed size and shape relationships specified in the latest edition of The American Standard for Nursery Stock published by the American Association of Nurserymen. All sizes specified refer to size at time of planting. No building permit shall be issued nor grading begun until a plan for buffers and landscaping has been approved. 
3.  Maintenance responsibility. Unless otherwise stated, the owner of any property where landscaping is required shall be responsible for the maintenance of all required plant material and continued compliance with this section. 
4.  Request for extension of occupancy. It is recognized that land development occurs continuously and that vegetation used in landscaping or screening should be planted at certain times to insure the best chance of survival. In order to insure compliance and to reduce the potential expense of replacing landscaping or screening materials which were installed at an inappropriate time or under unfavorable conditions, a letter of request for extension of compliance with landscaping requirements may be filed with the planning administrator, which states the reasons why the request is being made. The planning administrator may find cause to grant an extension of compliance if one (1) or more of the following conditions exist: 
a.  The planting material is unavailable. 
b.  The time for planting would jeopardize the health of planning material. 
c.  Weather conditions prohibit the planting of material. 
In addition, this letter shall acknowledge that the applicant for the building permit is aware of all landscaping and screening requirements. If the planning administrator grants the extension of compliance, the applicant shall post a performance guarantee (such as a letter of credit or performance bond) payable to the city from a financial institution licensed in the State of North Carolina with a local office within sixty (60) miles of the city sufficient to cover one hundred ten (110) percent of the installed landscaping costs has been posted with the department of engineering. The applicant will be required to comply with the landscape requirements within one hundred eighty (180) days from the issuance of the extension of compliance, or discontinue use of the property. If the initial letter of request for extension of compliance with landscaping requirements has expired and conditions are still deemed unsuitable for planting, the applicant may request one (1) additional extension of up to ninety (90) days. The applicant shall also acknowledge that while a conditional certificate of occupancy may be issued, no final certificate of occupancy will be issued while there is an active extension of compliance with landscaping requirements. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section within the time noted in the letter of request for the extension of compliance with landscaping requirements shall be deemed a violation of this LDC. 
5.  Plant and topsoil requirements. All plants installed to meet the requirements of this section shall be healthy and conform to the standards set forth in the current edition of American Standards of Nursery Stock (developed by the American Association of Nurserymen). Such plants shall be planted in fertile, sandy loam topsoil that is free from any substance that may be harmful to plant growth. 
6.  Maintenance requirements. The owner is responsible for maintaining all required plant material in good health for the duration of the premises. In maintaining such plants, good husbandry techniques shall be used, including, but not limited to, proper pruning, watering, fertilizing and mulching, so that the plants will meet the requirements of this LDC and have minimum density and foliage. All landscape planting areas shall be stabilized from soil erosion immediately upon planting and shall be maintained for the duration of the premises. Such soil stabilization shall include mulching with bark or other acceptable material or seeding with grass (unless ground cover is already established). Whenever planting areas required by this section are adjacent to parking areas or driveways, the planting areas shall be protected from vehicular intrusion and damage from vehicle lubricants or fuels. Any dead, unhealthy or missing plants must be replaced with locally adapted vegetation, which conforms to the initial planting standards of this LDC. In order to help insure that required plants are established in good health and will continue to grow to their desired size, the owner of any required landscaping shall provide the city with a performance bond from a surety company authorized to do business in the state, an irrevocable letter of credit or other instrument readily convertible to cash at face value payable to the city from a financial institution licensed in the state with a local office (within sixty (60) miles of the city, or cash placed in escrow with a financial institution designated as an official depository of the city in the amount designated by the City Administrative Policy X.5.1. Planning and Development Administrative Fees. For financial guarantees of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or less, only irrevocable letters of credit or cash placed in escrow will be accepted. The financial guarantee may be used to replace/replant any required plants, which the city determines, are unhealthy within eighteen (18) months after the initial planting. Such replanting shall take place within one (1) year after a plant is deemed unhealthy. 
7.  Traffic hazards. Landscaping shall not obstruct the view of motorists using any street, private driveway, parking aisles or the approach to any street intersection so as to constitute a traffic hazard or a condition dangerous to the public safety upon any such street, driveway parking aisle or street intersection; or violate the thirty (30) foot sight triangle or site distance easement (SDE) computation guidelines. 
8.  Easements. No tree, shrub, or barrier shall be installed on property subject to utility or drainage easements without the consent of the public works and/or public utilities departments and the easement holder (grantee). 
9.  Solar access. If existing development on an adjoining lot is designed for solar access, small trees shall be substituted for large trees where large trees would destroy solar access. 
D.  Alternate methods of landscaping compliance. Although certain materials and particular methods of construction are specifically prescribed by this section, this section is not intended, especially whenever a stream, natural rock formation or other physiographic condition exists, to prevent the use of an alternate material or method of construction; provided any such alternate material or method of construction has been approved in writing or in plan and its use authorized by the director or the director's designee. The director may approve in writing or in plan any such alternate material or method of construction; provided, it is found that the proposed alternate material or method of construction is for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that specifically prescribed by the LDC in quality, effectiveness, durability, hardiness, and performance. The director may require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim that may be made regarding its use. In instances where the ground area required for landscaping by this LDC exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the lot and the property owner has reduced the width of the bufferyard, then the size of landscaped planting areas may be further modified as deemed appropriate to achieve this twenty-five (25) percent limitation. This provision of this section is supplemental to any statutory and LDC authority to issue variances. 
E.  Credit for preservation of existing vegetation. The preservation of existing vegetation within bufferyards and on-site is strongly encouraged. Existing vegetation may be used to meet any non-residential development landscaping/buffering requirements of this LDC as long as the intent and applicable standards of this LDC are fully met. 
1.  Credits and other incentives to preserve vegetation: Existing live natural trees located on the subject lot and outside of drainage and utility easements and public street rights-of-way may be credited towards the tree planting requirements of this LDC, including buffer trees, street trees and parking lot trees, according to the following: 
Size of Existing Tree Number of Trees to be Credited 2 inch to six in caliper 1 7 inch to 12 inch caliper 2 13 inch to 18 inch caliper 3 19 inch to 24 inch caliper 4 25 inch + caliper 5  
In order to receive credit, preserved vegetation must be in good health and condition. Trees designated to be preserved must be indicated on the landscape and grading plans. Protective barriers must also be shown on the landscape plans in accordance with the submission requirements of this section. If a preserved tree dies within twenty-four (24) months of the completion of the landscape project, it must be replaced with the total number of trees which were credited to the existing tree; the size of the new tree must comply with the size requirements for new trees as established in this section. 
2.  Protection of existing trees during construction. No grading or other land-disturbing activity can occur on a site with existing trees which are designated to be preserved in order to meet the landscaping requirements until protective barriers are installed by the developer and approved by the director of development services. Trees designated for preservation which are counted toward the landscape requirements must be protected by barrier, while trees designated for preservation which do not count toward the landscape requirements are encouraged to be protected by barriers. The diameter of the preserved trees and the location of protective barriers must be shown on the landscape and grading plans with the dimension between the tree trunk and barrier indicated. 
Barricades shall be placed around the critical root zone of the preserved trees that are within fifty (50) feet of any grading or construction activity. The critical root zone is a circle extending around the tree with a one (1) foot radius for every on inch of tree diameter. For example, a ten (10) inch diameter tree would have a barricade surrounding it, erected ten (10) feet away from the trunk. All protective barriers must be maintained throughout the building construction process. 
Protective barriers shall consist of either: 
a.  A fence which is at least three (3) feet high and constructed in a post and rail configuration, using two (2) by four (4) rails; or 
b.  A fence with two (2) by four (4) posts placed no farther apart than ten (10) feet apart covered with four (4) foot orange polyethylene laminar safety fencing. 
No credit will be allowed for any tree proposed to be retained if there is any encroachment within the "protected ground area" defined above. For the purpose of this section, an encroachment is defined as any change in the natural grade, construction of impervious surfaces, trenching or excavation, storage of equipment, materials or earth and the temporary or permanent parking or circulation of vehicles or equipment. This definition does not exclude the construction of sidewalks or permeable parking areas, so long as such areas are approved by the director and the following conditions are met: 
a.  No more than ten (10) percent of the protected ground area (including any additional landscape planting area) may be covered by sidewalks, up to twenty (20) percent of this area may be covered by permeable parking areas or a combination of sidewalks and permeable parking areas; 
b.  Sidewalks shall be raised to avoid root damage; private sidewalks may be constructed with asphalt if a concrete or brick sidewalk would damage the tree's roots; and 
c.  Permeable paving shall provide water and gaseous exchange to the tree roots, and the existing grade shall not be lowered or raised, except that the finished paved surface may be an average of six (6) inches above the existing grade. 
d.  Where existing vegetation is used in bufferyards, supplemental plantings may be required, if the existing vegetation does not provide the same effect as a planted buffer would after five (5) years of normal growth. Where supplemental evergreen shrub plantings are required, the shrubs shall have a minimum height of one and one-half (11/2) feet when installed with an expected height of six (6) feet or greater within five (5) years after planting. When existing vegetation to be preserved on a site does not meet all of the requirements of this LDC, then the owner shall only be required to plant those trees and shrubs necessary to meet these requirements. 
F.  Parking lot and driveway landscaping. 
1.  Intent, purposes and application. The landscape requirements herein have been developed to improve the appearance of parking areas, to distribute planting areas around and within parking areas; to modify the rate of stormwater runoff and increase the capability of groundwater recharge in urbanizing areas; to provide shade, noise reduction, filtering of the air of pollutants, and other beneficial environmental effects to the microclimate; to prevent the overcrowding of land; and to break the visual blight created by large expanses of parking areas. The requirements of this subsection are for all parking areas or portions thereof, required or otherwise, built after the application of this section (effective date), which provide service to a nonresidential development, regardless of the zoning district in which they are located. Parking areas as they pertain to this subsection shall include all areas outside of public rights-of-way where motor vehicles are either stored or driven, including private driveways, parking lots, vehicular display lots, rental lots, and depots, but excluding parking buildings/structures, temporary parking areas which are covered with grass or other live plant material, and areas which are exclusively used as loading and/or service areas. 
2.  Landscaped parking areas development within parking areas (including accessory drives and aisles) exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet on the same parcel shall provide and maintain landscaped areas based upon the surfaced parking area. Areas under canopies, loading and service areas, and portions of drives with no parking on either side for a distance longer than twenty-five (25) feet and/or used exclusively as access to loading or service areas, are exempt from this requirement. The landscaping within parking areas shall be provided in addition to buffer requirements of this LDC. Internal areas provided for landscaping shall be in the amount equivalent to at least fifteen (15) percent of the paved parking area, and shall be used for either the saving of existing trees or their replacement with either trees or shrubs according to the credits below. Tree planting areas shall be located such that no parking space is farther than sixty (60) feet from a large tree trunk (To ensure this requirement is met the developer shall submit a parking landscape radius detail). 
3.  Required landscape materials. 
a.  Trees shall be credited at the following rates, either in combinations of small and large trees, or with large trees only, to add up to the required landscape area: 
1)  One (1) two and one half (21/2) inch caliper, large tree per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of required landscaped area. Each large tree shall be located within a minimum growing area of two hundred fifty (250) square feet, un-encroached upon by shrubs or impervious pavement, with a minimum dimension of ten (10) feet. Additional credit may be given for larger trees, up to four (4) inch caliper, when larger growing areas are also provided. 
2)  One (1) small tree/large shrub or evergreen tree at the rate of one (1) eight (8) foot tall tree per one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet of required landscaped area. Small trees and evergreen trees shall be located within a minimum growing area of one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet, with a minimum dimension of seventy-two (72) feet, un-encroached upon by shrubs or impervious pavement. Small trees/large shrubs may be used to fulfill up to one half (1/2) of the required trees. 
b.  Evergreen trees and large shrubs, when used, shall be either pruned or located to facilitate safe sight distance easements within parking lots. 
c.  Shrubs shall be credited at the rate of one (1) fifteen (15) to eighteen (18) inch minimum height evergreen or deciduous shrub per thirty-five (35) square feet of required landscaped area. This rate may be varied based upon size of installed shrubs or ground cover. Shrubs to meet this requirement must be located within fifteen (15) feet of the paved area. Additionally, shrubs shall be located to facilitate safe sight distance easements within parking lots, and to protect them from overhangs of motor vehicles. 
d.  Minimum curb radii of three (3) feet are required on the corners of all tree islands and medians to allow for free movement of motor vehicles around planting materials. All islands shall have raised edging around them to further protect plants from being run over by motor vehicles. Medians without raised edging shall include devices to stop vehicles from driving into the planted areas. 
e.  No more than one (1) tree may be provided per island, unless there is at least the minimum growing area per tree as required in this LDC. Large trees shall not normally be planted less than eighteen (18) feet apart, and small trees/large shrubs shall not normally be planted less than twelve (12) feet apart. 
4.  Vehicular use area landscaping design screening. Requirements of this subsection are intended to ensure attractive views of a property from streets and adjacent properties; to block views of parking lots from the adjacent rights-of-way, to moderate temperatures of impervious areas and abate glare from parking lots or service areas; to filter automotive exhaust; and to encourage the preservation of stands of existing trees and their root zones. This section specifies minimum requirements and design standards while allowing flexibility freedom in design. It is not the intent of this section to completely block the views of buildings from the street. Irrigation of landscape medians is strongly discouraged. The use of drought-tolerant planting material should be used instead. Landscaping requirements in parking areas and vehicular use areas are as follows: 
a.  All vehicular use areas must have at least one (1) canopy tree trunk within sixty (60) feet of each parking space. Two (2) small trees may be used instead of one (1) canopy tree only if overhead or underground utility lines will impair the canopy tree's growth to mature habit. All vehicular use areas used for parking shall be screened from the view of adjacent properties and streets by evergreen plantings that will attain a height of three (3) feet within three (3) years. The use of shrubs and ground covers is encouraged in parking area islands and along the borders of parking areas. 
b.  Existing healthy, well-formed, canopy trees may be counted toward the requirements of this section, provided that these trees are protected before and during development of the site and maintained after development in a healthy growing condition. 
c.  The design of the vehicular use area with landscaped areas, and the selection of plant materials, and the vehicular use area shall meet the following standards: 
1)  All parking spaces shall be within sixty (60) feet of the trunk of a canopy tree, or thirty (30) feet from small trees if allowed under overhead utilities or within special circumstances. 
2)  All planting medians and/or islands in vehicular use areas should all be at least ten (10) feet long by ten (10) feet wide with a minimum of three hundred (300) square feet of space per canopy tree where these trees are proposed. This dimension must be measured from the back of the curbs. Linear planting strips between the length of parking isles are strongly encouraged rather than numerous small one (1) tree islands. If linear planting strips are used then the distance of parking spaces from a trunk of a canopy tree may be increased to seventy (70) feet. 
3)  A minimum ten (10) foot wide continuous planted median shall be installed in off-street parking areas approximately every two hundred fifty (250) linear feet in one (1) direction for vehicular surface areas exceeding seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet. Other design options may be approved provided the intent of "breaking up" large areas of parking is met. Saving existing interior trees may be credited toward this requirement. This requirement does not apply to vehicular display lots, vehicular rental lots and other similar lots. 
1)  The size of the planting area and size of plant material at maturity shall allow for a three and one-half (31/2) foot bumper overhang from the face back of the curb. Barriers, such as curbs or wheel stops, must be provided between vehicular use areas and landscaped areas. 
2)  All sidewalks shall be at least six (6) feet from the trunks of all trees, unless otherwise approved by the Director. For example, when the placement of the sidewalk would require the removal of an existing large tree to meet this requirement or where there is not enough space on the site to accommodate both the tree and the sidewalk this requirement may be modified. 
3)  Parking lots shall be graded so that landscape islands do not impound water, unless surface impoundment is required as a method of on-site retention of stormwater. Landscape islands should be thoroughly cultivated and amended so as to support healthy plant growth. 
4)  Preservation of existing groups or stands of trees, groves of trees, as well as isolated islands with single trees, is strongly encouraged. Canopy trees shall be at least two and one-half (21/2) inches in caliper when installed. 
5)  Evergreen shrubs shall be of at least twenty-four (24) inches in height and minimum three (3) gallon container size at the time of installation. 
6)  The standards for all plants in vehicular use areas shall conform to the American Standard for Nursery Stock published by the American Association of Nurserymen for tree or shrub types at installation. 
7)  Adequate drainage, and mulching, and irrigation shall be provided for landscape medians and islands. If automatic underground irrigation systems are permitted, moisture sensor regulators soil moisture sensors or drip irrigation shall be used. 
8)  The property owner or developer shall provide for continuous maintenance of the landscaped areas after occupancy of the building. The property owner shall ensure that performance criteria within this LDC and/or included on the approved development plan are met. Failure to correct deficiencies in a timely manner shall result in a citation for violation of this LDC. 
d.  Exceptions are provided for underground parking and above ground parking structures. When parking is provided underground or within buildings, the above requirements shall not apply. However, if the parking is visible from a public right-of-way or adjacent property, then it shall be screened from views from streets and adjacent properties. Unless they are designed to look like, reflect the architectural style of, and blend in with the adjacent buildings, other buildings, dense landscaping should visually separate all parking structures from the view of streets and adjacent property. If this is not possible, then the walls of the structure should be softened by the use of terracing, plantings, or other techniques. 
G.  Loading areas, trash collection and HVAC equipment screening regulations. All loading areas, trash collection areas and portions thereof, and HVAC and refrigeration equipment installed or established after the effective date of this section, which provide service to a nonresidential development and are not screened by an intervening building, shall be screened from the view of all public street rights-of-way for their entire length along those streets, except for necessary access. Screening for such areas may be accomplished by a closed fence or wall, or with natural evergreen shrubs. The location of the required screening shall be between the street right-of-way and all chain link fences, so that such fences are also screened from the street. Natural evergreen shrubs used to meet the requirements of this section shall be spaced at no more than one-half (1/2) of their natural spread at maturity or seven (7) feet, whichever is less. Fences/walls used to meet the requirements of this section must be comparable with the material, color and design of the main building, and additional planting materials shall be provided so that no more than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the surface of the fence/wall is visible from the street within three (3) years of the erection of the structure. Planting areas for shrubs which are required by this subsection shall have a minimum width of five (5) feet. 
1.  Loading areas. Fences/walls used to screen loading areas must be at least six (6) feet high; when using natural evergreen shrubs for screening, such shrubs shall be a minimum of three (3) feet in height when planted and shall reach a minimum height of six (6) feet within three (3) years of planting. Screening for refuse containers (dumpsters) must equal or exceed the height of the container; this screening standard shall be met at installation for fences, or within three (3) years of planting for shrubs. 
2.  HVAC equipment and trash collection. Fences/walls used to screen HVAC and refrigeration equipment or trash collection areas must equal or exceed the height of the equipment required to be screened and be located at least two and one-half (21/2) feet from such equipment. Natural evergreen shrubs used for screening shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) inches in height when planted and shall be expected to equal or exceed the height of the structures required to be screened within three (3) years of planting. Shrubs planted to meet the requirements of this section shall be located so that at maturity they will be no closer than two and one-half (21/2) feet to any HVAC or refrigeration equipment. 
H.  Buffer areas. The intent of buffer areas is to provide a space to separate differing uses, reduce the visual impact of development and provide for the protection and retention of existing or revegetated plant materials. 
1.  Permitted uses within buffer areas. Buffers shall be left in an undisturbed natural vegetative state or provided with supplemental plantings. Selective thinning of vegetation under one and one-half (11/2) inch caliper and removal of dead vegetation shall be permitted as long as the intent of the buffer requirement is maintained. Driveways or walkways may cross a buffer at as near a perpendicular angle as practical. Grading in the designated buffer may be allowed with site plan approval, if the revegetation plan is determined to meet the intent of this section. 
2.  Purpose of buffer yards. Buffer yards are a combination of land and physical barriers such as trees, shrubs, fencing, and earthen berms which separate various incompatible land uses. The purpose of buffer yards is to: (1) create a better quality of living for the community and stabilize the environment's ecological balance by planting and preserving vegetation; (2) establish separation and a greater sense of privacy between incompatible land uses; (3) reduce the transmission of dust, dirt, litter, air pollution, and odors; (4) help block out visual pollution, glare, and noise; (5) help protect the value of buildings and land in the community as a whole; and (6) serve as a protective or safety barrier when incompatible land uses adjoin one another. 
3.  Buffers required. All new land uses established after the effective date of this section shall provide a buffer yard whenever one is required, which complies with the requirements of this LDC, on the developing property or on a contiguous planting easement on the adjacent/adjoining property which is to be screened. Existing lots may be required by the DRC and/or planning board to meet the buffer yard requirements of this LDC, when proposed expansions or additions exceed fifty (50) percent of he initially developed floor area and such expansions are subject to planned building group regulations. In all other cases, the requirements of this subsection shall not apply to adaptive reuse of existing buildings or structures. 
4.  Riparian buffers. For all residential and non-residential development, a fifty (50) foot riparian buffer shall be maintained from any perennial or intermittent stream in accordance with the Tar Pamlico Nutrient Management Regulations as adopted by the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources. Land disturbing activities within the riparian buffer shall be limited to those permitted by the NC DENR regulations. 
5.  Buffer yards of different setbacks or widths are required depending upon the combination of uses and the adverse effects which the uses have. Bufferyard setbacks are measured from the common property line to the edge of the closest vehicular surface area, building, loading, display, storage, or service area located on the lot of the proposed land use (except in the case of buffering for perennial watercourses which is measured from the edge of the bank of the watercourse). Whenever two (2) or more bufferyard setbacks are simultaneously applicable, as an example, a building which contains office and commercial uses, then the more stringent regulation is controlling. But, if two (2) or more different uses are present on one (1) lot, only those uses which are more than ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the building or land area shall be considered. 
6.  Detached single-family housing on its own lot shall not be required to provide any bufferyards. 
7.  Determination of required bufferyard. To determine the bufferyard required by this section, the following steps shall be taken: 
a.  Identify the classification of the proposed land use and any existing adjacent land uses listed in the buffer yard use classification. 
b.  Use the buffer yard chart to determine the appropriate letter designation for each abutting yard. Refer to Table 8. 
c.  Match the letter designation obtained from the buffer yard chart with the letter designation of the buffer yard specifications Table 9, to determine the required buffer yard. 
I.  Bufferyard use classification. Below are the classifications of land uses which will determine the required bufferyards. 
1.  Classification I. 
a.  Single-family dwellings, golf courses (regulation), nature areas, wildlife sanctuaries and accessory uses including recreation and storage. 
2.  Classification II. 
a.  Duplexes, family care homes, multi-family dwellings, dormitories, manufactured home parks, fraternities and sororities, rooming/boardinghouses and accessory uses including recreation and storage. 
b.  Limited impact recreational uses, including, but not limited to, playgrounds, jogging trails, bicycling areas, boat launch ramps, golf courses (par 3), picnic areas, swimming pools, tennis courts, and ball fields. Specifically excluded are miniature golf facilities, golf driving ranges not operated in conjunction with a golf course (regulation) and outdoor movie theaters. 
3.  Classification III. 
a.  Institutional uses, including, but not limited to, day or youth camps, cemeteries, churches, day care centers, group homes, libraries, museums, nursing homes, public or private schools, schools or homes for the physically or mentally handicapped, retirement homes, social or fraternal organizations and hospitals. 
b.  Governmental buildings or uses, including, but not limited to, offices, fire stations, police stations, garages, public utilities and public service uses. Specifically excluded are sanitary landfills, wastewater treatment facilities, extraction activities and animal shelters. 
c.  Commercial and services uses, including, but not limited to, retail operations, hotels, laundries/dry cleaners, grocery stores not open any time between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m., alcoholic beverage stores, restaurants (standard, not drive-ins), service or business stores (e.g. catering, bakery, duplicating, photography, shoe repair, tailoring, travel agency, etc.) taxi companies, shopping centers, funeral homes and principal use parking lots. 
d.  Utility uses, including, but not limited to telephone facilities, cable television, radio and television facilities. 
e.  Medium impact commercial recreation uses, including but not limited to, amusement parks, fairgrounds, miniature golf, golf driving ranges not operated in conjunction with a golf course (regulation), sports' arenas, stables, indoor recreation areas such as skating rinks, tennis, swimming, handball and racquetball, athletic clubs, exercise and dance studios and indoor theaters. 
f.  Plant nurseries or greenhouses that are not a part of a farm. 
g.  Offices, including drive-in facilities. 
4.  Classification IV. 
a.  High impact recreational uses, including, but not limited to outdoor theaters, ranges (skeet, rifle, archery) go-cart racing, billiard parlors and nightclubs. 
b.  Road service uses, including, but not limited to, gasoline service stations, convenience stores, drive in/fast food restaurants, major and minor automobile repair, boat rental/sales or service, vehicle rental/sales or service, automobile wash, retail sales involving outdoor storage (vehicles, storage units, etc.), veterinary offices, kennels, bus and truck terminals and mobile home sales. 
c.  Agricultural support uses including, but not limited to, farm equipment rental/sales and service, and farm supply (feed, grain and fertilizer). 
d.  Grocery stores that remain open any time between 11:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. and animal shelters. 
e.  Light industrial uses, including, but not limited to, sewing operations, wood products, laboratories, warehouses, wholesaling businesses and storage, publishing plants and printing plants, mini-warehouses, contractors' office with equipment storage yards, furniture refinishing, fuel oil, ice, coal, wood sales, lumberyards, building materials sales and storage, trade shops (including cabinet, metal, carpentry, planing, plumbing, upholstery, refinishing and paneling), tire recapping plants, and wastewater treatment plants. 
5.  Classification V. 
a.  Heavy industrial uses, including, but not limited to, concrete or asphalt mixing plants, open storage of bulk material or machinery, fuel generation plants, grain elevators, farm product processing (dairies, poultry or meat), meat packaging plants or slaughterhouses, resource recovery activities, landing strips and heliports, and fertilizer manufacturing. 
b.  Extraction activities and junkyards. 
J.  Bufferyard requirements. 
1.  Bufferyard chart in Table 7-1 sets forth requirements for various use classifications. 
2.  Buffering for adjacent nonresidential developed lots on which there is two hundred (200) or more feet between the common property line and any existing development may be reduced by one (1) letter (from C to B for example). 
3.  Manufactured home parks must adhere to the buffer requirements specified in the regulations for manufactured home parks. 
4.  The minimum allowed bufferyard width is six (6) feet. Where the bufferyard width is less than nine (9) feet, two (2) small trees shall be provided for every large tree otherwise required. 
Table 7-1. Use Classification Bufferyard Requirements 
Adjacent Land Use Class 1 Adjacent 
Vacant 
Residential Proposed 
Land Use 
Class   
  
I   
  
II   
  
III   
  
IV   
  
V   
Zoning 
District II B - - - - A III C B - - - B IV D C A - - C V E D B A - D  
5.  Bufferyard specifications. 
Table 7-2. Bufferyard Specifications 
Number of Plants Per 100 Feet   
Bufferyard Type   
Width (feet)   
Large Trees   
Small Trees Evergreen 
Shrubs A 6 0 3 7 B 10 2 3 16 C 20 4 5 32 D 30 6 7 38 E 50 9 9 50  
6.  The required bufferyard shall be measured in a horizontal line, beginning at the property boundary line to the outermost distance required in Table 7-2 above. All required plantings shall be located within the required bufferyard. 
7.  Buffering with fences, walls, and earthen berms. 
(a)  A closed wooden fence or solid wall which is at least six (6) feet in height may be used toward meeting the requirements of this subsection. Such fences and walls shall be compatible with the material, color and design of the main building, and the required plant materials shall be located between the fence and the common property line. If a fence or wall which meets these requirements is installed, the number of evergreen shrubs and the bufferyard width (amount of land) may be reduced by forty (40) percent (to a minimum width of six (6) feet). 
(b)  Any berms installed in a bufferyard shall have a minimum height of three (3) feet, a minimum crown width of two (2) feet, and a stabilized side slope of no greater than 2:1. A steeper side slope may be used in exceptional cases when: (a) this steeper slope is sufficiently stabilized; (b) the screening objectives of this ordinance are better achieved; and (c) physical constraints of the site prevent the use of a flatter slope. 
If an earthen berm which meets these requirements is installed, the bufferyard width may be reduced by twenty (20) percent (to a minimum of six (6) feet). 
(c)  Where a standard bufferyard covers more than twenty (20) percent of the total area of a lot, a fence and berm combination may be used toward meeting the requirements of this section. Such fence/berm combinations shall be at least eight (8) feet in height and must meet the fence requirements of subsection (g)(1). 
If a fence/berm combination which meets these requirements is installed, the number of evergreen shrubs and the bufferyard width may be reduced by a maximum of sixty (60) percent (to a minimum of six (6) feet). 
K.  Buffering for perennial and intermittent watercourses. A fifty (50) foot riparian buffer shall be maintained from any perennial or intermittent stream in accordance with the Tar Pamlico Nutrient Management Regulations as adopted by the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources. Land disturbing activities within the riparian buffer shall be limited to those permitted by the NC DENR regulations. 
L.  [Reserved.] 
M.  [Reserved.] 
N.  Landscape screens/buffer, unsightly areas. The planning board may require screen/buffers and/or berms to block unsightly views. The intent of a screens/buffer is to use plant materials and/or other landscape architectural elements, fences or walls to obscure views from the backs and sides of adjacent properties and roadways or trash collection and dumpster locations. Breaks in screens shall be permitted to provide adequate ingress and egress as needed. Loading docks for semi-trailers and trucks over thirty-five (35) feet in length, mini-warehouses, correctional institutions, service courts, and outside storage of material stocks or equipment, not for sale on the premises, such as motor vehicles, farm equipment, or construction equipment, shall normally be screened from unobstructed off-site views. 
O.  Landscape screen standards. Features and uses specified in subsection 703.0 above as requiring screen/buffers shall provide a visual obstruction from adjacent properties in conformance with the following standards: The screen may be composed of existing undisturbed or re-planted, view-obscuring vegetation, wall, fence, or berm. The items may be used individually or in combination. The result shall be a semi-opaque (seventy-five (75) percent) screen which obscures views from the ground to a height of the object being screened; however, the screen is not required to exceed eight (8) feet. Plant materials shall be at least two (2) feet tall at the time of installation and reach the desired height within three (3) to five (5) years of planting. When a combination of features is proposed, one-third ( 1/3 ) of the surface area of all walls, fences or berms that face off-site must be covered with plant material within three (3) to five (5) years. Additionally, screen areas shall be sufficient to allow for the mature growth of plant materials when used. 
P.  Streetscape buffer, major arterials and collector street trees. The primary objective of major streetscape tree standards is to create a built environment that benefits from the aesthetic and environmental qualities of an extensive tree canopy along the frontages of streets and highways. Trees along major streets are attractive amenities that improve the appearance of the community, providing shade and visual interest. Trees along streets improve air quality, reduce stormwater runoff, provide wildlife habitat and moderate the micro-climate impacts of heat absorbed by paved surfaces. Street tree standards promote an appropriate balance between the built environment and the preservation of natural vegetation. 
1.  Street trees for non-residential development. In all non-residential developments which do not have street yard plantings, the developer shall either retain or plant trees in front yards and corner side yards along any frontage with adjacent public rights-of-way such that there is an average at least one (1) large street tree for every thirty (30) feet of street frontage. The location of trees may be varied, as long as there is a minimum of one (1) large tree for every one hundred (100) feet of street frontage. Driveway widths may be subtracted from the frontage linear feet. 
2.  Streetscape buffer for residential subdivisions. In all residential subdivisions along any minor or major arterial street frontage abutting the development, an average twenty-five (25) foot streetscape buffer shall be provided and protect the subdivision and adjacent residence's side and rear yards from traffic noise. The screen may be composed of existing undisturbed or re-planted, view-obscuring vegetation, wall, fence, or berm. The items may be used individually or in combination. The result shall be a semi-opaque (seventy-five (75) percent) screen which obscures views from the major street into the subdivision lots being screened; however, the screen is not required to exceed twelve (12) feet in height from the ground. Plant materials shall be at least two (2) feet tall at the time of installation and reach the desired height within three (3) to five (5) years of planting. When a combination of features is proposed, one-third ( 1/3 ) of the surface area of all walls, fences or berms that face off-site must be covered with plant material within three (3) to five (5) years. Additionally, screen areas shall be sufficient to allow for the mature growth of plant materials when used. 
3.  Protection. Property owners and developers shall be responsible for making a good faith effort to protect existing or installed streetscape trees and buffers in accordance with standard horticultural practice. Such good faith efforts over twelve (12) months from the issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be deemed to meet these requirements. 
4.  Existing trees. Developers are encouraged to use existing specimen and other trees identified on the tree survey to meet the requirements of LDC, as long as existing trees are protected in accordance with the standards herein, protection of existing vegetation. Existing trees preserved to meet other requirements of the LDC may be used to meet these requirements as well. Street tree credit shall be granted to a development for preserving existing trees in public rights-of-way adjacent to the development provided that the root zone outside of the public right-of-way is protected. 
5.  Street tree installation. Street trees to be provided in accordance with chapter 7 of this LDC, streetscape buffer tree standards, shall be clearly noted on any site plan, development plan, preliminary plat, final plat, special use permit. Street trees shall be of a species included on the list of acceptable street tree species adopted by the director. Streetscape buffer trees shall be planted in accordance therewith shall be at least two and one-half (21/2) inch caliper measured four and one-half (41/2) feet above the ground. The director or the director's designee shall have the authority to vary on a case-by-case basis the amount and size of required street trees where an alternative requirement would address unique site conditions and allow design flexibility while still serving the objectives for street tree standards. New street trees shall be located within the front setback area and within twenty-five (25) feet of the street right-of-way and shall not be located within or within four (4) feet of any street right-of-way or within any right-of-way easement. However, the director of public works or the director's appointee shall have the authority to approve street tree planting in the street right-of-way in situations where street trees will not conflict with public utilities or the provision of other public services. At least two hundred fifty (250) square feet of contiguous, un-encroached growing area shall be provided for each tree. The director of public works or the director's appointee shall have the authority to approve a street tree growing area of smaller size where special features are utilized in the site design to provide for adequate growth of street trees. Planting location shall take into consideration any roadway widening identified on approved arterial plans but not provided by the development. Street trees required by chapter 7, streetscape buffer tree standards, on any lot shall be planted before a certificate of occupancy is issued, except that the planting may be postponed to the appropriate season in accordance with the requirements of chapter 7, request for extension of compliance with landscaping requirements. 
6.  Application of streetscape and street tree standards. All new development and land disturbing activity shall be conducted in accordance with this section, following adoption, except additions to existing residential buildings on single-family residential lots of record. 
Q.  Variations. The planning board may modify buffer and landscape standards where: 
1.  There are special considerations of site design and/or topography. 
2.  There is existing healthy vegetation that is sufficient to meet the requirements of this section in part or in whole. 
3.  There exists a unique relationship to other properties. 
4.  The plantings or planting area would conflict with utilities, easements, or overhead power lines, or encroach upon city trees, as recommended by the director. 
5.  Proposed street widening not provided by the developer will consume the landscaping area. 
6.  The additional screening or landscaping requirements of any other section warrants a variance, in which case, the approving authority may vary the requirements of this LDC so long as the intent of all sections are met. 
The director may require alternative buffers or landscaping when a modification to the requirements of this section is warranted in order to meet the intent of the specified standards. 
R.  [Reserved.] 
S.  [Reserved.] 
T.  Landscaping in site distance triangles. Within a thirty (30) foot by thirty (30) foot sight distance triangle where any two (2) public streets intersect, all landscaping shall remain clear between and within the plain described as thirty (30) inches to ninety-six (96) inches in height above ground level. There shall be no obstructions to vision in compliance with chapter 7. Within parking lots where drive aisles intersect a travel lane, a ten (10) foot sight distance easement shall be maintained and landscaping shall remain clear of obstructions to vision between and within the plain described as thirty (30) inches to ninety-six (96) inches in height above ground level. 
U.  Location and spacing. Plant materials shall be spaced in such a way as to provide an effective buffer. For example, trees and shrubs planted in a row which is parallel to the common property line would be acceptable, whereas plants in rows which are perpendicular to the common property line are not acceptable. 
V.  Screening fence, wall or hedge. For the purpose of maintaining a compatible relationship between certain land uses, a screening requirement may be established in other sections of this LDC. When provisions require the construction of a screen wall or fence as a condition, the screening wall or fence: 
1.  Shall be constructed, designed, and arranged to provide visual separation of such uses, irrespective of vegetation. 
2.  Shall not be less than six (6) feet in height in side and rear yards, however in front yard setback areas, no fence or wall shall exceed four (4) feet in height. 
3.  Shall be constructed with all braces and supports on the interior, except where both sides are of the same design and appearance. 
4.  Shall be erected prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or prior to the initiation of any use; and 
5.  Shall be repaired and maintained as necessary. 
W.  Landscaping for single-family lots, duplex sites and multifamily developments. At least one (1) large tree and one (1) small tree shall be provided on all single-family residential lots. Duplex lots shall require one (1) large tree per unit. Multifamily units shall require one (1) large tree per each four (4) units. The required trees shall comply with chapter 7, landscaping requirements preservation of existing trees on the site meeting the standards may be counted towards this requirement. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2016-95, § 4, 12-12-16; Ord. No. O-2017-95, § 5, 11-13-17; Ord. No. O-2017-96, §§ 2, 3, 11-13-17; Ord. No. O-2018-78, §§ 2, 3, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 705. - Drainage improvements, soil erosion and sediment control. 
    Drainage improvements may be required for any regulated development in conformance with the provisions of this LDC. Soil erosion and sediment control-related measures are required for any regulated land disturbance activity, in accordance with the standards set forth in chapter 8 of this LDC. All temporary measures and permanent erosion control and sediment control shall be maintained continuously in an effective, working condition. 
Sec. 706. - Driveways/roadway access and sidewalks. 
A.  Single-family and duplex dwellings. Curb openings for single-family and duplex dwellings shall conform to the standards in chapter 7. All residential driveways shall be surfaced with concrete, asphalt, or an approved decorative hard surface, except in the A-1 District. All existing nonconforming driveways and curb openings that serve existing residences shall be excluded from the requirements of this section. 
B.  Nonresidential development driveways. Curb openings for nonresidential development shall conform to the standards in chapter 7. Driveways shall be surfaced with concrete, asphalt or an approved decorative hard surface, except in the A-1 district. All existing nonconforming driveways and curb openings that serve existing nonresidential development shall be excluded from the requirements of this section. 
C.  Sidewalks. All site development and subdivision construction plans shall provide for the installation of sidewalks in accordance with the location and design requirements established in chapter 13 entitled "minimum design and improvements requirements", section 1304, subdivision improvements. As a condition of plan approval except as provided below: 
1.  Existing development expansion: The sidewalk requirement may be waived for modifications of existing sites with an impervious area expansion of less than twenty-five (25) percent provided any building expansion is no more than two thousand (2,000) square feet and the total expansion of impervious area is less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
D.  Sight distance easement (SDE). 
1.  To the extent feasible within frontage limits, a driveway or street connection should provide the recommended sight distance requirements as set forth in "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets" (current edition) by the American Association of State Highway Officials. The following table lists minimum sight distance values for various design vehicles. 
Table 7-3. Design Sight Distance (ft) Per 10 MPH of Design Speed. 
ARTERIAL TWO LANES FOUR LANES SIX LANES Passenger Vehicle 100 120 130 Utility Vehicle 130 150 170 Truck w/50' 
Turn Radius 170 200 210  
2.  In those locations where the required sight distance cannot be met to the right and/or left of the driveway location, left-turn movements from or into the driveway may be prohibited, thus, restricting the driveway operation to right turns only. In addition to those locations where the required sight distance cannot be met to the left of the driveway, a deceleration lane and a right turn acceleration lane, designed in accordance with AASHTO standards, may be required. 
3.  In order to achieve adequate sight distance, the property owner will, at a minimum, be required to dedicate a ten (10) foot by seventy (70) foot sight distance easement that would remain clear between thirty (30) inches to ninety-six (96) inches in height above ground level of any obstructions to vision. In all cases, the sight distance requirements outlined in Table 3 above shall be provided. In the event the ten (10) foot by seventy (70) foot SDE is not adequate to satisfy this requirement, the SDE may be expanded to provide the necessary sight distance. Alternatively, access to/from the driveway or street connection may be restricted. 
4.  The available sight distance at street and driveway connections shall not be restricted by landscaping, permanent or temporary signing, or in any other manner. The property owner or lessee shall be fully responsible for providing and maintaining safe sight distances along their property frontage. If the property owner or lessee fails to comply with this requirement, the city may, upon written notice to the property owner or lessee, remove such obstacles from the right-of-way or within the sight distance easement (at the property owner's expense) or barricade the driveway from further use until such corrections and improvements deemed necessary are made. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-37, § 2, 5-9-11) 
Sec. 707. - Fire and life safety access. 
    The following standards for fire prevention, suppression, and access shall be met. 
A.  Fire hydrants. 
1.  Fire hydrants shall be placed in approved locations every one thousand (1,000) feet in single-family residential or townhouse subdivisions in any district. Fire hydrants shall be located so that each front minimum building line is no more than five hundred (500) feet from a fire hydrant and located at street intersections, with intermediate hydrants between intersections, unless otherwise specified by the fire chief and director of engineering. Where structures are located more that one hundred fifty (150) feet the frontal property line, the fire chief may require an additional fire hydrant(s). 
2.  Fire hydrants shall be placed every eight hundred (800) feet for non-residential or multi-family residential use. Fire Hydrants shall be located so that no part of any structure is more that four hundred (400) feet from a hydrant and located at street intersections, with intermediate hydrants between intersections, unless otherwise specified by the fire chief and director of engineering. 
3.  Sprinklered building and/or buildings with standpipe systems shall have an additional fire hydrant designated for supporting that system. Fire hydrants designated for supporting those systems shall be located no more that seventy-five (75) feet from the Fire Department Connection (FDC). 
4.  The planning board and city council may require other spacing upon recommendation from the fire chief. All fire hydrant spacing shall be measured as road travel, not as crow flies. 
5.  All water lines sizes and fire hydrant locations and placement shall meet the latest NFPA standards; however, no fire hydrant shall be installed on a water line less than six (6) inches in size. For nonresidential subdivisions "The Guide for Determination of Required Fire Flow," as updated, published by the insurance services offices, will be utilized in determining the estimated water needs for fire protection. The minimal acceptable fire flow shall be one thousand (1,000) g.p.m. @ twenty (20) p.s.i., unless otherwise determined by the fire chief. 
B.  Fire department connection locations. All FDC shall be located on the street side of buildings or in a vault. All FDC locations shall be approved by the fire department. 
C.  Access. 
1.  Means of access for fire department apparatus to one (1) and two (2) family dwellings shall consist of approved fire lanes, private streets, public streets, parking lot lanes, or a combination thereof. Where structures are located more that one hundred fifty (150) feet from the frontal property line, the fire chief may require additional fire apparatus access roads. 
2.  Means of access for fire department apparatus shall be provided to all structures in planned building groups in accordance with this section and all applicable Fire and Building Codes. 
3.  Where access to an area is restricted because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life saving or fire-fighting purposes, the fire department may require a Knox Box to be installed by the developer in an accessible location. 
4.  All public and private roadways shall be designed in accordance with the current city's engineering manual specifications, standards and designs manual. 
5.  Roadways shall conform to standards established in the city's subdivision regulations. 
6.  Parking in any means of access shall not be permitted within twenty (20) feet of a fire hydrant, sprinkler, or standpipe connection or in any other manner that will obstruct or interfere with the fire department's use of the hydrant or connection. 
7.  Fire lanes shall be provided and marked as required by the fire department fire lanes connecting to public streets, roadways, or private streets shall be provided with curb cuts extending at least two (2) feet beyond each edge of the fire lane. 
8.  Parking lot lanes shall have a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet clear width between rows of parked vehicles for vehicular access and movement. 
9.  Structures exceeding one thousand (1,000) square feet gross floor area shall not be set back more than fifty (50) feet from an approved fire lane or street. 
10.  Where traffic signals are required by Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) or installed otherwise in normal or designated fire department access routes, the developer shall be responsible for the installation of Opticom or other traffic management devices as required by the fire department. 
D.  Knox Box. The following structures shall be equipped with a Knox Box at or near the main entrance or other such location approved by the fire official: 
1.  Commercial or industrial structures protected by an automatic fire alarm system or automatic sprinkler or standpipe system, or such structures that are secured in a manner that restricts access during an emergency; 
2.  Commercial or multi-family residential structures that have restricted access or gated residential communities with limited access during an emergency. 
Sec. 708. - Off-street parking and loading. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  New development. The off-street parking and loading standards of this section apply to any new building constructed and to any new use established. 
2.  Expansions and alterations. The off-street parking and loading standards of this section apply when an existing structure or use is expanded or enlarged. Additional off-street parking and loading spaces will be required only to serve the enlarged or expanded area, not the entire building or use, provided that in all cases the number of off-street parking and loading spaces provided for the entire use (pre-existing plus expansion) must equal at least seventy-five (75) percent of minimum spaces required according to the tables below. 
3.  Change of use. Off-street parking and loading must be provided for any change of use or manner of operation that would, based on the tables below, result in a requirement for more parking or loading spaces that the existing use. Additional parking or loading spaces will be required only in proportion to the extent of the change, not for the entire building or use. 
4.  Independent parking lots. Parking areas that are not directly associated with a specific commercial, industrial or any other use, or any areas that are regularly used for parking of three (3) or more vehicles shall meet all of the parking lot standards set out in this LDC. 
5.  Loading space required. Every building or structure hereafter constructed in any district for nonresidential purposes, that requires the receipt of material or merchandise for distribution by transport vehicles, shall provide and maintain on the same lot with such building off-street loading space. 
B.  Parking plan required. A parking plan shall be submitted to the director with any application for special use permit or building permit and prior to making any parking lot improvements for curb cuts. Said plan shall be drawn to scale accurately depicting the property lines, easements, structures, sidewalks, parking and loading spaces, aisles, driveways, curb cuts, landscaping areas, drainage and a detail of the surface materials. The plan shall be approved by the DRC. 
C.  Spaces required. 
1.  General regulations. For land, structures or uses actually used, occupied or operated on the effective date of this LDC, there shall be provided such off-street parking space as was required for any such land, use or operation under the provisions of the off-street parking which was adopted by the city and in full force and effect at the time of the adoption of this LDC. If such land, structures or uses are enlarged, expanded or changed, there shall be provided off-street parking for the enlargement or expansion in accordance with the ratios contained herein. If existing land uses are converted to another type of land use or classified by the LDC, then the off-street ratios as contained herein must be complied with. 
2.  With the exception of chapter 7, off-street parking space, either garage or properly graded open space, shall be provided in accordance with the requirements set forth below in all classes of districts. In cases where different parking and/or loading ratios are specified in the table of regulations for special uses, those ratios shall have precedence over the parking ratios specified in this section. 
3.  Each applicant for a building permit or a certificate of occupancy/compliance, whose application has been submitted to the inspection services administrator or authorized agents as provided for in chapter 7, shall include information as to: 
a.  Location and dimensions of off-street parking and loading space. 
b.  Distance between that parking/loading space and the street or alley. 
c.  Ingress and egress of the property. 
This information shall be in sufficient detail to enable the inspection services administrator or authorized agents to determine if requirements of this LDC are met. 
4.  The certificate of occupancy/compliance for the use of any building, structure or land where off-street parking or loading space is required shall be withheld by the or authorized agents until provisions of this section are fully met. If at any time such compliance ceases, any certificate of occupancy/compliance previously issued for the use of the property shall immediately become void and of no effect. 
5.  Where parking or loading areas are provided adjacent to a public street, ingress or egress thereto shall be made only through driveways or openings not exceeding twenty-five (25) feet in width at the curb line of said street, except where the director of engineering finds that a greater width is necessary to accommodate the vehicles customarily using the driveway. Detailed plans of all curb cuts and driveway openings shall be submitted to the traffic engineer for approval. 
6.  No part of an off-street area required for any building or use for the purpose of complying with the provisions of off-street parking requirements in this LDC shall be included as part of any off-street parking area similarly required for another building or use, unless the times of usage of such buildings or uses will not be simultaneous. 
7.  Off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use for which provided or on a separate lot within six hundred (600) feet of any entrance to the building, provided that such parking space land is owned or leased by the owner of the use. Should the owner of the use lose controlling interest of the parking, the use will no longer be in compliance with the provisions of this LDC and will be subject to remedies as specified in this LDC. 
8.  The off-street parking requirement for two (2) or more uses on the same lot may be combined and used jointly, provided that the parking space shall be adequate in area to provide the same total off-street parking requirements with all such uses. 
9.  No parking shall be provided that would necessitate the automobile backing onto any street right-of-way. Sufficient maneuvering space shall be provided on the lot to enable the motorist to enter all street rights-of-way in a forward direction. 
10.  All off-street parking spaces shall be provided with wheel or bumper guards so located that no part of parked vehicles will extend beyond the parking space onto any public right-of-way. 
D.  Parking ratios. Special situations which are not covered by the table below shall be handled by the board of adjustment when an appeal of an administrative interpretation is requested by the applicant. The board of adjustment shall make the final determination as to the number of spaces to be required, but shall in all cases give due consideration of the needs therefore. The following parking ratios shall control, as applicable, in the zoning districts: 
Table 7-4. Parking and Loading Ratios. 
USE CATEGORY REQUIRED PARKING SPACE(S) REQUIRED 
LOADING 
BAY(S) Adult care centers 1 per 6 adults or fraction thereof. 1 Animal hospital, veterinary office 1 per 300 sq. ft. 1 Auditoriums, stadiums, theaters, gymnasiums and multi-purpose buildings 1 per 4 seats 1 Automobile service station 2 per station + 4 per service bay 0 Banks, financial institutions 1 per 300 1 -Bank drive through windows 3 stacking or queuing spaces per window -ATM machines 2 per machine 1 Bars, taverns, night clubs, lounges 1 per 4 seats or 1 per every 50 sq. ft. whichever is greater. 1 Bed and breakfast 1 for each rental guest room plus 1 space per employee. 1 Bowling alley 4 per alley 1 Car wash automatic or drive through 6 per washing or processing area. 0 Car wash self service 2 per bay plus 1 space per bay for drying 0 Caretaker's residence 2 per unit 0 Cemeteries 1 per full time employee plus + required spaces for offices 0 Churches 1 per every 4 seats plus 1 for every 300 square feet of building space not used as a sanctuary 1 Childcare home 3 per home. 1 Clubs or lodges 1 per every 3 seats of meeting space 1 College, technical or vocational school, universities 1 per classroom plus 1 for every 2 students and spaces required for other uses (gymnasiums, auditoriums, residential areas, etc.). 1 Commercial outdoor recreation 1 per 200 sq. ft. plus 1 per every 3 persons accommodated by facility at maximum capacity. 0 Community or private swimming clubs 1 per 100 sq. ft. of water area. 0 Convenience stores 1 per 150 square feet. 1 Dormitories 1 per bed 1 Drive through not otherwise identified 3 stacking spaces per window or use 0 Farm or flea markets 3 spaces for each vendor or stall unit 1 Funeral homes 1 per 200 square feet 1 Furniture/appliance 1 per 400 square feet 1 Golf course 6 per green plus 1 per employee 0 Golf driving range, miniature golf or par 3 course 2 per tee plus 1 per 200 sq. ft. 0 Group care 1 space for every 5 beds plus 1 space for each employee. 1 Home for the aged, retirement home 1 for every 4 residents plus 1 for each employee 1 Hospitals 1 per patient bed plus 1.25 for each full time employee + spaces required for other uses. 1 Hotels and motels 1 per sleeping room plus 1 per employee per shift plus 1 per 4 seats for meeting, assembly rooms, lounges and restaurants or other assembly rooms or areas 1 Industry, light 1.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. or .75 per employee whichever is greater (commercial zones); 1 per 4,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per 600 sq. ft. of office space (industrial zones) 1 Junk or salvage yards 1 per 10000 sq. ft. of yard area. 0 Laboratory, research 1 per 1000 sq. ft. 1 Libraries 1 per 200 sq. ft. 1 Manufacturing, light 1.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. or .75 per employee whichever is greater (commercial zones); 1 per 4,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per 600 sq. ft. of office space (industrial zones) 1 Manufacturing, heavy 1.25 per 1,000 sq. ft. or .75 per employee whichever is greater (commercial zones); 1 per 4,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per 600 sq. ft. of office space (industrial zones) 1 Medical clinic, doctors offices 1 per 200 sq. ft. 1 Motor vehicle raceway 1 per 4 seats (8 ft. of bench). 0 Museum 1 per 500 sq. ft. 1 Nursing home, congregate care, dependent living units .25 per person plus 1 space for each employee. 1 Offices 1 per 300 sq. ft. 0 Outdoor amphitheater, private or government 1 per every 3 seats or 300 sq. feet of amphitheater space whichever is greater. 0 Parks - outdoors areas 0.1 per acre 0 - swimming pool 1 per 75 sq. ft. of water area 0 - tennis or racquet court 3 per court 0 - other areas 0.1 per acre 0 Personal services establishments 1 per 200 sq. ft. 0 Public safety stations 1 per 500 square feet 0 Radio and TV broadcasting studios 1 per 500 sq. ft. 0 Radio and TV transmission towers, other communication towers. 1 per employee 0 Railroad stations and yards 1 per employee 0 Recreation centers 1 per 250 sq. ft. for floor areas. 0 - swimming pool 1 per 75 sq. ft. of water area. 0 Research laboratories 1 per 500 sq. ft. 1 Residential single-family 0 - detached dwelling units 2 per dwelling 0 - duplex 2 per dwelling unit 0 - multi-family 2 per dwelling unit plus .50 for each bedroom over 2. 0 - multi-family, senior 1.25 per dwelling unit plus 1 visitor space per 10 dwelling units 0 - manufactured home 2 per unit 0 - manufactured home park 2 per unit plus required spaces for other uses on site (offices, swimming pools, etc.) 0 - modular home 2 space per unit 0 - semi-detached/attached units 2 per dwelling 0 - townhouses 2 per dwelling unit plus .50 for each bedroom over 2. 0 Restaurants 1 per 3 seats 1 - drive through window 6 stacking or queuing spaces for the first window and 3 stacking or queuing spaces for each additional window. 0 Retail services (free standing) 1 per 200 sq. ft. 1 Service establishments (free standing) 1 per 200 sq. ft. 1 Schools - high school 1.5 per classroom plus 1 per 4 students plus 1 space for every 5 seats in auditoriums and gymnasiums. 1 - elementary, middle, jr. high 2.25 per classroom plus 1 space for every 5 seats in auditoriums and gymnasiums. 1 Shopping centers and malls, 
(Big Box retail) 
Less than 100,000 sq. ft. 1 space per each 250 sq. ft. gross area 2 - Between 100,001 & 300,000 sq. ft. - 1 space per each 300 sq. ft. gross area 3 - More than 300,001 sq. ft. - 1 space per each 350 sq. ft. gross area. 3 Shelter home 1 per 5 residents plus 1 for each employee. 1 Vehicle sales and rentals 1 per 300 sq. ft. of enclosed floor area plus 1 per 5000 sq. ft. of outdoor display area. 0 Warehouses 1 space per 5000 sq. ft. of floor area. 1 Wholesale establishments, other businesses not catering to retail or package trade 1 per 900 sq. ft. plus 1 space for each truck to be stored or parked on site. 1 Youth development center 1 space for each employee and 1 space for each 4 residents opposite said entry 1  
1.  Requirements based on square feet mean actual square footage of gross floor area, except as otherwise indicated. 
2.  Requirements based on the number of seats or students means the number that is determined by the building inspector in accordance with the NC State Building Code. 
3.  Requirements based on the number of staff or employees means the largest number of staff or employees on the largest shift as certified by the applicant. 
E.  Off-street loading regulations. The duty to provide the off-street loading space herein required shall be the joint responsibility of the owner and operator of the structure or structures for which off-street loading space is required. The space shall be provided in accordance with the table below, and all off-street loading spaces shall be designed so that the vehicles loading and unloading shall not rest upon or cross any public street or alley right-of-way. All off-street loading spaces shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide, thirty (30) feet long and have an overhead clearance of fourteen (14) feet. 
F.  Rules for computing requirements. The following rules apply when computing off-street parking and loading requirements. 
1.  Multiple uses. Lots containing more than one (1) use must provide parking and loading in an amount equal to the total of the requirements for all uses. 
2.  Fractions. When measurements of the number of required spaces result in a fractional number, any fraction of one-half (1/2) or less will be rounded down to the next lower whole number and any fraction of more than one-half (1/2) will be rounded up the next higher whole number. 
3.  Area measurements. Unless otherwise expressly stated, all square footage-based parking and loading standards must be computed on the basis of gross floor area. 
4.  Occupancy-based standards. For the purpose of computing parking requirements based on employees, students, residents or occupants, calculations shall be based on the largest number of persons working on any single shift, the maximum enrollment or the maximum fire-rated capacity, whichever is applicable and whichever results in the greater number of spaces. 
5.  Business vehicles. When parking spaces are used for the parking of vehicles for sale, in storage or used in the operation of a business, such parking spaces shall be provided in addition to those otherwise required by this LDC. Parking spaces for business vehicles shall conform to all of the standards of this section. 
6.  Unlisted uses. Upon receiving a development application for a use not specifically listed in the table above, the director shall apply the off-street parking standard specified for the listed use that is deemed most similar to the proposed use or require a parking study in accordance with subsection 707.D. above. 
G.  Shared parking. Developments or uses with different operating hours or peak business periods may share off-street parking spaces if approved as part of a parking plan and if the shared parking complies with all of the following standards. 
1.  Location. Shared parking spaces must be located within six hundred (600) feet of the primary entrance of all uses served, unless remote parking shuttle bus service is provided. 
2.  Zoning district classification. Shared parking areas require the same or a more intensive zoning classification than required for the use served. 
3.  Shared parking study. Those wishing to use shared parking as a means of satisfying off-street parking requirements must submit a shared parking analysis to the Director that clearly demonstrates the feasibility of shared parking. The study must address, at a minimum, the size and type of the proposed development, the composition of tenants, the anticipated rate of parking turnover and the anticipated peak parking and traffic loads for all uses that will be sharing off-street parking spaces. 
4.  Agreement for shared parking. A shared parking plan will be enforced through written agreement among all owners of record. An attested copy of the agreement between the owners of record must be submitted to the director for recording, and recording of the agreement must take place before issuance of a building permit for any use to be served by the off-site parking area. A shared parking agreement may be revoked only if all required off-street parking spaces will be provided in accordance with this section. 
H.  Exemption for central city business area. The off-street parking and loading requirements shall apply to all districts with the exception of that Central City Business District area described by legal description and delineated on an official map approved by the city council and maintained by the department of development services. 
I.  Parking lot design standards. 
1.  An off-street parking space shall not be less than the size required in the city's manual of design specifications as illustrated below: 
2.  Surfacing. All required off-street parking areas, including parking and loading spaces, driveways and aisles, shall be surfaced with concrete, asphalt or decorative hard surface in accordance with the specifications for material and construction methods and approved by the director of engineering. 
3.  [Reserved.] 
4.  Handicapped spaces. Off-street handicapped parking spaces shall be included within the total spaces otherwise required and be provided according to the NC State Accessibility Code. 
5.  Markings. All parking and loading spaces shall be marked and maintained in accordance with the approved parking plan. Directional markings shall also be provided and maintained as needed. 
6.  Fire lanes. Fire lanes as may be needed shall be provided and marked in red as "Fire Lane - No Parking" for emergency vehicle access in accordance with chapter 7 of this LDC. 
7.  Lighting. Whenever lighting is provided, the lighting facilities shall be arranged so that illumination is directed away from residential properties and will not interfere with traffic. 
8.  Drainage. All parking areas shall be properly graded to provide for adequate storm drainage and onsite detention of stormwater as required by the director of engineering. 
9.  Bumpers, curbs or wheel stops. A permanent curb, bumper wheel stop or similar device shall be installed in such a manner that parked vehicles do not encroach or overhand any street, alley, driveway, sidewalk, landscaping or adjacent properties. 
10.  Curb cuts and driveways. All curb cuts and driveways shall conform to the standards in chapter 7 of this LDC. 
11.  Traffic flow. All parking areas shall be designed to minimize traffic hazards, congestion and conflicts between pedestrians and vehicles. 
12.  Paving exemptions. 
a.  Storage of mobile homes, manufactured homes, farm implements, equipment, containers or other similar products in the B-4 (CBD), I-1 and I-2 zones as an accessory use to their sales, service, or rental, shall not be required to pave that portion of the lot devoted to storage. Instead, such storage area shall be surfaced with a sealed, dust-free surface approved by the director of engineering. 
b.  This subsection shall not apply to automobile sales and service uses, nor other uses where the vehicles are moved regularly. 
c.  All parking lots in the A-1 district shall be exempt from the requirement for concrete, asphalt paving. Instead, such parking lots, driveways, aisles and loading areas shall be surfaced with a sealed, dust-free surface approved by the director of engineering. 
Table 7-5. Parking Space Design Standards (Angles) 
45 
Degrees 60 
Degrees 75 
Degrees 90 
Degrees Stall Width * 
8.0' 9.0' 9.5' * 
8.0' 9.0' 9.5' * 
8.0' 9.0' 9.5' * 
8.0' 9.0' 9.5' Stall Width, parallel to aisle A 11.3 12.7 13.4 9.2 10.4 10.9 8.3 9.3 9.8 8.0 9.0 9.5 Stall Length of Line B 24.0 25.0 25.0 20.6 22.0 22.0 118.1 20.0 20.0 16.0 18.5 18.5 Stall Depth of Width C 17.0 17.7 17.7 17.9 19.0 19.0 17.5 19.3 19.3 16.0 18.5 18.5 Aisle Width Between Stall Lines D 12.0 12.0 11.0 16.0 16.0 15.0 20.0 23.0 22.0 22.0 26.0 25.0 Stall Depth, Interlock E 14.2 14.5 14.3 15.9 16.8 16.6 16.5 18.1 18.1 16.0 18.0 18.0 Module, Wall to Interlock F 43.2 44.2 43.0 49.8 51.8 50.6 54.0 60.4 59.4 54.0 63.0 62.0 Module, Interlocking G 39.3 41.0 39.6 47.3 49.6 48.2 53.0 59.2 58.2 52.0 63.0 62.0 Module, Interlock to Curb Face H 40.7 42.2 41.0 48.0 49.5 48.3 52.0 57.9 56.9 50.0 60.5 59.5 Bumper Overhang Typical I 1.5 2.0 2.0 1.8 2.3 2.3 2.0 2.5 2.5 2.0 2.5 2.5 Offset J 5.7 6.4 6.7 2.3 2.3 2.4 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 Setback K 11.3 11.3 11.0 8.0 8.8 8.7 4.1 4.6 4.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 Cross Aisle, One Way L-1 13 14 14 13 14 14 13 14 14 13 14 14 Cross Aisle, Two Way L-2 22 24 24 22 24 24 22 24 24 22 24 24 Module, Wall to Wall M 46.0 47.4 46.4 51.6 54.0 53.0 55.0 61.6 60.6 54.0 63.0 62.0  
* Compact Only     Minimum Parking Dimensions 
Parking Standards 
J.  Parking deck. 
1.  All parking spaces shall meet applicable design standards outlined in Table 7-5; and comply with handicap accessible regulations. 
2.  Prohibitions. Only parking of automobile/passenger vehicles is permitted. No loading or unloading of goods from vehicles is permitted. Long-term or dead storage of vehicles is prohibited. 
3.  Parking decks shall not exceed three (3) stories in height. 
4.  The following words shall be exempt from the total wall sign calculations (exit, enter and parking). Square footage of exempt words will based on a one to one linear feet wall frontage. 
5.  Prior to final approval, legal assurances (i.e. contract, management agreements or property owner association by-laws) shall be submitted to the city to ensure maintenance of parking decks. 
6.  Traditional parking deck. 
a.  Parking decks shall meet the minimum setbacks for the permitted zoning district. 
b.  A minimum nine-foot clearance shall be maintained on the first level and any additional level that provides disabled parking spaces and a minimum seven-foot clearance throughout the remainder of the parking deck to ensure the safe movement of vans and emergency vehicles. 
c.  A minimum twenty-five-foot planting strip shall be provided between the face of the parking deck and the sidewalk. The planting strip shall be planted as follows: 
1.  Trees shall be planted at a rate of one tree per thirty (30) linear feet of street frontage and shall have a minimum caliper of two (2) inches measured six (6) inches aboveground at the time of planting. 
7.  Mix-use parking deck. 
Parking decks may be constructed to the following standards, provided that at least fifty (50) percent of the street frontage of the first floor is used for retail or office use: 
a.  A minimum nine-foot clearance shall be maintained on the first level and any additional level that provides disabled parking spaces and a minimum seven-foot clearance throughout the remainder of the parking deck to ensure the safe movement of vehicles and emergency vehicles. 
b.  No more than two (2) floors of parking are allowed above the street level use at the setback and subsequent floors shall be recessed a minimum of twenty (20) feet. 
c.  Tree requirement outlined in J.6.(d) shall be met along non-storefront entrances. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-1, § 7, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 0-2006-27, § 2a, 4-10-06; Ord. No. O-08-124, § 2, 10-6-08; Ord. No. O-2011-117, § 3, 12-12-11; Ord. No. O-2012-100, § 2, 11-12-12; Ord. No. O-2014-73, § 1, 9-22-14; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 2, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 709. - Signs. 
A.  Introduction. 
1.  General intent and purpose. It is the intent and purpose of this section 709 to establish effective sign regulations that recognize the public as well as private interest and investment in the environment of the city; to promote economic and business development; to protect property values; to reduce distractions and obstructions that may contribute to traffic accidents; to regulate the number, size and location of signs; to prohibit unsafe signs; to cause removal of abandoned signs; and to promote and protect the health, safety, welfare, conveniences and enjoyment of the city for its residents and visitors. 
2.  Principle of interpretation. Any device or object or clusters of devices or objects visible from any public right-of-way that is reasonably certain to distract a person operating a motor vehicle, however briefly, on account of the device or object's illumination, color, contrast, size, height, location, material, or number are disfavored under the LDC ("attention-attracting device"). Attention-attracting devices pose a higher risk to the health, safety, and welfare of the city's residents and visitors than do other devices and objects. Attention-attracting devices may or may not convey a message and can include, but are not limited to, search lights, beacons, strobe lights, strings of lights, barber poles, internally illuminated translucent canopies or panels, electronically controlled message boards, signs, flags, banners, streamers, pennants, propellers and inflatable objects (including strings of balloons) and oftentimes incorporate illumination, which may be stationary, moving, turning, blinking (including animation), flashing or laser. Any sign, which emits a sound, odor, or visible matter, is considered an attention-attracting device. Approved traffic-control devices are not considered to be attention-attracting devices. 
B.  Sign permit. Except as provided herein, before a sign is erected, enlarged, or replaced or relocated, a permit must be obtained from the city and the construction work inspected and approved by the inspection services administrator. All signs must comply with the applicable sections of the building code as adopted by the city. All electrical installations associated with the erection and installation of a sign must be performed by a licensed electrical contractor. These regulations shall apply in all districts. 
1.  Application. The following information shall be submitted with each sign permit application: 
a.  A completed sign permit application form; 
b.  Plans, elevations and specification of the sign and support structure, including all dimensions, materials, major color schemes, structural support and electrical specifications; 
c.  For freestanding and projecting signs, a site plan that includes the location of existing and proposed signs in relationship to property lines, driveways, existing and future buildings and other site features as may be appropriate; and 
d.  An indication of the proposed site by identifying the property by ownership, location and use. 
2.  Review and action by director of development services or the director of development services' designee. The director of development services or the director of development services' designee must review each sign permit application in light of this LDC and act to approve, approve with conditions or deny the permit. The director of development services or the director of development services' designee may grant approval with conditions only to the extent that such conditions specify the actions necessary to bring the application into complete compliance with this LDC. If conditions warrant, the inspection services administrator, or authorized agents, may require such additional information as will enable staff to determine if such sign is to be erected in conformance with this LDC. 
3.  Appeal. Appeals of sign permits denied by the director of development services or the director of development services' designee shall be taken to the board of adjustment within thirty (30) days of mailing of the interpretation, in accordance with procedures in chapter 5 of this LDC. 
4.  Expiration and lapse of approval. A property owner(s) shall have six (6) months from the date of approval of a sign permit to carry out the proposed improvements; thereafter, the sign permit shall lapse, and a property owner shall be required to submit a new application in accordance with this LDC. 
C.  General regulations. 
1.  These regulations shall apply in all districts. No exterior sign may be erected, constructed, altered or maintained in any district, except in compliance with these regulations. Signs serving a public purpose which are authorized by the city manager and erected by the city shall be exempt from the regulations contained herein. Unless otherwise provided herein, no sign may be erected, constructed, altered or maintained without a permit from the inspections services administrator or authorized agents. Application for permits shall be submitted on forms obtainable at the office of the inspection services administrator. Each application shall be accompanied by plans which shall indicate the proposed site by identifying the property by ownership, location and use. The plans shall: 
a.  Show the location of all proposed and existing signs on the lot in relation to property lines and building, zoning district boundaries, right-of-way lines and existing signs; 
b.  Show size, character, complete structural specifications and methods of anchoring and support of the sign; and 
c.  Indicate that such sign has been approved by the director of engineering, if such approval is required by this LDC. 
2.  Additional information. If conditions warrant, the director of development services or the director of development services' designee may require such additional information as necessary to determine if such sign is to be erected in conformance with this LDC. No sign shall be permitted on any public right-of-way except as specifically authorized herein. 
3.  Non-exclusive causes for permit denial. In addition to grounds for denial set forth in this section 709, the director of development services or the director of development services' designee shall not issue a permit for any sign which shall: 
a.  Be attached to or painted on any telephone pole, telegraph pole, power pole or other manmade object not intended to support a sign, nor on any tree, rock or other natural object, except as specifically authorized herein. Signs shall not obstruct any window, door, fire escape, stairway, ladder or opening intended to provide light, air ingress or egress for any building, structure or lot; 
b.  Be erected or continued that would tend, by its location, color or nature, to be confused with or obstruct the view of traffic signs or signals, or would tend to be confused with a flashing light of an emergency vehicle; 
c.  Use admonitions such as "stop," "go," "slow," "danger," etc., which might be confused with traffic directional signs or signals; or 
d.  Obstruct the line of sight of motorists at intersections or along a public right-of-way. 
4.  North Carolina state building code. All signs requiring permits shall be subject to the provisions of the state building code. 
D.  Prohibited signs. The following signs shall not be permitted, erected or maintained: 
1.  Roof signs, except for canopy or fascia signs attached to the walls, eaves, fascia or edge of the roof, and that do not extend more than three (3) feet above the highest point of the roof; 
2.  Signs that are structurally unsafe or pose a safety or health hazard; 
3.  Signs that by reason of size, location, content, coloring, clashing or illumination obstruct or interfere with the vision of drivers or obstruct or detract from the visibility or effectiveness of any traffic sign or control device on streets and driveways; and 
4.  Signs that are located wholly or partially within the public right-of-way or any clear sight distance easement ("SDE"). 
5.  Signs which are attention-attracting devices that spin, flutter, that emit a sound or a flash and that are windblown or inflated. 
E.  Signs not requiring a permit. 
1.  Premises identification signs. Signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in area and bearing only property numbers, post office box numbers, names of occupants of the premises or other identification of the premises shall not require a permit from the director of development services or the director of development services' designee. 
2.  Signs required by governmental bodies. Signs or notices required by the city, the law of the state of North Carolina, federal law or by a court of competent jurisdiction to be placed on lots otherwise subject to this section 709 shall not require a permit from the director of development services or the director of development services' designee. 
3.  Signs in lots used primarily for a residential purpose. Subject to subsection E.4. hereof, with respect to freestanding, hanging, pole-mounted, projecting, or wall sign(s) which are displayed in a lots used primarily for a residential purpose, such sign(s) shall not require a permit from the director of development services or the director of development services' designee provided that: 
a.  The lot displays four (4) or fewer signs; 
b.  No single sign exceeds six (6) square feet in total area; 
c.  No single side of any sign exceeds three (3) feet; 
d.  The height of any sign does not exceed six (6) feet; and 
e.  The total square footage of all signs displayed on any one (1) lot under this subsection does not exceed twenty (20) square feet. 
4.  Display of official governmental flags. In light of the provisions of G.S. § 144-7 and any successor thereto ("Section 144"), this subsection E.4. shall govern the display of an "official governmental flag" (as defined in Section 144) (each a "flag") on all lots governed by this LDC. Pursuant to Section 144, the city may not prohibit a flag from being flown or displayed on lots governed by this LDC; provided, however, the city may, for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, and welfare of its residents and visitors, impose reasonable restrictions on flag size, the number of flags, and the location and height of flagpoles. 
a.  Reasonable restrictions on the display of flags on lots used primarily for a residential purpose. In accordance with Section 144, the city has determined that lots used primarily for a residential purpose may display of flag(s) in accordance with Section 144, whether as a freestanding, hanging, pole-mounted, projecting or wall sign, subject to the following limitations: 
1)  The lot displays four (4) or fewer flags; 
2)  No single flag exceeds twenty-four (24) square feet in total area; 
3)  The total square footage of all flags displayed on any one (1) lot under this subsection does not exceed ninety-six (96) square feet; 
4)  The height of any flagpole does not exceed thirty-five (35) feet; and 
5)  All other applicable permits, if any, bearing on the display of a flag (i.e., a building permit) have been obtained. 
b.  Reasonable restrictions on the display of flags on lots used primarily for a nonresidential purpose. In accordance with Section 144, the city has determined that lots used primarily for a nonresidential purpose may display flag(s), whether as a freestanding, hanging, pole-mounted, projecting or wall sign, and such display shall not require a permit from the director of development services or the director of development services' designee under this section 709 provided that: 
1)  The lot displays twenty (20) or fewer flags; 
2)  No single flag exceeds fifty (50) square feet in total area; and 
3)  If pole-mounted, the pole shall not exceed the lesser of (i) the height of the principal building on the lot or (ii) twenty-five (25) feet; and 
4)  All other applicable permits bearing on the display of a flag (i.e., a building permit, if applicable) have been obtained. 
F.  Permitted freestanding signs. 
1.  Scope and interpretation. A permit to erect a freestanding sign under this subsection F. shall issue only with respect to those lots used primarily for a nonresidential purpose. 
2.  Permitted signs. A permit shall issue for a freestanding sign under this subsection F. upon a showing to the director of development services or the director of development services' designee that: (i) the lot upon which the sign shall be placed is located in a district identified in table 7-6, (ii) such lot is used primarily for a nonresidential purpose and (iii) the sign meets the applicable specifications set forth in table 7-6. 
Table 7-6 
District Type 
of Lot Number 
of Signs Maximum 
Height Area Placement Other A-1 
R-1 
R-6 
R-8 
R-10 
R-6MFA 
MHP Lot of record One (1) per lot of record Six (6) feet Thirty-two (32) square feet Five (5) feet from property line N/A B-1 
PDR Lot of record One (1) per lot of record Sixteen (16) feet One (1) square foot per linear foot of lot frontage up to a maximum of one hundred twenty (120) square feet Five (5) feet from property line N/A Outparcel One (1) per outparcel provided the establishment fronts an arterial street Eight (8) feet Thirty-two (32) square feet for outparcel Five (5) feet from property line Outparcel limited to monument sign B-2 
B-5 Lot of record One (1) per lot of record Sixteen (16) feet One (1) square foot per linear foot of lot frontage up to a maximum of one hundred twenty (120) square feet Five (5) feet from property line N/A Outparcel One (1) per outparcel provided the establishment fronts an arterial street Eight (8) feet Thirty-two (32) square feet for outparcel Five (5) feet from property line Outparcel limited to monument sign B-3 Lot of record One (1) per arterial street frontage Sixteen (16) feet One (1) square foot per linear foot of lot frontage up to a maximum of one hundred twenty (120) square feet Five (5) feet from property line N/A Outparcel One (1) per outparcel provided the establishment fronts an arterial street Eight (8) feet Thirty-two (32) square feet for outparcel Five (5) feet from property line Outparcel limited to monument sign B-4 Lot of record One (1) per lot of record 
If establishment occupies more than one (1) lot of record, only one (1) sign is permitted Sixteen (16) feet One (1) square foot per linear foot of lot frontage up to a maximum of one hundred twenty (120) square feet Five (5) feet from property line N/A I-1 
I-2 
IP Lot of record One (1) per lot of record Sixteen (16) feet One (1) square foot per linear foot of lot frontage up to a maximum of one hundred twenty (120) square feet Five (5) feet from property line N/A O-I 
MA Lot of record One (1) per lot of record Eight (8) feet Fifty (50) square feet Five (5) from property line Monument sign only  
3.  Subsection F. exceptions. Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection F. or table 7-6 to the contrary, a permit shall issue for a freestanding sign upon a showing that: (i) the lot upon which the sign shall be placed is located in a district identified in table 7-6; (ii) such lot is used primarily for a nonresidential purpose; (iii) the sign may be erected under an exception listed in a.-d., below and (iv) the sign meets all other applicable specifications set forth in subsection F. and table 7-6. 
a.  Lots providing drive-thru services. Providers of drive-thru services may, for the convenience of their customers, erect, on a qualifying lot, two (2) additional freestanding signs on the lot of record provided that the sign: (i) does not exceed forty-five (45) square feet in area, (ii) no one (1) side of such sign exceeds seven (7) feet, (iii) the sign is no more than seven (7) feet high, and (iv) the sign is not legible or otherwise appreciable from the public right-of way. 
b.  Lot frontage exception. If a qualifying lot has frontage on two (2) streets, the lot may erect an additional freestanding sign, provided each linear frontage has a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) linear feet. Each street frontage may have one (1) sign provided that such additional sign otherwise satisfies the requirements for a sign located on lot of record in the applicable district as set forth on table 7-6. 
c.  Short-term display exception. A qualifying lot shall receive a permit from the director of development services or the director of development services' designee upon the submission of an application in accordance with this LDC to display no more than four (4) freestanding signs for a period of no more than thirty (30) days. The total square footage of all signs displayed pursuant to this subsection shall be no greater than thirty-two (32) square feet. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, no sign requiring any approval or permit not provided for under this section 709 shall be permitted to be displayed pursuant to this subsection (i.e., a building permit). 
4.  Conditional requirements. 
a.  Conditional setback. Notwithstanding anything contained in this section 709 to the contrary, no freestanding sign may be erected on any lot used primarily for a nonresidential purpose, if such lot is immediately adjacent to a lot zoned solely for residential use, unless a distance of at least twenty (20) feet intervenes between the closest part of such sign and the adjacent lot line of the property in the residential zone. 
b.  Conditional spacing. Notwithstanding anything contained in this section 709 to the contrary, a freestanding sign may only be erected on any lot used primarily for a nonresidential purpose, if such sign is located at least one hundred (100) feet from any other freestanding sign; provided, however, such condition shall not apply if the other freestanding sign is less than or equal to ten (10) feet in height. In the event the director of development services or the director of development services' designee receives two (2) or more applications to erect freestanding signs which would result in a violation of this subsection if both were approved, such application first received by the director of development services or the director of development services' designee will have priority over the later-received application until such time as the first-received application is approved or denied. 
G.  Permitted wall signs, hanging signs, projecting signs and roof signs. 
1.  Scope and interpretation. A permit to erect a wall signs, hanging signs, projecting signs and roof signs under this subsection G. shall issue only with respect to those lots used primarily for a nonresidential purpose. 
2.  Lots in districts OI, OI-2, MA, B-1, B2, B-3, B-4, B-5, I-1, I-2, and I-P. Subject to the limitations set forth in subsection D.1. hereof, a permit shall issue for a wall sign(s), hanging sign(s), projecting sign(s) or a roof sign(s) located on lots in districts OI, OI-2, MA, B-1, B2, B-3, B-4, B-5, I-1, I-2, and I-P and used primarily for a nonresidential purpose in accordance with table 7-7 hereof. 
Table 7-7 
District Number of Signs Area B-1 
B-2 
B-3 
B-5 No limit   
The total square footage of all signs displayed shall not exceed the greater of one and one-half (1.5) square feet of linear building frontage per establishment, and in no case shall the total square footage of all such signs exceed twenty (20) percent of the area of the wall to which the sign is attached. B-4 No limit for an establishment that opens to a courtyard, parking lot or public street   
The total square footage of all signs displayed shall not exceed the greater of one and one-half (1.5) square feet of linear building frontage per establishment, and in no case shall the total square footage of all such signs exceed twenty (20) percent of the area of the wall to which the sign is attached.   
O-I 
O-I(2) 
MA 
I-1 
I-2 
IP No limit Thirty-two (32) square feet  
3.  Projecting and hanging signs. 
a.  Applicable limitations. Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection G. and table 7-2 to the contrary, no permit for a projecting or hanging sign shall issue unless the applicant shows the following will be satisfied. 
1)  Projecting and hanging signs shall be at least ten (10) feet above the finished grade of any sidewalk or other walkway. 
2)  Projecting and hanging signs attached to the underside of a canopy shall be at least nine (9) feet above the finished grade of any sidewalk or other walkway. 
3)  No projecting or hanging sign shall extend closer than two (2) feet to a vertical plane at any street curb line. 
4)  A projecting or hanging sign that extends into a service street and alley rights-of-way shall not interfere with passage of motor carriers using the service entrances at the rear and side of commercial establishments adjacent to such rights-of-way. 
b.  Sufferance. Projecting signs, where permitted to project over a public street or sidewalk right-of-way, shall remain only at the sufferance of the city, and shall be removed within five (5) days of formal notification by the director of development services or the director of development services' designee of any conditions necessitating removal. 
c.  Signs affixed flat against the walls of buildings or vertical surfaces of canopies and not more than twelve (12) inches in thickness shall not be deemed a projecting sign. 
d.  Signs mounted on the parapet or on the roofline and not projecting more than twelve (12) inches beyond the building face shall not be deemed a projecting sign. 
e.  The thickness of such nonprojecting signs shall not be used in measuring setbacks. 
f.  In no case shall the signs covered in this subsection G. extend closer than two (2) feet to a vertical plane at any street curb line. 
H.  Public safety exceptions. 
1.  Emergency response exceptions. In order to reduce response times of emergency response personnel (such as police, firefighters and emergency medical technicians), the following signs shall be permitted: 
a.  Business complex directory sign. Business complex directory signs may be located on any lot used primarily for a nonresidential purpose for the purpose of identifying locations of different activities and buildings of a nonresidential land use contained on one (1) lot. The information contained on the signs shall not be visually legible from any exterior lot line. The location of the sign shall provide adequate vehicular stacking room on-site, as determined by the city traffic engineer. 
b.  Multifamily development identification sign. One (1) identification sign shall be allowed for each multifamily development per street frontage, provided that it does not exceed thirty-six (36) square feet in area and provides the name and address of the multifamily development. Said sign may be either attached flat against the wall of the structure or may be freestanding; if freestanding, the sign shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the street right-of-way and shall be no more than six (6) feet in height above the ground. Applicable side yard setbacks for buildings shall also be adhered to. 
c.  Permanent residential subdivision sign. Permanent subdivision identification signs having a maximum sign area of thirty-six (36) square feet may be erected. There shall be a limit of one (1) double-face sign or two (2) single-face signs (if two (2) single-face signs are employed, maximum area per sign is eighteen (18) square feet) for each street entrance into the development identified by the sign. The sign shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the street right-of-way line. Applicable side yard setbacks for buildings shall also be adhered to. The maximum height shall be thirty (30) inches. Permanent subdivision signs must be approved and permitted by the director of engineering. 
d.  Business/commercial residential subdivision sign. Permanent business subdivision signs may be erected when the approved subdivision meets the following (the following does not apply to subdivisions conveyed by condominiums or townhomes): 
1)  Subdivision shall be comprised of four (4) or more lots and zoned B-3 and B-5. 
2)  Subdivision signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet in height and one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area. 
3)  Subdivision sign shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the street right-of-way line. Applicable side yard setbacks for buildings shall also be adhered to. 
4)  Subdivision signs shall include the name of the subdivision and may include corporate logos. 
5)  Subdivisions with more than one (1) main entrance may be allowed two (2) subdivision signs. Each sign shall be placed on a separate buildable lot of record. 
6)  Subdivisions signs shall only be permitted on buildable lots. 
7)  Lots occupying subdivision signs shall be limited to one (1) monument sign. Monument signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height and thirty-two (32) square feet in area. 
e.  Flush-mounted identification sign. In addition to a freestanding sign, one (1) flush-mounted identification signs may be permitted on lots (i) located districts A-1, R-15, R-10, R-8, R-6, R-6MFA, MHP, and PDR and (ii) used primarily for a nonresidential purpose provided that such sign does not exceed one (1) square foot of sign area per horizontal linear foot of building frontage up to a maximum area of fifty (50) square feet. The content of the flush-mounted identification sign shall be limited to the name of the entity. 
2.  Sign location. If it is reasonably foreseeable that the content of any sign will compel the operator of a motor vehicle to come to a complete stop in order to appreciate a sign's content and that other such operators will stop their motor vehicles at or around the same time in anticipation of the opportunity to read the such sign (for instance, a sign which identifies food items and prices for the purpose of facilitating drive-thru restaurant service), the sign permit will not issue until the city's traffic engineer determines the location of such sign provides adequate on-site vehicular stacking room. 
3.  Entrance and exit signs. Freestanding entrance/exit signs may be erected on any nonresidential lot for the purpose of directing the ingress and egress of traffic, provided that they conform to the following criteria: 
a.  There may be two (2) signs per driveway cut per lot. 
b.  No sign shall exceed four (4) square feet. 
c.  The message shall be restricted to the business name or logo and information used to direct traffic, for example: arrows, or words such as entrance/exit, in/out, freight entrance, etc. The business name or logo shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total sign area. 
d.  Illumination shall be restricted to an interior source. 
e.  The maximum height shall be thirty (30) inches. 
f.  No part of any sign shall be closer than two (2) feet to the right-of-way, provided further that no part of any sign shall be closer than eight (8) feet to the edge of the curb line or the edge of pavement if there is no curb. 
I.  Off-premise signs (billboards). 
1.  Permitted. Off-premises and outdoor advertising signs shall be permitted only on tracts of land zoned B-2, B-5, I-1 and I-2; provided however, that outdoor advertising signs are not permitted in any of the above-listed districts for those portions of the district that may be located within a historic district(s) as defined in this LDC. For the purpose of this LDC, the following signs shall be considered as one (1) outdoor advertising sign: 
a.  A single outdoor advertising sign. 
b.  V-type and back-to-back signs, if not located more than fifteen (15) feet apart at the nearest points of each sign. 
2.  Requirements. 
a.  Setback. Outdoor advertising signs shall observe all setback requirements of the districts in which they are located. An outdoor advertising structure shall not be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any street right-of-way line. In any case, no outdoor advertising structure shall be located closer than three hundred (300) feet to a lot zoned exclusively for residential purposes. 
b.  Size. Outdoor advertising signs shall not be larger than three hundred eighty (380) square feet in area as defined in "area computation." An additional twenty (20) percent of the sign area is allowed outside of the sign area for enlargements for a specific display or copy. The enlargement shall not be permanent and is only allowed for a specific display or copy. The enlargement must be removed when the specific display or copy is removed. 
c.  Location. Outdoor advertising signs shall not be located less than one thousand (1,000) feet from any other outdoor advertising sign on the same street side as measured along the street right-of-way line. An outdoor advertising sign on one (1) street side may not be located less than three hundred (300) feet from an outdoor advertising sign on the opposite side of the same street or from any other existing outdoor advertising sign. This minimum three hundred (300) foot provision applies to street intersections and to parallel or curved streets located within three hundred (300) feet of an existing outdoor advertising sign. 
d.  Other requirements. Outdoor advertising signs attached to a building structure shall not be higher than the wall to which they are attached. Outdoor advertising signs shall not be mounted on the rooftop of any building. 
e.  Height. Off-premises signs are limited to thirty (30) feet in height above ground. 
f.  Cantilever. Off-premises signs may not cantilever above buildings. 
J.  Historic replica signs. Signs are considered to be historic replicas when they duplicate or replicate a sign which previously existed on site. This can be determined by age, type of sign, and time period in which it originated. Signage may be in the form of awnings, projecting or wall signs and shall display original content. Calculations for historic replica signs shall be exempt from total allowable signage for a building/structure. Such signs may be replicated based on photographic evidence or other documentation and shall be approved by the historic preservation commission. The validity of age for a historic replica sign shall be determined by the historic preservation commission. 
K.  Lighting of signs. Where illuminated signs are permitted, they shall conform to the following criteria: 
1.  Unless expressly prohibited, illuminated signs may have either an interior or exterior source of illumination, or both. 
2.  Interior illumination, where the source of illumination is from within the sign itself, shall be such that the illumination emanating from the sign is diffused. 
3.  Exterior illumination, where the source of illumination is provided by such devices as, but not limited to, floodlights or spotlights, shall be placed and shielded so as to prevent the direct rays of illumination from being cast upon neighboring lots and/or vehicles approaching on a public right-of-way from any direction. 
4.  Illuminated signs are required to be non-flashing; the illumination for the sign shall not, either totally or in part, flash on and off, except for public service information signs. 
5.  Whenever external lighting is provided, the lighting facilities shall be arranged so that illumination is directed away from residential properties and will not interfere with traffic. 
6.  When new electrical service is required for a new freestanding sign such service shall be underground. 
L.  Utilities and drainage. Signs and their support structures shall not interfere with surface or underground utilities and related facilities, and they shall not interfere with natural or artificial drainage. 
M.  Sign contractors. All persons engaged in the erection, installation, construction, alteration or relocation of any sign requiring a permit under this section 709 shall obtain an annual sign contractor license from the city or be a regular employee of a licensed contractor. Before obtaining a sign contractor license, a contractor must provide evidence of current public liability insurance policy in an amount acceptable to the city. 
N.  Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good structural condition at all times. 
1.  Maintenance required. Every sign and its support, braces, guys, anchors and electrical equipment shall be maintained in safe condition at all times. All signs shall be kept in a state of good repair and aesthetic condition, free from defective, rusting or missing parts (e.g., broken sign facing, broken supports, loose appendages or struts, disfigured, cracked, ripped or peeling paint or poster paper) or missing letters or numbers and shall be able to withstand the wind load as prescribed in the state building code. Illuminated signs shall not be allowed to operate with only partial illumination. The area within ten (10) feet in all directions of the base of a freestanding sign shall be kept clear of debris and undergrowth. The message of a sign face may be changed at any time provided it complies with this LDC and other applicable local and state laws. The face of a sign and/or a sign structure that conforms to this LDC may be disassembled and taken down temporarily for the purpose of maintenance provided such sign face and/or structure are reassembled to their original location within a period of no more than sixty (60) days. A permit shall be required for such purpose. 
2.  Repair or removal of improperly maintained signs. The director of development services or the director of development services' designee shall possess the authority to order the painting, repair, or alteration of any sign that in the opinion of the director of development services or the director of development services' designee constitutes a hazard to health, safety, or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment. The director of development services or the director of development services' designee may order the removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance with this LDC. Such removal shall be at the expense of the property owner. Signs that are not repaired or removed as required by this LDC shall be cause for the director of development services or the director of development services' designee to take legal or civil action to effectuate such repair or removal. 
O.  Removal of discontinued signs, abandoned signs or nonconforming signs. 
1.  If any sign becomes nonconforming as a result of the adoption of this LDC or an amendment thereto, that sign shall be removed in accordance with section 1104A. of this LDC, as may be amended from time to time, and the owner of the property where the sign is located shall bear the cost of removal. 
2.  Any lawfully permitted sign or sign structure, including but not limited to, the supporting braces, anchors, or similar components which become nonconforming with adoption of this LDC shall be brought into compliance or be removed and replaced with a conforming sign prior to receipt of approval for any subsequent sign permit on such tract or parcel of land. If any such sign or its structure is damaged more than sixty-six and two-thirds (66.67) percent of replacement value, such sign must be removed. 
3.  For conforming signs, any and all sign face advertising must be removed by the owner of the property and a blank opaque sign face must be installed and maintained with like material within thirty (30) days after the sign becomes materially misleading because of the closing of the business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction or other enterprise or activity that is no longer being offered or conducted on the premises associated with the sign. 
4.  The city may cause the removal of any sign erected, maintained, discontinued, or abandoned that is in violation of this LDC. The cost of removing the sign shall be the full responsibility of the owner of the property on which the sign is located. 
5.  If the city causes the sign to be removed, a statement of the actual cost of removal and request for payment shall be mailed to the property owner. If payment is not received within thirty (30) calendar days, the cost associated with the removal shall be levied as a lien against the property owner with the appropriate county clerk. Such costs are in addition to any civil or criminal penalties that may be accessed to the owner for violation of this LDC. 
P.  Area computation. For the purposes of this LDC, the square footage area of any sign shall be computed by the smallest square, triangle, rectangle, circle or combination thereof which will encompass all words, numbers and symbols situated on the sign, including latticework and wall work incidental to its decoration. For signs with three (3) or fewer sides, the total sign area shall be calculated by determining the area of one (1) sign side. For signs with more than three (3) sides, the total sign area shall be determined by calculating the combined sign area of all sides. The total sign area for any facade may not exceed the square footage permitted in chapter 7, business identification signs. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2006-30, § 2, 5-8-06; Ord. No. O-08-49, § 2, 5-12-08; Ord. No. O-08-108, § 4, 8-11-08; Ord. No. O-08-124, § 3, 10-6-08; Ord. No. O-2009-2, § 5, 1-12-09; Ord. No. O-2010-46, §§ 2, 3, 6-14-10; Ord. No. O-2011-25, §§ 4-8, 3-14-11; Ord. No. O-2016-95, § 4, 12-12-16; Ord. No. O-2017-95, §§ 6-8, 11-13-17; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 3, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 710. - Fences and walls. 
    Fences, walls and hedges are allowed on private property within the city according to the following provisions: 
A.  Generally. 
1.  In all residential and O-I zoning districts, fence and walls not to exceed six and one-half (61/2) feet in height may be erected along all side and rear property lines. In front yard setback areas, no fence or wall shall exceed four (4) feet in height. Fences and walls along side and rear lot lines may be constructed to a maximum height of eight (8) feet if approved by the planning board as part of a residential planned building group. 
2.  In residential and O-I zoning districts, fences may be allowed within the five (5) feet drainage or utility easement. Fences are prohibited in all other easements and or rights-of-way unless approved in writing by the director of public works. Fences allowed in the five (5) ft. drainage or utility easement may be removed by the city at property owner's expense without notice. The city shall not be responsible for any damage to any fence, the reinstallation of any fence or for any cost associated with repairing or reinstalling a removed fence. Walls are prohibited within the five (5) feet drainage or utility easement. 
3.  Fences and walls may be erected for existing dwelling unit(s) in a nonresidential zone in accordance with the residential fence regulations of this section. 
4.  Barbed wire, razor wire or embedded glass fences are prohibited in any residential district or local historic district unless specific approval is granted by the city council following a public hearing on the matter. 
5.  Business zoning districts may have a solid or open fence or wall erected to a maximum height of ten (10) feet along side and rear property lines. In front yard setback areas, no fence or wall shall exceed four (4) feet in height. 
6.  Industrial zoning districts may have a solid or open fence or wall erected to a maximum height of ten (10) feet except as regulated by other provisions of this LDC. 
7.  A fence or wall that does not meet the requirements of an open fence or open wall shall maintain a setback at entrances and exits of the site to provide a triangular sight distance easement that shall be a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet in length on each corner side of said entrance or exit. 
8.  On rear property lines in all districts a chain link fence may be erected to a height of twelve (12) feet for the purpose of enclosing a tennis court or other court game. 
9.  Where a fence is located along an interior property line separating two (2) lots and there is a difference in grade of the two (2) properties, the fence may be erected or allowed to the maximum height permitted on either side of the property line. 
10.  A fence with a gate and security latch shall enclose all outdoor swimming pools, spas or other similar pools. The fence shall not be not less than five (5) feet in height. A yard fence meeting these requirements is acceptable provided the swimming pool or spa is fully enclosed. Above ground pools equipped with decks and enclosure railing that is at least five (5) feet above the ground are not required to be fenced provided that the deck area is enclosed and all entrances are equipped with a gate and security latch. 
11.  No fence may be constructed on or in a public street right-of-way or on city owned property without written approval of the director of public works. 
12.  Stormwater retention ponds may be required to have fencing as determined and approved by the director of engineering as part of the conditions of an approved use, site development plan or building permit. 
B.  Security fences. 
1.  Barbed or razor wire fences. The use of barbed wire or razor wire is prohibited in all zoning districts front yards. Where permitted, barbed or razor wire shall not be located within the front setback of any building, and shall be located a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from the closest side or rear yard set back lines abutting a public right-of-way unless protected by an outer fence that complies with this LDC. In such cases, there shall be a minimum of three (3) feet between the outer fence and the barbed or razor wire fence. 
2.  Electric fences. 
a.  No person shall install or energize any fence or allow a fence to remain that is capable of producing an electrical shock by alternating current (AC). No person shall install or energize a fence or allow a fence to remain that is capable of producing an electrical shock by direct current (DC) without first having obtained a permit and passing necessary inspections from inspection services. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall give the electrical inspector the right to abate any violations either by disconnection of utilities, correction by the city at the expense of the owner and/or the responsible party with such cost being a lien if not paid by the owner and/or the responsible party, criminal prosecution, or all of the above, provided the owner and/or the responsible party is notified verbally or in writing and the owner and/or responsible party fails to make said corrections with eight (8) hours of notification. Responsible party is defined as the person who is in charge of the property at the time the violation is detected. 
b.  Security fences capable of producing an electrical shock by direct current (DC) shall be allowed in A-1, B-5, I-1, and I-2 zoning districts provided they comply with the following: 
1)  The installation shall comply with UL 69 (Standard for Electrical Fence Controllers) and the National Electrical Code; and 
2)  The electrical fence may not be located within five (5) feet of any public way; and 
3)  The system may not exceed twelve (12) volts primary voltage; and 
4)  The electric fence shall be completely surrounded by a non-electrical fence with a minimum twelve (12) inch separation between the electrical and non-electrical fence; and 
5)  Warning signs of a minimum twelve (12) inches by twelve (12) inches with lettering no smaller than three (3) inches in height stating: "Warning Electric Fence" or other approved verbiage must be placed at all gates and at twenty-five (25) feet intervals along the non-electrical fence. 
6)  A fire department approved public safety access box shall be placed at a location acceptable to the fire department and shall house keys and or other devices that allow for emergency override of the system. 
7)  Fences that produce an electric shock by direct current for livestock containment and are supplied through a transformer to convert AC current to DC current are permitted within the confines of ones property provided they comply with the following: 
a)  The wire used to transport the current of the DC fence must be identified with an approved flagging material at ten (10) foot intervals; and 
b)  All wiring must comply with the UL 69 and the National Electrical Code and be approved by the electrical inspector prior to being energized. 
Sec. 711. - Handicapped accessibility standards. 
A.  Standards. All development meeting the criteria outlined in subsection B. below shall meet the North Carolina State Building Accessibility Code. The building official shall be responsible for administration of these standards during review of any applications for a building permit. 
B.  Applicability. These standards apply to all new and/or renovated municipal buildings and facilities used by the public. These standards apply to temporary or emergency conditions as well as permanent conditions. These standards to not apply to private single-family residences unless then owner/occupant request the installation of access ramps and/or other handicap facilities, or the residence or portions are converted to a use required to meet the requirements of the Accessibility Code. 
C.  Application for building permit. Drawings and specifications for the construction or renovation of buildings shall accompany the application for a building permit. The drawings, specifications application shall be submitted to and reviewed by the inspection services administrator. 
D.  Exceptions. In cases of practical difficulty, unnecessary hardship or extreme difference, the building official may grant exceptions from the literal requirements of these standards or permit the use of other methods or materials, but only when it is clearly evident that equivalent facilitation and protection are thereby secure. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05) 
Sec. 712. - Site development plans. 
A.  Purpose. Site plans are made a requirement for certain projects under this LDC in order to provide for planned and orderly development. The purpose of this section is to assure that the intent of the LDC is realized through a site plan review procedure and to allow a property owner to record development intentions for a specified period of time. 
B.  Applicability and review classifications. Site development plans shall be required for all new development projects except single-family dwelling units or duplex units. The projects listed and described in subsections 1.-5. below shall be subject to the provisions of this section and shall require a site development plan: 
1.  General plan, Level I, Level II, Level III projects: 
a.  General plans are defined as any plan review project involving commercial, small multi-family and/or industrial projects that are not required to meet the planning building group requirements of this LDC. Single-family and duplex residences are not included in this definition. Examples of general review projects include the following: 
1)  Residential projects containing three (3) or more attached dwelling units. 
2)  An expansion or modification of up to ten (10) percent in the floor area not to exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet in an existing planned building group. 
3)  Any commercial project located within a MA, PDR, O-I, B-2, B-3, B-4, or B-5, zoning district involving one (1) or more buildings with total square footage not exceeding ten thousand (10,000) square feet for all building(s). 
4)  Any industrial project. 
b.  General plan review projects will be placed into one (1) of three (3) levels for review depending on complexity of the proposed development. 
1)  Level I projects are small additions, up to one thousand (1,000) square feet in area, that do not require any additional site work except for the building construction. Level I projects must submit plans meeting only the minimum submittal requirements. Level I general plans are reviewed and may be approved by the director or the director's designee. 
2)  Level II projects are all nonresidential projects, greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet and less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet and multi-family projects containing three (3) to eight (8) units that require additional site improvements such as additional parking, water and sewer main extensions and/or drainage improvements. Level II projects must submit plans meeting the minimum submittal requirements and the other information required to evaluate the proposed improvements for compliance with city codes and standards. Level II general plans are reviewed and approved by the DRC. 
3)  Level III projects include any industrial project located in an I-1, I-2 or I-P zoning district, regardless of the size of the project. Level III projects must meet the criteria for Level II and obtain a wastewater discharge permit when required by the city engineer. Level III general plans are reviewed and approved by the DRC. Areas that are visible from the public right-of-way and that are accessible to the public shall be required to comply with the paving and landscaping requirements as established in chapter 7 of this LDC, however, all other areas are exempt from said requirements. 
2.  A planned building group project is defined as: 
a.  A residential project containing nine (9) or more attached dwelling units (e.g. apartments); 
b.  A residential project with attached dwelling units for individual ownership (e.g. townhouses); 
c.  A commercial and/or office-institutional project located within a PDR, MA, O-I, B-1, B-2, B-4 or B-5 zoning district involving the construction of one (1) or more buildings containing a combined total of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or greater; 
d.  A commercial and/or office-institutional project within a PDR, MA, O-I, B-1,B-2, B-4 or B-5 zoning district involving the construction of three (3) or more buildings regardless of project size; 
e.  A commercial and/or office-institutional project located within a B-3 zoning district, regardless of project size and building number; 
f.  A formerly approved non-planned building group project for which new structures are added to the site and/or the cumulative addition of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or greater is obtained on the site. 
g.  Institutional uses such as childcare centers, churches, schools, and similar institutional uses, regardless of the zoning district, involving the construction of one (1) or more building containing a combined total of ten thousand (10,000) square feet gross floor area or greater; 
h.  A commercial and/or office-institutional project within a B-2 or B-5 zoning district located within the Central City area; 
i.  A college or university; 
j.  A manufactured home park. 
Planned building group projects may be approved by the planning board upon recommendation of the DRC. 
3.  Residential and commercial cluster development projects. (See section 712D.5.) 
4.  Planned density residential (PDR) projects: (See section 712D.4.) 
5.  Other new development projects: The following projects are subject to the requirements of this section and may be approved by the DRC. 
a.  Construction of a building or alterations or expansions to an existing building or use of a property. 
b.  Construction of, or changes to, parking areas, circulation, access points, or other site improvements. Resurfacing that changes or deviates from the originally approved design is also included for consideration under these provisions. 
c.  Alterations of watercourses, watershed boundaries, water bodies, or flood plain boundaries. 
d.  Changes of land or building use where revisions to landscaping or buffering standards apply. 
C.  Criteria for approval. The following evaluations shall be made during site plan review. Site plans that do not meet the criteria identified below shall be rejected. 
a.  Compliance with all applicable LDC and other applicable code requirements. 
b.  Compliance with a previously approved plan, such as a development plan or the city's comprehensive plan. 
c.  Locations and adequacy of pedestrian and vehicular access points and parking areas. 
d.  Design of traffic patterns, traffic control measures and street pavement areas, with provisions for maintaining traffic flows and reducing unfavorable effects of traffic on nearby properties. 
e.  Compliance with landscaping standards and site construction specifications. 
f.  Adequacy of stormwater drainage, water supply, sewer service, fire protection, street signs, and street lighting. 
g.  Compliance with requirements for easements or dedications. 
h.  Conformance with open space and trails planning. 
i.  Solid waste regulations. 
D.  Required contents for site plans. Site plan documents shall contain, the information listed below unless the DRC determines that less detailed information is required for adequate review. No process or review of a site plan will proceed without the required information. Detailed standards and specifications for design and construction are available from city, county and state agencies, as applicable. 
1.  Plan review site plan requirements, Level I. All Level I plans submitted for general plan review must include these minimum submittal requirements: 
a.  Plan must show the following information. The scale on the plan should be such that the relevant features of the project can easily be determined (minimum of 11" by 17" paper). Multiple sheets may be submitted when needed for clarity. 
1)  Vicinity map including North arrow. 
2)  Property identification number (PIN). 
3)  Map of property being developed including North arrow if different from vicinity map. 
4)  Existing property boundaries including metes and bounds and lengths. 
5)  Building footprint and elevations. 
6)  Setbacks from property lines: building and arterial (if applicable). 
7)  Location of all easements and rights-of-way. 
8)  Floodplain or watershed protection area boundaries (if applicable). 
9)  Title block with project name and location, drawing scale, names of engineer and/or surveyor if appropriate, and developer or property owner and date of drawing. 
b.  Zoning and land use information: 
1)  Current zoning designation and existing or proposed land use for the subject property. 
2)  Current zoning designation and land use of adjoining property owners. 
3)  Size and location of any existing or proposed signs. 
c.  Existing and proposed improvements: 
1)  A clear delineation between existing and proposed improvements such as crosshatching for existing areas or other method showing the difference between existing and proposed. 
2)  On site and adjacent storm drainage structures including pipes, ditches and catch basins. 
3)  Proposed and existing streets including street names and current or proposed street address. 
4)  All utilities (water, sewer, gas and electric) including meter location(s). 
5)  Current or proposed type of solid waste collection and dumpster pad if applicable. (Contact the public works department for determination of type of collection required). 
6)  Existing and proposed parking area including number of existing and required spaces, parking area dimensions and type of surface. For surfaces other than asphalt or concrete, parking bumpers must be shown. 
7)  Location of loading areas for commercial projects. 
8)  Location and width of driveways. 
9)  Locations and square footage of all existing and proposed building(s). 
10)  Total area that will be disturbed during the construction. 
11)  Upon review by the development review committee, some projects may be reclassified to a higher level due to additional on site improvements that may be required. 
12)  [Reserved.] 
2.  Plan review site plan requirements, Level II & III. All Level II and III plans submitted for plan review must include the minimum submittal requirements above and the following where applicable: 
a.  Department of development services requirements. 
1)  Lighting plan inclusive of wattage and illumination. 
2)  Number of units and bedrooms per unit, (residential projects only). 
3)  Landscaping plan including calculations and details including location and height of all fences, walls and plants shown with a parking landscape radius detail. (Checklist available from planning dept.) 
4)  Base flood elevation (BFE) and lowest floor elevation for projects located within the floodplain. 
5)  Density or built upon area and calculations for those projects located in the watershed. 
6)  For projects requiring a new or relocated bulk solid waste collection container, show the location and details of bulk solid waste container pad and screen. (Contact public works department for requirements). 
b.  Erosion and sediment control requirements. For sites one (1) acre of disturbed area or larger: 
1)  A completed and notarized financial responsibility form. 
2)  Location and size of temporary swales, berms and diversion ditches. 
3)  Location and size of sediment traps, temporary rock check dams and stabilized gravel construction entrance. 
4)  Methods of permanent ground stabilization (grassing, landscaping), location of temporary silt fences and details on catch basin protection. 
5)  If retention/detention basin is required, a detailed design including emergency spillway and outlet design must be provided. 
6)  The following notes must be shown on the plans: 
a)  A permit from the city and NC DENR as appropriate is required prior to construction. 
b)  The erosion control measures must be maintained in good working order until final inspection and approval of the project by the city. 
c)  Any grading beyond the limits of the approved plan is in violation of the city LDC and is subject to a fine. 
c.  Storm drainage requirements. 
1)  Show existing drainage on the site and the total amount of impervious surface area such as parking lots and building(s) that will be added as a result of the project. 
2)  Show direction of drainage and topography of the site at contour intervals no greater than two (2) feet. 
3)  Provide all design calculations for the proposed storm drainage system: 
a)  Design storm event for various types of pipes. 
b)  Design storm velocities in all pipe sections, swales and ditch sections. 
c)  Pre and post development run off calculations and drainage area maps including any off site drainage that may be impacted by this project. 
d)  Provide plans showing the location, size, invert, grade, rim or grate elevations and type of pipe for all proposed and existing storm drainage pipe, culverts, ditches, catch basins, drop inlets and manholes. 
e)  Show the location and width of all storm drainage easements and indicate if they are to be public or private easements. 
f)  Provide details of all drainage structures to be used. 
g)  Location of floodway and floodplain within project boundaries. 
h)  For all ditches, the side slope grades must be shown. (The maximum side slope shall be dependent upon the soil type and/or the type of stabilization proposed). 
i)  If the proposed storm drainage system connects into an existing pipe or ditch, the existing flow in the pipe at the design storm events must be calculated and the ability of the pipe to handle the additional flow demonstrated. 
j)  Existing and proposed contours (all elevations should be based upon NGVD). 
k)  Design details and calculations for stormwater management and/or other BMP's to be constructed. 
l)  Sanitary sewer requirements. These requirements apply only if a public sewer main is required to be installed. Provide all design calculations for the proposed sewer system to include minimum and maximum velocities in all pipe sections or projects. 
3.  Planned building group regulations. Before submitting a construction plan for a planned building group it is recommended that a preliminary plan be submitted, in an effort to minimize development costs, avoid misunderstanding or misinterpretation, and ensure compliance with the requirements of this section. However, the applicant may choose to omit the preliminary plan process and submit a construction plan. 
a.  Submission and review of planned building group preliminary plan. All planned building group preliminary plans submitted for plan review must include the minimum submittal requirements listed below. The number of sets of plans as established in the city's administrative manual shall be submitted. The DRC shall review the plans for compliance with the standards of this LDC and other city requirements and shall forward a recommendation to the planning board for consideration. 
1)  Proposed name of the subdivision and proposed names of any public streets. 
2)  Parcel information including tax parcel identification (PIN), metes and bounds of property, lot size, current zoning including any conditional uses, adjoining street names, names of adjoining property owners and adjacent zoning. 
3)  Vicinity map location streets and highways, sections lines, railroads, schools, parks, and other significant features within one-half (1/2) mile of the proposed subdivision. 
4)  Contour intervals to sea level datum of not more than two (2) feet when the slope is less than four (4) percent, and not more than five (5) feet when the slope is greater than four (4) percent, referenced to a United States Geological Survey or Coast and Geodesic Survey bench mark or monument. 
5)  Natural features within and surrounding the proposed subdivision including streams, drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas and other significant natural features. On all watercourses leaving the tract, the direction of flow shall be indicated, and for all watercourses entering the tract, the drainage area below the point of entry shall be noted. 
6)  Man-made and other cultural features within and surrounding the proposed subdivision, including existing and platted streets, bridges, culverts, utility lines, pipe lines, power transmission line structures, all easements, park areas, city and county lines, and other significant information. 
7)  Proposed project layout, including building footprint, required parking and loading bay, building setbacks, plan view of proposed water and sewer service, location of required landscaping including perimeter buffers and interior islands. 
8)  Location of curb and gutter along major and minor arterial, collector and local streets constructed with curb and gutter. 
9)  Proposed location and types of solid waste storage facilities. 
10)  Conceptual drainage plan including size and location of stormwater management facilities and pipes and plan view and cross sections of any on site or off site ditches carrying stormwater. 
11)  Proposed finish floor elevation of the building, base flood elevation and floodway if appropriate. 
12)  If a traffic impact analysis is required for the project, submit copy of TIA and show in plan view all recommended improvements. 
13)  Such other information as the subdivider wishes to bring to the attention of the planning board and the city. 
14)  Technical documentation. The preliminary plat submitted shall also be accompanied by the following written information: 
15)  Source of water supply and distribution. 
16)  Horizontal alignment for sanitary sewer, water supply, drainage and flood control. 
17)  Typical cross sections of all streets. 
18)  Certifications and endorsements: 
Certification by the Director of Development Services and the Director of Engineering that this Planned Building Group Preliminary Plan was approved by the Planning Board on ________ (date) and meets the standards set forth in the Land Development Code. 
__________Director of Engineering Director of Development Services  
b.  Submission and review of planned building group construction plan. All planned building group construction plans submitted for plan review must include the minimum submittal requirements in subsection D.1. and D.2. above and the following where applicable: 
1)  Proposed provision for storm drainage and sanitary sewerage, approved by the director of engineering. 
2)  Topography of site at contour intervals of no greater than two (2) feet. 
3)  Size and proposed location of any signs (including business identification, traffic control/parking and handicap). An integrated sign system design shall be required for all planned building group developments. These systems shall be reviewed by the director of development services or designee for materials, colors, shapes, sizes, compatibility with architecture and unity of design for the development. New individual signs and changes to existing individual signs shall be reviewed for conformance with such sign systems. 
4)  All planned building groups shall meet the minimum provisions of the zoning district in which they are to be constructed with respect to the following: 
a)  Minimum lot area 
b)  Parking 
c)  Landscaping 
5)  Where any non-residentially zoned planned building group abuts a residential zoning district, such plan may include one (1) or more of following: 
a)  existing or new berms of a reasonable height, 
b)  additional decorative landscaping or opaque fencing, 
c)  permanent undisturbed buffers and setbacks. 
6)  Proposed solid waste storage facilities: Either mechanically dumped bulk containers compatible with and accessible to city is required. The location and design details of bulk container must be shown on project site plans and be approved by the director of public works or representative. Projects shall be designed and constructed to city standards and specifications. Consideration or proposed use of a private collection service does not negate this design requirement and any modification after plan approval must be approved by the director of public works or representative. 
7)  All hydrants must be served by a water main of sufficient size. In no case shall the minimum size main be less than six (6) inches in diameter. 
8)  Fire department vehicular access to all structures under construction shall be provided at all times. In areas where ground surfaces are soft or likely to become soft, hard all weather surface roads shall be provided. 
9)  Where the length of a dead-end private drive for residential uses exceeds three hundred (300) feet and where a dead-end private drive serves non-residential uses exceeds on hundred fifty (150) feet, an area must be provided for the turnaround of firefighting vehicles on a paved or graveled surface. This area shall not be used for parking and shall subscribe a circular area having a radius of forty-five (45) feet or, shall have a configuration which provides comparable turnaround space. 
10)  At least fourteen (14) feet of nominal overhead clearance shall be provided over the full width of streets, private streets, fire lanes, and other means of vehicular access. 
11)  The fire protection water supply system, including fire hydrants, shall be installed and in service prior to recording the subdivision; or if no subdivision is involved, the placing of combustible building materials for structures, or combustible pre-tested fabricated building assemblies on the project site or utilizing them in the construction of building structures. If phased construction is planned, coordinated installation of the fire protection water system is permitted. 
12)  Types of surfacing, slope, grade and cross-section of drives and sidewalks. 
13)  The location and heights of all fences, walls and hedges shall be shown. 
14)  Profiles of publicly maintained water and sewer lines. 
15)  Profiles, cross sections and slopes of on-site and off-site ditches carrying water runoff. 
16)  Erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
17)  The installation of curb and gutter shall be required for parking lots. This may be waived or modified by the planning board upon recommendation of the director of engineering if storm drainage, traffic circulation and other site design issues are improved by such waiver. 
18)  Depict traffic-control devices. 
19)  All plans and construction details must meet the current specifications of the city. 
20)  Location and size of all heating, ventilation, air conditioning, and refrigeration equipment to be located outside the exterior building wall. 
21)  Timing: Proposed schedule of development including stages likely to be followed. 
22)  In addition to the requirements set forth in subsequent subsections of these planned building group regulations, a traffic impact analysis (TIA) prepared in accordance with city guidelines (available from the department of engineering) shall be required for any planned building group that satisfies either one (1) of the following criteria: 
a)  The proposed development is located reasonably proximal or adjacent to one (1) of the corridors identified in Table 7-1 and is expected to generate more than one hundred (100) additional peak hour trips (a.m. or p.m. peak) or one thousand (1,000) additional daily trips as determined by the most current edition of the ITE Trip Generation Manual. 
b)  The proposed development is expected to generate more than four hundred (400) peak hour trips (a.m. or p.m. peak) or four thousand five hundred (4,500) daily trips as determined by the most current edition of the ITE Trip Generation Manual. 
c)  This work shall be completed by a North Carolina registered professional engineer based on a scope of work approved by the city traffic engineer or designee prior to submittal of the project to the development review committee. 
d)  The submittal of the TIA does not release the applicant from having to amend the analysis to address any substantive changes that result from the development review committee. Guidelines addressing the preparation of the traffic impact analysis will be made available by the city's department of engineering. 
Table 7-8. Corridors Identified for Application of ITE Traffic Impact Analysis Thresholds. 
Roadway From To Wesleyan Boulevard Bethlehem Road Jeffreys Road Sunset Avenue Halifax Road River Drive Winstead Avenue Bethlehem Road Hunter Hill Road Benvenue Road Peele Road Hunter Hill Road Jeffreys Road Country Club Road US 301 Raleigh Rd/North Raleigh St US 301 Bypass US 64 Bypass Hunter Hill Road Winstead Avenue Benvenue Road  
23)  All Planned Building Groups are required to include the following municipal certification on each page of the approved construction improvement plans: 
Certification by the Director of Development Services and the Director of Engineering that this planned building group construction plan conforms to the preliminary plan approved by the Development Review Committee on _______ (date) and meets the standards set forth in the Land Development Code. 
__________Director of Engineering Director of Development Services  
24)  No construction may begin on the improvements required by this LDC until the planning board has approved the plans for those improvements and the plans duly signed by the director and director of engineering. Any party who initiates construction without an approved plan may be subject to the fines and penalties outlined in chapter 12, "Specific Penalties". 
25)  The development review committee may approve an expansion and/or modification of up to ten (10) percent in the floor area not to exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet, the parking area and/or other improvements of an existing or approved planned building group project. The proposed expansion and/or modification shall be shown on the planned building group plan previously approved by the planning board. In approving the proposed expansion and/or modification, the development review committee shall ensure that the project: 
a)  Meets applicable LDC and other code requirements. 
b)  Has adequate provisions for drainage. 
c)  Has adequate traffic circulation. 
d)  Has adequate fire protection. 
e)  Has adequate solid waste collection facilities. 
Upon satisfying the above standards, the proposed expansion and/or modification shall be approved by the DRC. Any project not approved by the DRC may be presented to the planning board for consideration of the standards specified herein. 
26)  Placement of buildings: 
a)  There shall be maintained at least twenty (20) linear feet of open space between individual and unattached buildings in a residential planned building group. 
b)  Any group of buildings forming a courtyard shall have at least twenty-five (25) percent of the perimeter of such courtyard open for access by Emergency vehicles. 
c)  Where the length of a street exceeds three hundred (300) feet and where there exists three (3) or more dwelling units, an area must be provided for the turnaround of firefighting vehicles on a paved or graveled surface. This area shall not be used for parking and shall subscribe a circular area having a radius of thirty-five (35) feet or, shall have a configuration which provides comparable turnaround space. 
27)  Specifically for apartment and condominium projects-Recreation area: Play areas shall be provided for all apartment and condominium planned building groups. A minimum play area of two thousand (2,000) square feet, having a minimum width of forty (40) feet or a minimum radius of twenty-six (26) feet shall be provided for the first six (6) to twenty-five (25) dwelling units. For each dwelling unit over twenty-five (25) in number an additional fifty-six (56) feet per dwelling unit shall be provided. The spatial distribution and number of individual play areas within the planned building group shall be determined by the planning board on the basis of the special arrangement of the dwelling units, topography and other physical features. Swimming pools and their accessory areas shall not constitute any part of the open space requirements. No part of the required play area shall be used for any other purpose. 
28)  Specifically for projects with attached units for individual ownership. (Condominium/Townhouse) 
a)  Minimum lot area. Seven thousand (7,000) square feet for the first two (2) dwelling units of each building; one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet for each additional dwelling unit of each building. Individual lots shall be exclusive of any public land or street right-of-way. In no case shall the number of dwelling units exceed sixteen (16) per acre, exclusive of any streets or publicly dedicated land. It is noted that the planning board may recommend, and the city council may require, a lower dwelling unit density per acre than the density specified by the minimum lot area due to factors such as, but not limited to, traffic congestion, projected demands on community facilities, availability of water, sewer and electrical utilities, and consistency with the comprehensive plan of the city. 
b)  Minimum lot width. Fourteen (14) feet. 
c)  Maximum number of dwelling units per building. Eight (8). 
d)  Setbacks. 
i.  All dwelling units must be setback a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from a public street and a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the initial perimeter of the subject development. 
ii.  All buildings must be separated by a minimum of twenty (20) feet. 
e)  Access. All lots shall front on a public street unless a homeowner's association is established in accordance with the provisions of this LDC and each lot is provided direct access to a public street across common property perpetually maintained for such purposes. A five (5) foot pedestrian, drainage and utility easement shall be provided on each lot along the entire length of all rear lot lines and side lot lines which are situated between the end walls of buildings. No fences, trees, shrubbery or other similar obstructions shall be permitted in that five (5) foot pedestrian, drainage and utilities easement. 
f)  Structures. Location and approximate size of all existing and proposed buildings and structures within the site and all existing buildings and structures within one hundred (100) feet, in addition to public or private easements or rights-of-way adjoining or intersecting such property. 
g)  Circulation. Proposed points of ingress and egress and proposed pattern of internal automobile and pedestrian circulation. 
29)  Specifically for manufactured home parks. 
a)  All manufactured home parks existing on the effective date of this LDC are required to comply with all applicable procedures and requirements of this LDC. Any manufactured home park failing to comply with the applicable provisions of this LDC is hereby declared to be a nonconforming use of land. All manufactured home parks shall continuously comply with the general requirements of this LDC. Failure to meet continuously each of the general requirements shall be grounds for revocation of the certificate of occupancy/compliance. This provision does not require a manufactured home park which was approved prior to adoption of this LDC to locate units with a parallel orientation to the lot (or approved space) frontage. 
b)  Minimum lot area. The minimum area of ten (10) acres, providing for a minimum of twenty-five (25) manufactured home spaces shall be mandatory for the establishing of a manufactured home park. Individual manufactured home spaces shall be at least fifty (50) feet in width and shall contain at least five thousand (5,000) square feet of area. In addition, a park shall have sufficient area to meet all applicable planned building group requirements. 
c)  Permitted manufactured homes. Manufactured homes meeting the definition for Type A, A-1, B or C may be permitted. Type D units shall be prohibited. 
d)  Density. A maximum of six (6) units per acre shall be permitted. 
e)  Parking: Each manufactured home space shall be provided with a driveway sufficient to accommodate two (2) vehicles parked in tandem. A waiver may be granted by the planning board during the planned building group process if an alternate parking design is determined to be appropriate. All parking areas, including those on individual manufactured home spaces, shall be hard-surface material approved by the department of engineering. 
f)  Screening and fencing. Manufactured home parks shall have on their entire perimeter a thirty (30) foot wide, Type D landscaped buffer as defined in chapter 7 of this LDC. This buffer shall be unbroken except at park entrance driveways or walkways. For a park that shares a property line with an existing park that already has a conforming bufferyard, the planning board may reduce the proposed bufferyard by up to fifty (50) percent. For parks located adjacent to railroads, major arterials, or other potential hazards, a suitable barrier shall be provided to ensure safety, and this shall be in addition to the required buffer. Screening of dumpsters is required, if applicable. 
g)  Structures. Location and approximate size of all existing and proposed buildings and structures within the site and all existing buildings and structures within three hundred (300) feet, in addition to public or private easements or rights-of-way adjoining or intersecting such property. This requirement shall include the location of all intended carports, garages, outside storage buildings, etc. Plans must indicate the type of manufactured home to be placed on each space (Type A, A-1, B, and C) and how the unit is to be oriented. A waiver of the parallel orientation requirement for Type A, A-1, and B units (as provided for in the definitions) may be approved by the planning board and so indicated on the plan. A space designated for a Type C unit may be used for a Type C, B, A-1 or A unit. A space designated for a Type B unit may be used for a Type B, Type A-1 or a Type A unit. A space designated for a Type A-1 unit may be used for a Type A-1 or a Type A unit. 
h)  Circulation. Proposed points of ingress and egress and pattern of internal circulation. All manufactured home spaces shall abut an interior drive or street. No manufactured home space shall have an individual driveway access through the required bufferyard to a public or private street. 
i)  Landscaping: As specified in chapter 7 of this LDC and additional requirements as noted in this section. 
j)  Location and dimensions of individual manufactured home spaces. Each space must designate a specific type of home permitted (A, A-1, B or C). 
k)  Provision for storm drainage and a sedimentation and erosion control plan. 
l)  Location and size of open play spaces and all other accessory features customarily incidental to the operation of a manufactured home park. 
m)  There shall be a yard clearance of at least fifteen (15) feet between each manufactured home, including manufactured homes parked end-to-end. Manufactured homes or accessory structures shall be located no closer than thirty (30) feet to any exterior property line of the park, and no closer than ten (10) feet to the edge of any interior street or walkway. 
n)  All manufactured home parks must connect to public water and sewer services. If the internal water and sewer lines are intended to be maintained by the city and/or if meters are to be provided by the city at individual home spaces, all lines shall be constructed to city standards and main lines located either within a publicly dedicated right-of-way or a publicly dedicated easement located outside any interior drive. Service lines from the tap to the individual meter may not be located outside of the dedicated right-of-way or easement. If water lines within the park are not public, the park must be served with a master meter. 
o)  In addition to the yard area provided on each manufactured home space, at least two hundred (200) square feet of recreation area per manufactured home space shall be provided. Recreation areas shall be designed to meet the needs of the anticipated population of the manufactured home park and shall at a minimum include all of the following: 
i.  A play lot for preschool children containing a minimum of twelve hundred (1,200) square feet within five hundred (500) feet of every space, improved with appropriate play equipment. The planning board may reduce the required recreational facilities for children if the park is to be restricted to adult occupancy only. 
ii.  One (1) or more recreation areas for school age children and adults, provided with appropriate equipment for both active and passive recreation. 
iii.  No recreation area shall be located within a power line easement, floodway, or other area not suitable for such purposes. 
p)  All interior streets must meet city standards for either private or public streets. Private streets shall be defined for this purpose as in Table 25 private street requirements, and having the same right-of-way and construction width as a "private street" for a PDR and cluster developments. Walkways constructed of all-weather surfaces shall be provided as needed. 
q)  All homes located within a manufactured home park must have a continuous masonry foundation, masonry curtain wall or skirting (as appropriate for the specific type of unit) installed prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy. The foundation, curtain wall or skirting shall be un-pierced except for required ventilation and access. Where skirting is used, it must be made of material designed and/or adapted for specific use as manufactured home skirting. 
r)  In manufactured home parks, fire hydrants shall be located at entranceways and street intersections, with intermediate hydrants between intersections, but in no case shall there exceed more than one thousand (1,000) feet between fire hydrants, unless otherwise specified by the fire chief and director of engineering. In addition: 
s)  Fire department vehicular access to all structures under construction shall be provided at all times. In areas where ground surfaces are soft or likely to become soft, hard all weather surface roads shall be provided. 
t)  All hydrants must be served by a water main of sufficient size. In no case shall the minimum size main be less than six (6) inches in diameter. 
u)  At least fourteen (14) feet of vertical clearance shall be provided over the full width of streets, private streets, fire lanes, and other means of water system is permitted. 
v)  Lighting shall be provided throughout the park to ensure safety of vehicles and pedestrians. All telephone, cable TV and electric lines shall be located underground. Lighting plans shall be approved by the city. 
w)  All structural additions to manufactured homes, other than those which are built into the unit and designed to fold out or extend from it, shall be erected only after a building permit shall have been obtained, and such additions shall conform to the building code of the city, where applicable, or shall meet the standards of any special regulations adopted with respect to such additions. The certificate of occupancy/compliance shall specify whether such structural addition may remain permanently, must be removed when the manufactured home is removed or must be removed within a specified length of time, not to exceed three (3) months, after the manufactured home is removed. 
x)  Solid waste storage facilities: Mechanically dumped bulk containers (dumpsters) compatible with and accessible to city equipment are required. The location and design details of bulk container sites must be shown on project site plans and be approved by the director of public works or representative. Projects shall be designed and constructed to city standards and specifications. Dumpster sites shall be screened from view of adjacent residential spaces or residential lots. Screening may be accomplished by a closed fence or wall which is at least the height of the dumpster. 
y)  The fire protection water supply system, including fire hydrants, shall be installed and in service prior to approval of the manufactured home park; placing of combustible building materials for structures, or combustible pretested fabricated building assemblies on the project site or utilizing them in the construction of building structures. If phased construction is planned, coordinated installation of the fire protection. 
z)  Consideration or proposed use of a private collection service does not negate this design requirement and any modification after plan approval must be approved by the director of public works or representative. Planned sites need not be screened until developed for use with dumpsters. 
aa)  Manufactured home parks with publicly dedicated interior street systems may be eligible for rollout cart service, with the approval of the director of public works or representative. 
30)  Specifically for business projects. 
a)  The following planned building group development shall apply in the development of a B-3 zoned property, regardless of project size. In addition, projects located within PDR, MA, O-I, B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, districts and churches and schools in any zoning district involving the construction of a building greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet or projects involving the construction of more than one (1) building, structure or combination thereof shall also comply with the following regulations. Relative to expansion of a building and site improvements not qualifying for hereinafter identified "exceptions," existing building(s) and existing supporting on-site improvements such as, but not limited to, parking spaces, landscaped areas, etc. are not required to meet planned building group provisions. Proposed building and on-site improvements (non-exception) construction shall be developed according to these business planned building group provisions. 
b)  Screening and fencing. A screen not less than six (6) feet high of dense plant material and/or fence where the lot abuts a residential lot. 
c)  Lots fronting on a public street. The planning board may approve plans with lots within the interior of a business planned building group project provided that the board finds that adequate access is assured by the design of the planned building group. 
d)  Minimum yard requirements. The planning board may approve plans which do not provide minimum yards along interior lot lines within a business planned building group project. All exterior lot lines located along the perimeter of the business planned building group shall satisfy the standards listed within the "district dimensional standards." 
e)  Curb and gutter. The installation of curb and gutter shall be required as well as pavement as specified herein. The addition of curb and gutter may be waived or modified by the planning board upon recommendation of the director of public works, if storm drainage, traffic circulation or other site design issues are improved by such waiver. 
f)  Plans are required and must show: 
g)  Structures: Location and approximate size of all existing and proposed structures within the site and all buildings and structures within five hundred (500) feet, in addition to public or private easements or rights-of-way adjoining or intersecting such property. 
h)  Circulation: Proposed points of access and egress and proposed pattern of internal automobile and pedestrian circulation. 
i)  Parking and loading: Location and extent of proposed parking and loading areas. 
j)  Points of access and egress shall consist of driveways or roadways at least twenty (20) feet in width and shall be set back a sufficient distance from highway intersections to minimize traffic hazards, inconvenience and congestion. 
k)  Parking areas shall have a stabilized surface with parking spaces and traffic lanes clearly marked. 
31)  Specifically for central city projects. 
a)  The following planned building group regulations shall apply to all new construction or expansions of existing buildings in B-5 or B-2 zoned property located within the central city area. These requirements shall be in effect for both the development of individual buildings over ten thousand (10,000) square feet, and two (2) or more buildings on a single parcel, the combined area of which is greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
b)  Screening and fencing. A screen not less than six (6) feet high of dense plant material and/or fence where a lot abuts a residentially zoned lot, to include the O-I zone. 
c)  Plans are required and must show: 
d)  Structures: Location and approximate size of all structures. 
e)  Circulation. Proposed points of access and egress and proposed pattern of internal automobile and pedestrian circulation. Curb cuts at a maximum combined width of twenty-five (25) feet shall be allowed for each eighty (80) feet of lot frontage or portion thereof. The locations of all points of ingress and egress shall be approved by the city planning board upon recommendation by the city's traffic engineer. 
f)  Signs: The applicable sign regulations shall apply to this planned building group requirement. 
32)  Specifically for college or university projects. 
a)  Plans shall show: 
b)  Minimum project and lot area. All college and university planned building group projects shall contain a minimum of three (3) acres. 
c)  Parking and loading. See section 707. 
d)  Loading bays. One (1) loading bay for each thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of administrative space and one (1) loading space for the school cafeteria. 
e)  Minimum yard requirements. All exterior lot lines within a college or university planned building group shall satisfy the standards listed within the Table 6 "yard and area requirements." In addition, a minimum seventy-five (75) foot setback will be required for any yard that abuts residential development. 
f)  Structures: Location and approximate size of all existing and proposed structures within the site and all buildings and structures within five hundred (500) feet, in addition to public or private easements or rights-of-way adjoining or intersecting such property. 
g)  Circulation: Proposed points of access and egress and proposed pattern of internal automobile and pedestrian circulation. 
h)  Points of access and egress shall consist of driveways or roadways at least twenty (20) feet in width and shall be set back a sufficient distance from highway intersections to minimize traffic hazards, inconvenience and congestion. 
i)  Parking area shall have a stabilized surface with parking spaces and traffic lanes clearly marked with the exception of athletic facilities. 
j)  College or university identification sign location and specifications. Sign size shall be as approved by the planning board. 
33)  Specifically for O-I(2) projects. 
a)  Proposed project shall be a combination of two (2) of the following land uses: commercial, residential or office. Stand alone develop of any one shall not be permitted. No one (1) land use (commercial, residential or office) shall be greater than seventy-five (75) percent of the total development. 
b)  Project shall contain a minimum of two (2) acres. 
c)  A fence not less than six (6) feet must be used in addition to all buffer requirements (reduction in width is prohibited). 
d)  Signs: The applicable sign regulations shall apply to this planned building group requirement. 
e)  Parking: When commercial and office uses are proposed together, parking calculations will be based solely on commercial uses. 
4.  Planned density residential districts (PDR). The district is intended to encourage efficient use of the land and public services and to promote high quality design that will provide a variety of dwelling types as well as adequate support services and open space for the residents of the development. The district regulations are intended to allow innovative development that is integrated with proposed adjacent uses and compatible with existing patterns of development. 
a.  Pre-application conference recommended. Before submitting an application for a rezoning to the PDR district, the applicant may confer with the DRC in order to become familiar with these district review processes. The DRC will inform the applicant of the information required for filing the application. At the pre-application conference, the applicant shall provide the following: 
1)  Boundaries of the property involved; 
2)  Existing roadways, easements, flood zone boundary lines, watershed boundary lines and waterways; 
3)  A general plan of development at a level of detail sufficient to indicate the nature and scope of the project including its magnitude in terms of approximate number and types of dwelling units, location and extent of nonresidential elements, proposed locations of major open space areas, and major circulation facilities; and 
4)  Proposed treatment of the perimeter of the project boundaries bordering other zoning districts, i.e. buffer yards, setbacks, etc. 
b.  Application. Following the pre-application conference, the applicant may proceed in preparing a formal application for a PDR development. The application shall consist of a simultaneous submission of a rezoning request, a special use permit application, a preliminary plat (when required) and proposed site development plan in accordance with chapter 7 of this LDC. Applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee, proof of ownership or statement from property owner authorizing application. 
c.  Development plan required. No building permits or other permits regulated by this LDC shall be issued on land within any PDR district except in accordance with the approved development plan. The developer shall submit a master plan showing the conceptual design of the proposed development and a written instrument describing the conditions for the development. Including but not limited to density, setbacks and dwelling unit type, etc. 
d.  Master plan submittal. The master plan shall include the following: 
1)  A legal survey of the property (with metes and bounds). 
2)  Parcel identification number (PIN). 
3)  General location, square footage, density (units per acre), height and description of all buildings and uses with proposed setback lines. 
4)  Proposed vehicular circulation and pedestrian circulation. 
5)  Storm-water drainage plan, if required. 
6)  Landscaping plan, required buffer yard(s), and proposed maintenance provisions. 
7)  Gross area, lot area, and open space calculated to the nearest tenth of an acre. 
8)  Delineation of any proposed construction phasing of the proposed development. 
9)  Right-of-way, easements, and utility locations. 
10)  Indication of existing natural features of the property, including watercourses, floodplain boundary lines with zones, watershed protection boundary lines, unique natural features and vegetation. 
11)  Notes to plan: Include the name of the development; flood map and panel number; tax parcel identification number (PIN); name and address of property owner;, name and address of developer; name, address and telephone number of project engineer and/or designer; name, address and telephone number of contact person for project; zoning district with any conditions of approval. 
12)  Other information deemed necessary by the DRC and director of development services. 
e.  PDR district requirements. The following requirements shall be met by any proposed PDR rezoning application. 
1)  The maintenance and perpetual existence of required private open spaces, easements, and right-of-way shall be guaranteed by creation of entities and the imposition or real conditions, covenants and restrictions as required by the city council. 
2)  See section 713 of this LDC for regulations relative to homeowners associations. 
3)  In the event that a subdivision plat is not required for approval of the entire PDR, no building permit for any structure within the development shall be granted until conveyances for any required public easements, streets, rights-of-way, or other public areas shall have been accepted by the city and filed with the appropriate county. 
4)  Where public improvements are to be constructed or where improvements are to be made upon lands to be conveyed to the city, the landowner shall, in accordance with approved construction plans, execute the required improvements and obtain the proper inspections, or provide a financial guarantee approved by the city to cover cost of the required improvements prior to obtaining any building permit within the development. 
5)  Privately maintained alleys may only be permitted in neo-traditional, new urbanism or smart growth developments within the PDR districts at the rear of lots to be used for business and residential purposes when constructed to city standards and where easements are included for necessary utility and trash pick-up purposes and maintenance is provided for in Homeowners Association documents. 
6)  The minimum lots size for residential lots shall be thirty-five hundred (3,500) square feet. 
7)  Where residential garages are accessed from a private alley, the rear yard set back shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) feet from the private alley easement line. 
8)  Where any PDR district abuts a residential zoning district, the planning board shall require such plan to maintain or otherwise provide one (1) or more of the following: 
9)  Existing or new berms of a reasonable height, 
10)  Additional decorative landscaping or opaque fencing, 
11)  Permanent undisturbed buffers and setbacks. 
12)  Density requirements: 
a)  The specific density in units per gross acre must be included in the application. The maximum allowable density is as follows: Density specified in the approval is the maximum allowable density, however, a PDR development shall not exceed ten (10) units per gross acre maximum. 
13)  Dimensional requirements: 
a)  Fifty (50) contiguous acres minimum; 
b)  Addition to an existing approved PDR district may be made in increments of any size. 
14)  Streets may be offered for public dedication or may be privately owned by homeowners association. Streets must meet the applicable design requirements set forth in the subdivision ordinance. 
15)  The director shall have the authority to authorize the developer to substitute sidewalks with alternate pedestrian walkways, such as nature trails. 
16)  Minimum lot area: 
a)  The PDR district provides for a variety of dwelling unit styles and support uses with adherence to flexible lot area and yard requirements provided in other districts; the minimum residential lot area shall be limited to three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet. The zero lot line provision may be utilized in a PDR development. 
b)  Pre-existing dwellings: Dwellings that exist prior to the application of a PDR zone which shall remain shall be considered existing nonconforming structures and shall be subject the provisions of chapter 11 of this LDC. 
c)  Setback from any public or private right-of-way: Any building that is erected, reconstructed, or moved shall be setback a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from the right-of-way line. However, for a corner lot, the minimum side distance from any right-of-way line is ten (10) feet. 
d)  Accessory buildings shall not be placed in the front yard not closer than five (5) feet to the side or rear property lines. 
17)  Height requirements. Maximum building height shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
18)  Open space requirements. Fifteen (15) percent of the total PDR area shall be maintained as open space. Street rights-of-way, parking lots, building areas (as defined) and yards held in individual ownership shall not constitute any part of the required open space; however, building areas for recreational facilities may be computed as open space. The city council may also require the developer to provide the city with an option to purchase open space sites at fair market prices for the development of future public recreational areas and/or community facilities. Said option shall become null and void if the city has not exercised the option prior to the completion of seventy (70) percent of the proposed dwelling units in the PDR. Any open space land use not included under approval of the PDR preliminary plan must be reviewed by the planning board and approved by the city council prior to its development. 
19)  Uses within a PDR zoning district shall comply with the table of permitted uses in chapter 5 of this LDC. 
20)  Condominiums shall be recorded in accordance with the North Carolina Condominium Act (N.C.G.S. [ch.] 47C). 
21)  Where applicable, PDR developments are subject to subdivision and PDR provisions of this LDC. 
5.  Residential cluster developments. Residential cluster development provides an alternative to conventional single-family residential development. Plans for the construction of a residential cluster development shall be approved by the planning board in accordance with the requirements of the subdivision ordinance. 
A residential cluster development is defined as a development design wherein conventional zoning standards are relaxed to permit modifications in lot area, lot width, lot frontage, lot coverage, rear and side required yards, sidewalks, and public street access, and to save infrastructure development cost, environmental damage, energy use and land resources by concentrating dwellings in specific areas of the site without increasing the net density above that which would normally be allowed pursuant to section 601 District Dimensional Standards. 
It is the intent of this section to allow a reduction in lot size with the result that land area "saved" by so doing will become usable open space (common area) accessible by all residents of the residential cluster development. 
1)  General requirements. 
a)  Residential cluster developments shall contain not less than five (5) net acres. For the purposes of this section, "net acres" shall be the total area of all lots and common area(s) exclusive of public street rights-of-way. Addition to any existing residential cluster development may be allowed provided such addition meets or exceeds all other applicable requirements. 
b)  Residential cluster development is a use-by-right in A-1, O-I, R-15, R-10, R-8, R-6, R-6MFA and PDR districts. Such development shall be exempt from the conventional zoning standards relative to lot area, lot width, lot frontage, lot coverage, and required yards, normally applicable to such districts provided such development complies with minimum standards set forth in this section. 
c)  Land uses specified as a special use in the applicable districts by the table of permitted uses shall meet all of the requirements as identified in this LDC. 
d)  In locations where the residential cluster development is proposed to be developed immediately adjacent to a developed or undeveloped single-family subdivision which is recorded in the register of deeds office and is zoned solely for single-family land use, the planning board may require at its discretion one (1) tier of lots not utilizing the residential cluster development regulations to be developed around the perimeter or a portion thereof of the property in which the residential cluster development design is to be employed. 
e)  Streets may be offered for public dedication or may be privately owned by homeowners association. Streets must meet the applicable design requirements set forth in the subdivision ordinance. 
f)  The director shall have the authority to authorize the developer to substitute sidewalks with alternate pedestrian walkways, such as nature trails. 
2)  Density. The maximum number of dwelling units allowed per acre are shown in the residential cluster development density table below. These requirements for residential cluster development supersede the requirements of the table of area, yard and height requirements of this LDC. 
Table 7-9. 
Density for Cluster Developments 
(District) (Dwelling Units Per Acre) A-1 2 du/ac R-15 3 du/ac R-10 4 du/ac R-8 5 du/ac R-6 6 du/ac R-6MFA 10 units/6 units O-I 10 units/6 units PDR 6  
*For cluster developments with more than five (5) net acres and less than ten (10) net acres. 
**For cluster developments with greater than ten (10) net acres. 
3)  Lot design and minimum dimensional standards. 
a)  Because the dwelling unit density identified in the preceding section is consistent with conventional single-family development within the district in which the development is located, no minimum lot size or width is required for the subdivision of a residential cluster lot. 
b)  For all of the residential cluster subdivision construction plats approved by the Planning Board prior to June 13, 1994, the following yard setback provisions shall apply. There are no yard setbacks required for buildings constructed for residential cluster development purposes from interior lot lines for residential cluster lots. 
c)  Any residential or nonresidential building construction shall setback a minimum of twenty (20) feet from any public or private street right-of-way line as identified on the planning board approved construction plat and the initial tract of land of the residential cluster development perimeter. 
d)  For residential cluster development construction plats approved by the planning board after June 13, 1994, the following shall apply. The conventional lot setbacks identified in the Table of Area, Yard and Height Requirements for each district shall apply to each cluster lot. In instances where a dwelling shares a common wall with another dwelling unit on one (1) or both sides, there shall be no side yard setback from the built-on side lot line. Minimum side and rear yard setbacks shall be five (5) feet from all interior side and interior rear lot lines. 
e)  There shall be a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet from the perimeter of the initial tract of land of the residential cluster development. This area may be counted toward the dwelling density if the area is dedicated as common area and is accessible to the residents of the development. 
f)  Each lot shall abut a public or private street right-of-way. 
4)  Common area. A residential cluster development shall provide open space subject to all of the following requirements: 
a)  Such open space shall be greater or equal in area to the total amount of area by which each lot was reduced below the minimum lot size requirement of the prevailing zoning district, or as provided under subsection b) below, whichever is greater. 
b)  Residential cluster developments shall reserve not less than twenty (20) percent of the net acreage as common space. 
c)  Such area shall not be used as a residential building site. For the purposes of this section, picnic areas or shelters, ball fields, walking or jogging trails, boat ramps and docks or similar recreational facilities may be allowed. 
d)  Such area shall not be devoted to any public street right-of-way or private street easement, private driveway or parking area. 
e)  Such area shall be left in its natural or undisturbed state if wooded at the time of development, except for the cutting of trails or walking or jogging or, if not wooded at the time of development, is improved for the uses listed under subsection c) above, or is properly vegetated and landscaped with the objectives of creating a wooded area or other area that is consistent with the objective set forth in subsection f) below. 
f)  Such area shall be capable of being used and enjoyed for purposes of informal and unstructured recreation and relaxation or for horticulture if not devoted to other allowable uses in this subsection. 
g)  Such area shall be legally and practically accessible to the residents of the development. 
h)  A minimum of one-half (1/2) of the required open space shall be contained in one (1) continuous undivided part. An open space area designed around the perimeter of the cluster development shall not constitute any portion of this required open space. 
i)  Such area shall be perpetually owned and maintained for the purposes of this section by the homeowners association. 
j)  The location and arrangement of any open space shall be subject to planning board approval. 
k)  There shall be no further subdivision of homeowners association owned property when the final plat of the initial subdivision of the residential cluster development has been recorded in the register of deeds office. 
5)  Homeowners association. See section 713 of this LDC for regulations relative to homeowners associations. 
6)  Validity. Approved site development plans shall be valid for a period of two (2) years from the date of approval. Upon the expiration of said two (2) year period of validity, a revised site development plan shall be required to be submitted as a new project. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. 0-2007-35, § 2, 6-11-07; Ord. No. O-2009-2, § 5, 1-12-09; Ord. No. O-2009-101, § 1, 9-14-09; Ord. No. O-2011-37, § 3, 5-9-11; Ord. No. O-2018-78, §§ 2, 3, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 713. - Homeowners association. 
    The establishment of a homeowners association shall be mandatory for all land subdivisions and developments involving and including commonly owned open spaces and easements. 
A.  Proposed articles of incorporation for the association. Such articles of incorporation shall provide for homeowners control when over fifty (50) percent of the dwelling units are sold. 
B.  Proposed bylaws of the association. Such bylaws shall contain provisions which will facilitate the selection of the most capable officers of the association. The bylaws shall also contain provisions requiring an annual audit and distribution of that audit to all the members of the association. 
C.  Annual assessments. Proposed annual budget of the association showing monthly assessments. The monthly assessments must be set at a sufficient level to ensure success of the association. 
D.  Budget. Proposed ten (10) year income and expense budget reflecting the establishment of a sinking fund for capital replacement. 
E.  Right of entry. Proposed document granting right of entry to the common areas by rescue officers, firefighting personnel, police officers and service personnel while performing their duties. 
F.  Proposed information packet for prospective buyers. The packet shall include a complete listing of all land, buildings, equipment, facilities, and other existing or proposed holdings of the association; time schedule for maintenance of major facilities and information regarding the association's assessments and fiscal program. 
G.  Covenants. Proposed restrictions and covenants for the common area and residential sites. 
H.  Easements. Easements over the common areas for access, ingress and egress from and to public streets and walkways and easements for enjoyment of the common areas, as well as for parking, shall be granted to each owner of a residential site. 
I.  Organization. The homeowners association shall be organized and established as a legal entity prior to or as part of the final plat approval and recording process. Membership in the homeowners association shall be mandatory for each original purchaser and each successive purchaser of a residential site as follows: 
1.  The homeowners association shall be responsible for the payment of premiums for liability insurance, local taxes, maintenance of recreational and other facilities located on the common areas, payment of assessments for public and private capital improvements made to or for the benefit of the common areas, maintenance and repair of the exterior of all attached residences located within the development or other common area facilities. It shall be further provided that upon default by the homeowners association in the payment to the government authority of any ad valorem taxes levied against the common areas or of assessments for public improvements to the common areas, should default continue for a period of six (6) months, then each owner of a residential site in the development shall become obligated to pay to the taxing or assessing governmental authority a portion of such taxes or assessments in an amount determined by dividing the total taxes and/or assessments due to the governmental authority by the total number of residential sites in the development. If the sum is not paid by the owner within thirty (30) days following receipt of notice of the amount due, then the sum shall become a continuing lien on the cluster real estate of the then owner, heirs, devises, personal representatives and assigns, and the taxing or assessing governmental authority may either bring any action at law against the owner obligated to pay the same or may elect to foreclose the lien against the cluster real estate of the owners. 
2.  The homeowners association shall be empowered to levy assessments against the owners of the residential sites within the development for the payment of expenditures made by the homeowners association for the items set forth in the preceding paragraph and any such assessments not paid for by the owner against whom such are assessed shall constitute a lien on the cluster site of the owner. However, assessments levied by the homeowners association for common area improvements may be exempted from the developer owned lots prior to the initial sale of the individual lots or a period of three (3) years, whichever occurs first. 
Sec. 714. - Appearance and design standards. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  These architectural design standards shall apply to all new development in office and business districts, and non-residential uses located in residential districts on parcels adjacent to the following arterials/corridors within the City of Rocky Mount: Benvenue Road, Hunter Hill Road, Raleigh Boulevard, Sunset Avenue, Thomas A. Betts Parkway, Wesleyan Boulevard, Winstead Avenue, Cokey Road, Fairview Road, Goldrock Road, East Grand Avenue, Atlantic Avenue, Marriott Street and Hathaway Street. 
2.  Additions to existing buildings and development sites shall also comply with the provision of these design standards. Additions should be sensitive to original design with improvements where possible. 
B.  Review Process. 
1.  Planning staff will review applications for compliance with these design standards. 
2.  Applications located within local historic districts will not have to comply with these standards. The city's historic preservation commission shall have the authority to review projects located in any local historic district. 
3.  Architectural elevations of the proposed project with colors and materials depicted shall be submitted in conjunction with the site development plan or architectural plans. 
C.  Appeals. 
1.  If in the course of administration a question arises as to the intent or meaning of any of these architectural design standards, the interpretation shall be given by the director of development services. 
2.  Appeals of the Directors interpretation will be heard by the planning board. The planning board's decision may be appealed to the city council. 
D.  Non-residential standards. 
1.  Building materials. 
a.  All exterior walls visible from the street right of way and public areas shall be partially covered with: brick, wood or fiber cement board, stone, or glass. Metal, stucco, or tinted and textured concrete may be used provided they adhere to the following standards. 
1)  If metal siding or stucco is used, it must have visible corner moldings and trim. Masonry, concrete, or other durable material must be incorporated as the base (between the siding and the ground plane) and shall extend at least thirty-three (33) percent above grade. 
2)  If concrete blocks are used they must incorporate a combination of textures and/or colors to add visual interest. For example, combining split or rock-façade units with smooth blocks can create distinctive patterns. 
b.  Vinyl, plywood, particleboard, T1-11, asphalt siding, and smooth-faced concrete block are discouraged as exterior finish materials unless the architect can demonstrate that the materials are appropriate to the design of the building. 
c.  In the Central Business District at least forty (40) percent of the first floor of any non-residential building facade that faces a public street or sidewalk shall be windows, doors or display windows of clear or lightly tinted glass that allow views into the building or display window from outside. Where windows are impracticable, a five (5) feet setback between the wall and the street shall be provided and landscaped with a continuous screen of shrubs, and one (1) tree planted for every twenty-five (25) feet or fraction thereof of street frontage. Trees may be planted in the public right-of-way as street trees. Where windows are not feasible, other wall enhancements and embellishments may be approved by the director where it is determined that the enhancements substantially achieve the intent of this section. 
1)  Exterior material shall be compatible with those of surrounding buildings. Buildings shall use the same materials, or material that are architecturally harmonious, on all walls and other exterior building components that are visible from public streets and any residential districts. 
2.  Building style. 
a.  All exterior walls visible from the public right-of-way shall have a recognizable base, middle, and top: 
1)  Building base must extend at least two (2) feet above grade and be defined by a change in at least one (1) of the following: wall thickness, materials, texture, color, ledges or sills. 
2)  Building top will be defined by at least one (1) of the following: varied roof lines, cornices, fascia, overhangs, stepped parapets, or aligned openings and articulations. 
3.  Building scale and mass. 
a.  A single, large, dominant building mass shall be avoided. Where large structures are desired, variation in the building form is required through the use of projecting and recessed elements, setbacks, and/or distinct roof shapes. Changes in mass shall be related especially to entrances, the integral structure, and/or the organization of interior spaces and activities (i.e. different stores or uses) and not merely for cosmetic effect. 
b.  Facades of eighty (80) feet in width or wider shall incorporate wall offsets of at least one-foot in depth a minimum of every forty (40) feet. Each offset shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet. 
c.  Other design techniques to break up large building forms and wall surfaces are encouraged, including: architectural elements such as columns, canopies or covered entries, and variation of materials, color, and texture. Such detailing may include sills, headers, belt or string courses, reveals, pilasters, window bays, and similar features. 
4.  Colors. 
a.  Colors used for exterior surfaces shall be harmonious with surrounding development. Primary materials shall be natural colors (e.g. grey, cream, brown) or muted primary colors (e.g. red, green, blue). Contrasting colors are encouraged to accent, or emphasize architectural features. The use of high-intensity or metallic colors is discouraged except for accent purposes. The use of fluorescent, day glow or neon colors shall be prohibited as a predominant wall color. 
5.  Infill development. 
a.  New infill development shall either be similar in size and height or, if larger, be articulated and subdivided into segments that are proportional to the mass and scale of other structures on the same block, or if no buildings exist thereon, then on adjoining blocks. 
b.  New infill development shall generally be setback a distance in context with surrounding buildings of the proposed development on the same side of the street. 
6.  Accessory buildings. 
a.  Accessory buildings located in front of the buildings within the same development shall include a consistent level of architectural detail on all four (4) sides of the building as well as exterior materials and colors that are compatible with the primary building in the development. 
7.  Landscaping. 
a.  When streetscape and landscape buffers are required they shall be designed in accordance with Section 704 of this LDC. All parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 704 of this LDC. 
8.  Pedestrian circulation. 
a.  An integrated pedestrian circulation system that connects buildings, open space, and parking areas with the adjacent street sidewalk system and adjacent properties shall be required. Clear and obvious access shall be provided from the building entry to the pedestrian sidewalk. 
9.  Mechanical equipment and utilities. 
a.  Mechanical equipment shall not be placed on the front of buildings. A fence, wall, and/or plantings shall screen any mechanical equipment so as not to be visible to the public. 
b.  The location of utility lines, including electrical, telephone, gas, cable television and other utility facilities shall be context sensitive and in keeping with community design standards (see chapter 7). In recognition of the importance of safety considerations and the view from the public right-of-way, utility lines and facilities shall be placed underground where feasible. Above ground utilities and facilities may only be approved by the director of utilities when cost, technical, maintenance or other system-related considerations are deemed to be significant factors. Electric transmission lines and related facilities, due to their special nature and extreme cost, shall be permitted to be maintained, expanded, repaired, and constructed above ground, based on the requirements of the electric system. 
E.  Residential standards. 
1.  Duplex or triplex orientation. For duplex or triplex units, the primary entrance (front door) of a minimum of one (1) unit shall face the public street right-of-way. 
2.  Tree canopy. At least one (1) large tree and one (1) small tree shall be provided on all single-family residential lots. Duplex lots shall require one (1) large tree per unit. Multifamily units shall require one (1) large tree per each four (4) units. The required trees shall comply with Chapter 7, Landscaping Requirements. Preservation of existing trees on the site meeting the standards may be counted towards this requirement. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-8, § 2, 2-10-14; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 3, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 715. - Street naming and addressing. 
A.  Legal authority. The city shall be responsibility for assigning names to all roadways and addresses to all addressable buildings in the city limit in accordance with Appendix A, 12, subsection 2, 2.1 of the Municipal Code. 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish standards for naming public and private streets, posting street signs and assigning numbers to all dwellings, principal buildings, businesses and industries to facilitate timely and efficient services to residents and businesses of the city and surrounding communities. 
C.  Street naming. 
1.  Streets requiring names. A roadway, private or public, shall be named if it meets one (1) of the following conditions: 
a.  If the potential for two (2) or more dwelling units or business related buildings exist or are proposed to be constructed along the roadway. 
b.  If the roadway is maintained by the city, NCDOT, or private entity. 
c.  Exceptional or unusual circumstances suggest the need for an individual name. 
d.  It is a private lane, street, roadway or development, commercial or residential, as defined by City Code and are vehicular travel-ways not dedicated as a public street, but resembling a local street in that they carrying traffic from a series of driveways to the public street system including, manufactured or mobile home communities/parks, shopping centers, shopping malls, entertainment arenas, and large residential living complexes. i.e. Colony Square Apts., Home Depot Plaza, Cobb Corners Plaza, Benvenue Plaza, Golden East Crossing. 
2.  Street name selection, base/primary: The first part of the complete street name. The following base/primary naming standards shall be used: 
a.  A street name should be appropriate and easy to read (so that children can use the name in an emergency situation), and should add to community pride; promoting local heritage, history and traditions and reflecting local geography and character. 
b.  Names with the same theme (i.e., flowers, states) are suggested for naming streets in an entire subdivision, as a means of general identification. 
c.  Historically used road names should be retained where possible. 
d.  Names tending to be confused as homonyms, having the same or similar pronunciation but with different spellings are not acceptable within the Rocky Mount, Nash and Edgecombe County community. (e.g. Smith, Smyth or Smythe; Ellis or Allice; Allen or Alan or Ellen; Petty, Peggy; Mansfield, Mansill). 
e.  Names which may be offensive (slang, double meanings, etc.) will not be accepted. 
f.  Use of frivolous or complicated words or unconventional spellings in road names is not allowed. i.e. Rockcreek St., Bizness Rd. 
g.  Following the National Emergency Number Standards (NENA), street names will be approved or rejected by the street name review committee (SNRC). 
h.  Proposed streets obviously in direct alignment exhibiting a logical extension of existing streets or roadways shall be given the same name and numbering scheme. 
i.  Streets proposed to be in alignment, having two (2) separate starting points, with structures in place, must physically connect with an all weather roadway within ninety (90) days of the start of construction. (i.e. Emerson Dr. project) Failure to meet this requirement will cause re-alignment of street plat and/or issuance of different street name. 
j.  References to a number as part of the base/primary name are prohibited. (i.e. 2. Two Road, Second Street). 
k.  Street name types/suffixes (2.4) shall not be used as part of the base/primary name. (i.e. Avenue B, Lane Ct., Country Court Ln.). 
l.  Abbreviations of words or personal name initials are prohibited as part of the base/primary name. i.e. Jones Sch. Road, Gov. Steve Patterson Hwy., JR. Lane. 
m.  All forms of punctuation as part of the base or primary name are prohibited. 
Prohibited Use Accepted Use Jones' School Rd. Jones School Rd. Jeffrey's Rd. Jeffreys Rd. St. Johns Ave. Saint Johns Ave.  
n.  References to single alphabet characters or combinations of characters such as A, CO, V, as part of the base/primary name are prohibited. i.e. "A Street", "Co Ah Bar". Exemptions are allowed for names such as O Rileys Way, Man O War Street where the single letters are due to lack of punctuation, not indication of a name or word. (entries of this type in CAD dispatching systems are prone to entry error). 
o.  The word "private" shall not be used as a part of the base or primary name. "Oak Private Drive", "Private Farm Lane". 
p.  A word may be used in the base/primary name even though prior approval has been given to base/primary names that contain that word. i.e. Oak Grove may be considered although Oak Forest has received prior approval. 
q.  The use of "Old" as part of the base/primary name is not allowed unless there is no future use planned for the remaining street name, i.e. "Old Battleboro Rd." is acceptable only if "Battleboro Rd." is not planned to be used. 
3.  Prefixes, type and suffice, second part of an entire street name. Directional prefixes or any combination thereof shall not be used. i.e North, South, East, West. Street types/suffixes shall be designated in accordance with street name types/suffixes definitions in chapter 15. Other suffixes may be considered by the street name review committee (SNRC) providing they comply with United States Postal Service (USPS) guidelines. 
4.  Duplication of street names. Duplication of names within Rocky Mount City limits, and Nash and Edgecombe Counties shall not be permitted. The E911 coordinator shall maintain an updated Master Street Address Guide (MSAG) of the street names within the city limits, and hold a list of Nash and Edgecombe County Street names so that new names will not duplicate existing names. These lists shall be available for review upon request. Proposed street name for new development or for name changes of existing streets shall be reviewed and approved. If two (2) or more streets within the city, and Nash or Edgecombe Counties have duplicates, or otherwise confusing names, one (1) of the street names shall be renamed as outlined in alternates for renaming existing streets. Any base/primary street name regardless of a prefix, or type/suffix shall be used only once. (i.e. Jones Drive and Jones Road; or Sunset Street and Sunset Ave.). 
Exception: 
A court off of a street bearing the same base/primary name. i.e. Rocky Rd. can have Rocky Ct. off of it. 
5.  City/county road coordination. The department of development services and the E911 coordinator shall coordinate road names and addressing with adjacent Nash and Edgecombe counties to facilitate a logical transition where roads traverse city/county boundaries. Roads names and addressing should be continuous the entire length of the road when possible. If road names change at city/county boundaries, the names and addressing shall change at a prominent intersection. Numbering of such streets shall follow the systematic sequence of the most populated portion of the street already adequately numbered; regardless of city or county jurisdiction. Under no circumstances should ranges be allowed to change in an irrelevant area with no distinguishment. 
6.  Municipal annexation of streets. In the event the city annexes an existing roadway and there is a street name conflict, the city shall change the name of the annexed roadway to conform to the guidelines outlined herein. Exception may occur if the previously named street within city limits has no addressed structures, in which case, the un-occupied street name would be changed. 
7.  Naming new roads. New streets shall be named during the subdivision or construction plat submittal process. Construction plans must be submitted with proposed street names and approved by the SNRC. Street name application form shall be maintained and provided by the E911 coordinator. Proposed street names shall be approved by the SNRC process prior to approval of construction plans or issuance of building permits. 
8.  Reserving new street names for new development. Upon written request, the city's department of development services may reserve proposed street names for a time period of one (1) year. The written request shall be submitted at the time of filing application for subdivisions on an approved form maintained and provided by the E911 coordinator. At the discretion of the director of development services and the E911 coordinator, a one (1) year extension may be granted. Upon recording of the subdivision final plat in the appropriate county register of deeds by the director or the director's designee, proposed street names will be official street names and removed from reserved status. If final plat recording of the subdivision plan does not occur within one (1) year of permit issuance, or two (2) years if an extension has been granted, street names will no longer be reserved. The department of development services will review all subdivisions for conformance with this street naming policy at the time of preliminary construction plan review. 
9.  Length of name. New street names are restricted to a maximum of fourteen (14) letters, including spaces and a minimum of two characters. This does not include the type/suffix letters. This assures reasonable sign length. 
10.  Renaming existing streets. Renaming or changing existing street names shall be approved by city council. When issues arise and safety issues result from street name duplications, phonetics, or non-compliance issues, it shall be the responsibility of the E911 coordinator to propose a resolution to city council. 
a.  Conflicting street names. When two (2) or more street names conflict with each other as a result of merger, annexation, or other authorized action involving street name issues, the city's addressing unit (CAU) shall be responsible for proposing a resolution for approval to city council. The CAU will use the following point system to determine which street name should be changed. The street awarded fewer points would be recommended for change to the city council. 
Eliminating Conflicting Street Names 
Point System Condition Points Public complaints concerning the problem 1 Older recognized name (if known) 1 Greater number of addresses/occupied structures 1 Arterial street 1 Historical relevance 1 Existing street name signs 1 Relatedness of town/subdivision names 1  
b.  Notification of conflict/alternate name selection. The city E911 coordinator shall cause to notify the property owners along the affected street of the need to change the street name and advise them of the process for renaming affected streets. 
1)  Within thirty (30) days of the notification, the property owners may make a written request for an alternate street name. 
2)  The CAU shall review from the requested street names or a list of SNRC approved submitted names if no alternative names are submitted or suitable, to determine an alternate name for the street. Those names requested by the property owners, which meet standards established herein shall be giving preference. 
3)  The CAU shall report the selected alternate street name and a second choice name to the SNRC for review and consequent approval. 
4)  The SRNC will review the names for compliance with the street naming policy and for duplication, and report acceptability to the department of development services within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the request for name change. Second choice street names will be assigned if the first choice is not usable. 
c.  Street name change requests from residents/owners. Residents/property owners desiring to have an existing street or private road renamed shall submit the proposed street name change to the department of development services by completion of a street name change request form. The department shall submit the name change request form to the SNRC for review. If the request is reviewed by the SNRC and approved by city council, all entities shall be notified in accordance this section. 
d.  Mediation. Affected property owners may speak at the city council meeting before the council makes its decision and subsequent adoption adhering to council agenda rules and regulations. 
e.  Name change approval. All changes to existing street names and orders for posting of new street name signs shall be approved by city council. 
f.  Notification of name change. The E911 coordinator shall notify the USPS with all street name changes. After notification of acceptance from the USPS, the following entities shall be notified within thirty (30) days: 
1)  E911 telephone service provider(s) 
2)  City of Rocky Mount, Nash and Edgecombe County Emergency Services 
3)  The appropriate county tax assessors 
4)  Elections and school boards 
5)  North Carolina Department of Transportation (NCDOT) 
g.  Affected property owners of street name changes. 
11.  Address number changes: In the event an annexation, merger or other circumstances require that address number schemes be changed, the E911 coordinator shall be responsible for coordinating the change process. 
a.  The department of development services shall determine the address number ranges to be utilized, and do not require city council approval. 
b.  The use of route and or box number addressing scheme shall not be permitted. 
c.  Property owners and occupants affected by the re-addressing shall be notified in accordance with this section. 
d.  Re-addressing shall occur prior to and become effective upon the completion of annexation or merger to assure appropriate addressing of properties is in place, effecting adequate emergency services response enhanced 9-1-1 information. 
12.  Effective date of change. Customer visual (numbers posted on structure, mail box, etc) and postal address changes should be completed within ninety (90) days of notification by the city E911 coordinator. Address number changes, not requiring city council approval, shall adhere too the same procedures. It shall be the responsibility of the E911 coordinator to cause follow up of address changes assuring customers received address change notification and time line of completion information. The owner of the building shall cause the posted address numbers to be changed within forty-five (45) days of receipt of such notice. 
D.  Street name signage. All public and private roads within the city limits of Rocky Mount and its ETJ shall have approved signs and shall display the proper road name with block range numbers. 
1.  Sign specification. Street name signs shall be installed at all intersections of proposed and existing streets according to city specifications; and shall comply in design, installation and maintenance, with requirements set forth below in this LDC. 
a.  Sign color. The street name should be reflectorized or illuminated to show the same shape both day and night, and should have a white legend on a green background color. 
b.  Sign height. Signs should be not less than seven (7) feet above the top of the curb. 
c.  Sign placement. Signs should be placed with their faces parallel to the streets they name, as close to the corner as practicable with the nearest part of each sign not less than one (1) foot from both curb lines. 
d.  Sign letters. The street name shall appear in capital lettering at least four (4) inches high. Supplementary lettering to indicate the type of street such as street, avenue, road, or directional information, may be in smaller lettering, at least two (2) inches high. 
2.  Responsibility for street name signs. 
a.  Existing public roads. The city is responsible for fabricating and installing street name signs at the intersections of all existing public roads, within the city limits of Rocky Mount the Edgecombe County ETJ in compliance this section. 
b.  Existing private roads. The property owners along private roads are responsible for fabrication, installation, and maintenance of street signs at the intersection of all private and public streets in compliance with this section. When requested, the city will fabricate and install street signs on private roads at the expense of the property owner. Subsequent maintenance is the responsibility of the property owners pending dedicated easement of street and right-of-way property. 
c.  New public and private roads. The property developer shall be responsible for fabricating and erecting street name signs at the intersections of all new public and private roads, in compliance with this section within thirty (30) days of construction of an all weather road surface. The municipality shall thereafter maintain street name signs at the intersection of all new streets pending dedicated easement of street and right-of-way property. In new subdivisions, all street names must be approved prior to final subdivision approval. 
E.  Addressing agency and methodology. The city shall establish and assign street address numbers in accordance with the guidelines of this LDC. All buildings used for residential, commercial and/or industrial purposes shall be provided with a street name and structure number address identifying the building (See 717E.2. for exemptions). 
1.  Addressing methodology. 
a.  Numbering. The city shall undertake a systematic numbering program for buildings within the city limits and ETJ having all due regard for the enhancement of rapid location of properties for emergency service providers while providing an easily understood system for the general public. This range assignment shall be relative to the axis established by the department of development services being U.S. Hwy. 301 (North and South Wesleyan Blvd.) for North and South addressing; and Sunset Ave./Tarboro St. for East and West addressing. 
b.  Residential property range: Address number assignment will use equal intervals of two (2) numbers per twenty (20) foot of road frontage of even or odd number. (i.e. 2,4,6; 1,3,5, etc.) The twenty (20) foot address interval will provide for fifty (50) odd and fifty (50) even addresses per one thousand (1,000) feet assuring adequate available numbers. For numbering of dead-end courts/circles, etc, numbers shall begin at the intersection of the adjacent road and terminate at the dead-end. Residential block numbering will begin measurement from the centerline rather than the first structure, site parcel, or addressable site. 
c.  Commercial property range: Address number assignment will use equal intervals of two (2) numbers per five (5) foot of road frontage of even or odd number. (i.e. 2,4,6; 1,3,5, etc.) For numbering of dead-end courts/circles, etc., numbers shall begin at the intersection of the adjacent road and terminate at the dead-end. The five (5) foot address interval will provide adequate available numbers for the many variables of commercial use. (i.e. sprinkler rooms, signage, kiosks, etc.) Commercial block numbering will begin measurement from the centerline rather than the first structure, site parcel, or addressable site. 
d.  Odd and even number convention. Even numbers shall be assigned to the North and West, odd numbers shall be assigned to the South and East. Number assignment will be based on primary direction of the longest part of the street. 
e.  [Reserved.] 
f.  Existing block numbering. Existing block range numbering systems of annexed or merged properties may be left in place if they meet both requirements below: 
1)  The block range numbering system in use within the affected area is systematic with the city standards; and 
2)  The block range numbering system in use within the affected area is of equal systematic interval between addresses, is expandable, and does not provide any duplicate addresses within the appropriate area. 
g.  Culs-de-sac/courts. Culs-de-sac (courts) by definition are streets having one (1) end open to traffic and the other end permanently terminated by appropriate terminal utilizing a single point of ingress and egress. Address numbers for cul-de-sacs/courts shall be in the one hundred (100) block range. Odd and even numbers shall meet at the mid-point of the back of the cul-de-sac. Numbers shall be arranged such that even and odd numbers (i.e. 108 and 109) will be across from and in direct opposing order. See following illustration: 

Cul-de-sac/Court 
h.  Circular development. True circle developments are defined as streets having addressable sites within the outer perimeter returning to itself with one (1) primary entrance utilizing a single point of ingress and egress. Circular development shall be numbered as follows. The outer perimeter will be assigned odd numbers with numbers progressing in a clockwise direction. The inner side of the circle will be assigned even numbers. Numbers shall be arranged such that 111 should be across from 112 and so on in direct opposing order. 

Circular Development 
i.  Townhouses. Townhouses will be assigned a number for each unit, every ten (10) foot per this section. 
j.  Apartment houses/high-rises. Apartment houses will be assigned a number for each unit, every ten (10) foot. Each apartment unit within the structure shall receive an individual apartment number. Letter designation shall not permitted. High-rises of more than two (2) stories shall be assigned one (1) address number at the main entrance with each floor receiving the next range/block of numbers. (i.e.: 100, 200, 300.) Units inside on each floor will receive suite number designations. Apartment complexes/high-rise occupancies consisting of two (2) or more buildings per site, shall require an individual street name for the property. 
k.  Shopping centers and shopping malls. Each unit located in a shopping center or shopping mall shall be numbered, based on five (5) foot intervals. Address numbers shall be a minimum of ten (10) inches in height and comply with all other guidelines established herein. Shopping centers/shopping malls consisting of two (2) or more occupancies/businesses per site shall require an individual street name for the property. (i.e. Home Depot Plaza.) 
l.  Buildings on the interior of a block. Building(s) located on the interior of a block, that uses a common street entrance, but does not have street frontage access, shall be assigned an address to the walkway used to access the interior of the block. This walkway shall be assigned an individual name with the type/ suffix of alley or walk. Each building in the interior of a block shall be assigned a building number with each apartment unit within each building utilizing a suite number or letter designation. 
m.  Corner buildings. Corner buildings shall be addressed to the street where the primary building entrance is located. Buildings set back from a corner utilizing space for parking, may use the primary drive entrance for addressing providing additional buildings cannot be built between the side and roadway. 
n.  Abbreviation, type and suffix, second part of an entire street name. The following types/suffixes are suggested for naming a type of roadway. Other suffixes not listed below may be considered at the discretion of the SNRC (street name review committee) providing they meet United States Postal Service (U.S.P.S.) guidelines. 
1)  Alley (ALY) - A narrow lane between or behind a row of buildings. 
2)  Avenue (AVE) - A street or thoroughfare in a densely populated area. 
3)  Boulevard (BLVD) - A street with a median reflecting the wide street boulevard character. 
4)  Circle (CIR) - A looped street that begins and circles back to terminate on the same street having the primary function of serving adjoining property. 
5)  Court (CT) - A permanently closed, dead end or cul-de-sac street, not exceeding nine hundred (900) ft., a non-through street short in length having a primary function of serving adjoining land with a circular turnaround at the dead end utilizing a single point of ingress and egress. 
6)  Drive (DR) - A curvilinear common street, usually in more densely populated areas. 
7)  Highway (HWY) - A primary state or federal route, suitable for heavy traffic volume. 
8)  Lane (LN) - A minor dead-end street exceeding nine hundred (900) feet in length. 
9)  Parkway (PKY) - A street with a median reflecting the parkway character. 
10)  Road (RD) - A common street, usually in less densely populated areas. 
11)  Street (ST) - A common street, usually in more densely populated areas. 
12)  Way (WAY) - A minor street. 
13)  Plaza, mall, corner, center, crossing - An access street or large parking area encompassing property such as strip store shopping centers, malls, entertainment arenas, and large residential complexes. (These properties would be addressed as a private street utilizing these types and addressed accordingly to that street name.) 
2.  Exempt buildings. The following buildings and uses shall be exempt from the addressing system, but may be addressed at the request of the property owner: 
a.  Farm buildings, which are not residential or commercial. 
b.  Accessory buildings, which have uses that are accessory to the primary use of a residential, commercial, industrial, institutional or governmental building. 
c.  Unoccupied farm land or lots containing no dwellings or businesses. 
3.  Addressing new construction, development, renovations, and up fits. 
a.  Application for site plan shall furnish complete addressing information as set forth in this chapter. 
b.  Prior to beginning new construction, property owners/developers shall submit an application for a building permit and an address request application. 
c.  Address request applications shall be maintained by and available from, the department of development services. 
d.  The department of development services will issue official addresses within five (5) working days after receiving the address request application. 
e.  Subdivision requirements. No residential, commercial or industrial subdivision or land development shall be approved or recorded unless it has been assigned address numbers and a street name. The LDC shall require that street names and address numbers be assigned to a proposed development before a subdivision receives final approval or recording. 
4.  Responsibility for display of address numbers. It shall be the responsibility of each and every property owner of each residence, apartment building, business or industry to purchase post and maintain address numbers as required by this chapter at all times, and to remove any prior or conflicting numbers. It shall be unlawful to cover any address number with any sign, drapery, or other obstruction tending to conceal such number. 
5.  Premise identification. Size and location of address numbers. 
a.  Residential properties (One- and two-family dwellings). Address number shall be placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property as near to the front entrance as possible and practical. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be arabic numerals or alphabetic letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of four (4) inches high with a minimum stroke width of one-half (1/2) inch. 
b.  Shopping center, shopping malls, and commercial establishments. Address numbers shall be a minimum of ten (10) inches in height with a minimum stroke width of one (1) inch. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be arabic numerals. 
c.  Private lane and long driveways. If any residence, apartment building or business (except malls or shopping centers) is located so that the address number is not clearly visible from the street, an additional address number shall be posted at the intersection of the driveway with the public street. The additional address number shall be placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road at the driveway intersection. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabetic letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of four (4) inches high with a minimum stroke width of one-half (1/2) inch. 
d.  Notice to comply. The city's E911 coordinator shall cause to notify by personal service or by certified mail to persons in violation of this policy directing them to abate the situation within fifteen (15) days after issuance of such notice. Should the violation not be corrected within the fifteen (15) days of notice, enforcement activities shall begin. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2018-78, §§ 2, 3, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 716. - Administrative adjustment. 
A.  Purpose. Administrative adjustments are specified deviations to an approved site development plan and conditions from the prior planning board or city council approved development plan, with the exception of signs and flood plain management standards, where the change in development proposed that would be: 
1.  Compatible with surrounding land uses; 
2.  In keeping with the public interest; 
3.  Consistent with the purposes of this LDC; and 
4.  Does not violate zoning district height, bulk or setback requirements. 
B.  Applicability. The director shall have the authority to authorize administrative adjustment of up to ten (10) percent from any numerical standard of an approved site development plan and conditions from the prior planning board or city council approved development plan, with the exception of signs and flood plain management standards. 
C.  Application. An application for an administrative adjustment shall include a brief description of the requirement to be varied and any other material necessary to ensure the criteria in subsection 716E. below are met. 
D.  Review and action by director of development services. The director shall review the application and approve, approve with conditions or deny the application based upon the criteria below. A written decision including affirmative findings on the criteria set forth below shall be mailed to the applicant, and a report shall be provided to the planning board at their next regular meeting. 
E.  Administrative adjustment criteria. To approve an application for an administrative adjustment, the director shall make an affirmative finding that the following criteria are met: 
1.  That granting the administrative adjustment will ensure the same general level of land use compatibility as the otherwise applicable standards; 
2.  That granting the administrative adjustment will not materially and adversely affect adjacent land uses and the physical character of uses in the immediate vicinity of the proposed development because of inadequate buffering, screening, setbacks, and other land use considerations; 
3.  That granting the administrative adjustment will not adversely affect property values in any material way; and 
4.  That granting the administrative adjustment will be generally consistent with the purposes and intent of this LDC and the city's comprehensive plan. 
F.  Appeals. Appeal of an administrative adjustment denied by the director shall be taken to the board of adjustment within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the director's decision. 
G.  Expiration and lapse of approval. Property owners shall have six (6) months from the date of approval of an administrative adjustment to secure a permit to carry out the proposed improvements. If a permit has not been obtained within six (6) months of the date of approval, the approval shall lapse and be of no further effect. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 3, 8-13-18) 
CHAPTER 8. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 801. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
A.  Purpose. This section is adopted for the purposes of: 
1.  Regulating certain land-disturbing activity to control accelerated erosion and sedimentation in order to prevent the pollution of water and other damage to lakes, watercourses, and other public and private property by sedimentation; and 
2.  Establishing procedures through which these purposes can be fulfilled. 
B.  Scope and exclusions. 
1.  Geographical scope of regulated land-disturbing activity. This section shall apply to land-disturbing activity within the territorial jurisdiction of the City of Rocky Mount and to the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city as allowed by agreement between local governments, the extent of annexation, or other appropriate instrument or law. 
2.  Exclusions from regulated land-disturbing activity. Notwithstanding the general applicability of this section to all land-disturbing activity, this Section shall not apply to the following types of land-disturbing activity: 
a.  An activity, including breeding and grazing of livestock, undertaken on agricultural land for the production of plants and animals useful to man, including, but not limited to: 
1)  Forage and sod crops, grain and feed crops, tobacco, cotton, and peanuts. 
2)  Dairy animals and dairy products. 
3)  Poultry and poultry products. 
4)  Livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules, and goats. 
5)  Bees and apiary products. 
6)  Fur producing animals. 
b.  An activity undertaken on forestland for the production and harvesting of timber and timber products and conducted in accordance with best management practices set out in Forest Practice Guidelines Related to Water Quality, as adopted by the Department of Environment and Natural Resources. If land-disturbing activity undertaken on forestland for the production of timber and timber products is not conducted in accordance with Forest Practice Guidelines Related to Water Quality, the provisions of this section shall apply to such activity and any related land-disturbing activity on the tract. 
c.  An activity for which a permit is required under the Mining Act of 1971, Article 7 of Chapter 74 of the General Statutes. 
d.  A land-disturbing activity over which the state has exclusive regulatory jurisdiction as provided in N.C.G.S. § 113A-56(a). 
e.  An activity which is essential to protect human life during an emergency. 
3.  Plan approval requirement for land-disturbing activity. No person shall undertake any land-disturbing activity subject to this section without first obtaining a sedimentation and erosion control (SEC) plan approval therefore from the city. 
4.  Protection of property. Persons conducting land-disturbing activity shall take all reasonable measures to protect all public and private property from damage caused by such activity. 
5.  More restrictive rules shall apply. Whenever conflicts exist between federal, state, or local laws, ordinance, or rules, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
6.  Plan approval exceptions. Not withstanding the general requirement to obtain a SEC plan approval prior to undertaking land-disturbing activity, a SEC plan approval shall not be required for land-disturbing activity that does not exceed forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet (one (1) acre) in surface area. In determining the area, lands under one (1) or diverse ownership developed as a unit will be aggregated. 
C.  General requirements. 
1.  General. 
a.  Soil disturbance shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize erosion and sedimentation. 
b.  Soil stabilization methods shall consider the time of year, site conditions, and the use of temporary and permanent measures. 
c.  Properties and channels located downstream from development sites shall be protected from erosion and sedimentation. At points where concentrated flow leaves a site, stable downstream facilities are required. 
d.  Soil erosion and sediment control features shall be constructed prior to the commencement of upland disturbance. 
e.  If dewatering devices are used, adjacent properties shall be protected. Discharges shall enter an effective sediment and erosion control measure. 
2.  Sites smaller than one (1) acre. 
a.  For all land-disturbing activities, control measures adequate to prevent off-site erosion and sedimentation shall be provided regardless of size of disturbance. 
b.  While sites with land-disturbing activities smaller than one (1) acre do not have to meet the requirement for prior submittal and approval of an SEC plan, all rules regarding protection of adjacent properties, easements, rights-of-way, storm sewer systems, storm water impoundments, and open channels shall be adhered to. 
c.  Where, in the opinion of the director of engineering, off-site erosion and sedimentation has resulted either directly or indirectly from a land-disturbing activity, which uncovers less than one (1) acre of land, the director of engineering may require the submission of an SEC plan. Except for cleanup and interim protection measures, all other construction activities on the site shall cease until the SEC plan has been approved and implemented. 
3.  Site stabilization. 
a.  In addition to stabilization requirements set forth in this section, all disturbed areas or phases of construction which will not be under active construction or disturbance for periods of more than twenty-one (21) calendar days shall be stabilized with temporary or permanent vegetation or approved stabilization methods such as surface roughening and/or placement of mulch and tack or rolled erosion control matting. 
b.  Stabilization for areas not actively being disturbed shall also include but not be specifically limited to temporary construction features such as soil stockpiles, borrow operations, sediment traps, basins, ponds, embankments, swales, diversions, water bars, etc. 
4.  Design requirements. 
a.  Except as covered under sections 802 and 803 of this Code concerning land disturbing activities in or adjacent to areas protected as riparian buffers or surface water supply watersheds, storm water hydrologic and hydraulic design methods as well as permanent and temporary storm water control methods shall be in accordance with the State of North Carolina Erosion and Sediment Control Planning and Design Manual, latest edition or the City of Rocky Mount Storm Water Design Manual, latest edition. Where conflicts may occur, the more stringent requirement shall govern. 
5.  Protection of existing storm sewer systems. 
a.  Protection of open waters or wetland areas. All open channels and storm water management facilities that are or will be functioning during construction shall be protected, by-passed, shielded, or otherwise treated, cleaned, or filtered to remove sediment. 
b.  Protection of enclosed private or public storm sewer systems. All storm sewer facilities that are or will be functioning during construction shall be protected, by-passed, shielded, or otherwise treated, cleaned, or filtered to remove sediment. 
6.  Minimum temporary control measures. 
a.  Construction entrance/exits. All land disturbing activities requiring direct ingress and egress from disturbed areas to publicly maintained streets or indirect access through parking lots, service roads, driveways, private streets, alleyways, etc. shall be provided with tire cleaning facilities including but not specifically limited to rock and gravel construction entrance/exits. In the event that construction entrance/exits prove insufficient to prevent tracking of soil or sediment onto adjacent properties, and roadways, additional measures such as tire washing facilities shall be required. All off-site soil or sediment shall be removed from adjacent properties and roadways without damage to said properties and roadways. At no time shall pavement markings be obscured or unsafe driving conditions be created due to a buildup of sediment on public or private travelways. 
b.  Temporary sediment storage. All land disturbing activities requiring a SEC Plan shall provide for temporary sediment storage regardless of the intended time of construction. In accordance with the Erosion and Sediment Control Planning and Design Manual, the required sediment storage may be provided in one (1) or multiple locations. As the project progresses towards completion, it may become advantageous to provide smaller temporary storage measures in more locations. For instance, while temporary sediment traps and basins may be appropriate for clearing and grading operations early in a project, as storm sewer systems are installed protection at individual inlets with storage upstream may be more appropriate. 
c.  Use of permanent facilities for temporary storage. Where permanent storm water management facilities are desired or required, their use for temporary sediment storage is discouraged. Whenever possible, temporary sediment storage should be captured by alternate measures in upstream areas or in forebay, fringe, or approach areas outside of the permanent pool. All permanent storm water management facilities must be at final grade as shown on the approved plans and in proper working order with stabilized slopes and embankments prior to issuance of certificates of occupancy or compliance or approval of subdivision final plats. 
7.  Drainage and earthwork on multiple lots. 
a.  Where drainage and/or earthwork including but not specifically limited to construction of earthen berms, walls, retaining walls, fences, storm sewerage, open channels or swales, etc. are proposed for placement on more than one (1) lot of record, the following rules shall apply regardless of size of disturbance: 
1)  Plan requirement. Construction drawings showing proposed improvements, proposed or existing easements, pertinent details, notes, specifications, etc. shall be provided to the director of engineering for review and approval a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to start of construction. Copies of the approved construction plans must be available on-site during any construction activities. 
2)  Easement requirement. All temporary and permanent easements necessary for construction, access, inspections, and maintenance must be recorded with the appropriate County and a copy of said easements provided to the director of engineering. Copies of said easements must also be provided to the contractor or contractors and be available for viewing on-site during construction activities. 
3)  Maximum slopes for earthen berms. The maximum slope for all earthen berms shall be dependent upon the soil types, intended vegetation, and level of maintenance to be provided. However, in no case shall non-reinforced or non-armored earthen structures be constructed with slopes steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1). 
4)  Minimum easement widths. Easement widths for open channels or enclosed conduit systems shall be based on the minimum widths shown on the current City of Rocky Mount Standard Detail drawings. Easement widths for earthen berms must include the base width of the berm at the widest point, a minimum of ten (10) feet for access and maintenance, and additional width for drainage swales and/or piping, as necessary. For example, given a four (4) foot high berm with four (4) foot top width and 2:1 side slopes, the minimum easement width would be calculated as follows: 
4'(height) x 2(slope) x 2(sides) + 4'(top) + 10'(access) = 30' Width 
Similarly, for each addition one (1) foot of height, the easement width must increase by four (4) feet. 
5)  Drainage provisions. Proposed earthwork and improvements shall not deny access to downstream drainage for upstream properties nor create unstable or damaging flows onto downstream properties by redirecting, concentrating, or realigning storm water discharges. All upstream drainage regardless of property ownership must be provided positive drainage to an existing or proposed storm sewer system, storm water management facility, or protected buffer or conservation area. 
8.  Posting of surety for incomplete work. 
a.  Prior to issuance of certificates of occupancy or compliance or approval of subdivision final plats, all disturbed areas are to be stabilized. In instances where a stand of vegetation sufficient to prevent erosion and retain sediment has not been achieved, a bond or surety must be posted for one hundred ten (110) percent of the estimated cost to stabilize the site. Estimated costs shall be based on current market prices for contracting the remaining work including incidental costs such as preparation of contract documents, bidding, contractors mobilization, etc. Previous quotes or unit pricing based on larger over-all contracts shall not be accepted for bonding purposes. 
b.  Acceptable methods for posting of a surety shall be a cash bond, performance bond, or irrevocable letter of credit in accordance with subsection 2.a of section 1310 of this Code. 
D.  Mandatory standards for land-disturbing activity. No land-disturbing activity subject to the control of this section shall be undertaken except in accordance with the following mandatory standards: 
1.  Buffer zone. 
a.  Standard buffer. No land-disturbing activity during periods of construction or improvement to land shall be permitted in proximity to a lake or natural watercourse unless a buffer zone is provided along the margin of the watercourse of sufficient width to confine visible siltation within the twenty-five (25) percent of the buffer zone nearest the land-disturbing activity. 
1)  Projects on, over, or under water. This subdivision shall not apply to a land-disturbing activity in connection with the construction of facilities to be located on, over, or under a lake or natural watercourse. 
2)  Buffer measurement. Unless otherwise provided, the width of a buffer zone is measured horizontally from the edge of the water to the nearest edge of the disturbed area, with the twenty-five (25) percent of the strip nearer the land-disturbing activity containing natural or artificial means of confining visible siltation. 
b.  Trout buffer. Waters that have been classified as trout waters by the Environmental Management Commission (EMC) shall have an undisturbed buffer zone twenty-five (25) feet wide or of sufficient width to confine visible siltation within the twenty-five (25) percent of the buffer zone nearest the land-disturbing activity, whichever is greater. Provided, however, that the sediment control commission may approve plans which include land-disturbing activity along trout waters when the duration of said disturbance would be temporary and the extent of said disturbance would be minimal. 
1)  Projects on, over, or under water. This subdivision shall not apply to a land-disturbing activity in connection with the construction of facilities to be located on, over, or under a lake or natural watercourse. 
2)  Trout buffer measurement. The twenty-five (25) foot minimum width for an undisturbed buffer zone adjacent to designated trout waters shall be measured horizontally from the top of the bank to the nearest edge of the disturbed area. 
3)  Limit on land disturbance. Where a temporary and minimal disturbance has been permitted as an exception to the trout buffer, land-disturbing activities in the buffer zone adjacent to designated trout waters shall be limited to a maximum of ten (10) percent of the total length of the buffer zone within the tract to be distributed such that there is not more than one hundred (100) linear feet of disturbance in each one thousand (1,000) linear feet of buffer zone. Larger areas may be disturbed with the written approval of the Director, NC Division of Land Resources. 
4)  Limit on temperature fluctuations. No land-disturbing activity shall be undertaken within a buffer zone adjacent to designated trout waters that will cause adverse temperature fluctuations in these waters, as set forth in 15 NCAC 2B.0211 "Fresh Surface Water Classification and Standards." 
2.  Graded slopes and fills. The angle for graded slopes and fills shall be no greater than the angle which can be retained by vegetative cover or other adequate erosion control devices or structures. In any event, slopes left exposed will, within twenty-one (21) calendar days of completion of any phase of grading, whichever period is shorter, be planted or otherwise provided with ground cover, devices, or structures sufficient to restrain erosion. The angle for graded slopes and fills must be demonstrated to be stable. Stable is the condition where soil remains in its original configuration, with or without mechanical constraints. 
3.  Fill material. Unless a permit from the N.C. Department of Environment and Natural Resources Division of Solid Waste Management to operate a landfill is on file for the official site, acceptable fill material shall be free of organic or other degradable materials, masonry, concrete and brick in sizes exceeding twelve (12) inches, and any materials which would cause the site to be regulated as a landfill by the State of North Carolina. 
4.  Ground cover. Whenever land-disturbing activity is undertaken on a tract comprising more than one (1) acre, if more than one (1) acre is uncovered, the person conducting the land-disturbing activity shall install erosion and sedimentation control devices and practices that are sufficient to retain the sediment generated by the land-disturbing activity within the boundaries of the tract during construction upon and development of said tract, and shall plant or otherwise provide a permanent ground cover sufficient to restrain erosion after completion of construction or development. Provisions for a ground cover sufficient to restrain erosion must be accomplished within twenty-one (21) calendar days following completion of construction or development, whichever period is shorter. 
5.  Prior plan approval. No person shall initiate any land-disturbing activity on a tract if more than one (1) acre is to be uncovered unless, thirty (30) or more days prior to initiating the activity, a SEC Plan for such activity is filed with and approved by the city. The city shall forward to the director of the division of water quality a copy of each SEC plan for a land-disturbing activity that involves the utilization of ditches for the purpose of dewatering or lowering the water table of the tract. 
E.  Erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
1.  Plan submission. A SEC plan shall be prepared for all land-disturbing activities subject to this section whenever the proposed activity is to be undertaken on a tract comprising more than one (1) acre, if more than one (1) acre is to be uncovered. The SEC Plan shall be filed with the city and a copy shall be simultaneously submitted to the Edgecombe County or Nash County Soil and Water Conservation District as applicable, at least thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of the proposed activity. 
2.  Financial responsibility and ownership. SEC plans may be disapproved unless accompanied by an authorized statement of financial responsibility and ownership. This statement shall be signed by the person financially responsible for the land-disturbing activity or his attorney in fact. The statement shall include the mailing address and street address of the principal place of business of (1) the person financially responsible, (2) the owner of the land, and (3) any registered agents. If the person financially responsible is not a resident of North Carolina, a North Carolina agent must be designated in the statement for the purpose of receiving notice of compliance or non-compliance with the SEC plan, the Sedimentation Pollution Control Act (SPCA), this section, or rules or orders adopted or issued pursuant to this section. 
3.  Environmental Policy Act document. Any SEC plan submitted for a land-disturbing activity for which an environmental document is required by the North Carolina Environmental Policy Act (N.C.G.S. § 113A-1, et seq.) shall be deemed incomplete until a complete environmental document is available for review. The city shall promptly notify the person submitting the SEC Plan that the thirty (30) day time limit for review of the SEC Plan pursuant to this section shall not begin until a complete environmental document is available for review. 
4.  Content. The SEC plan required by this section shall contain architectural and engineering drawings, maps, assumptions, calculations, and narrative statements as needed to adequately describe the proposed development of the tract and the measures planned to comply with the requirements of this section. Plan content may vary to meet the needs of specific site requirements. Detailed guidelines for SEC plan preparation may be obtained from the city on request. 
5.  Soil and water conservation district comments. The Edgecombe County or Nash County Soil and Water Conservation District as applicable shall review the plan and submit any comments and recommendations to the city within twenty (20) days after the soil and water conservation district received the SEC plan, or within any shorter period of time as may be agreed upon by the soil and water conservation district and the city. Failure of the soil and water conservation district to submit its comments and recommendations within twenty (20) days or within any agreed-upon shorter period of time shall not delay final action on the SEC plan. 
6.  Timeline for decisions on plans. The city will review each complete SEC plan submitted to them and within thirty (30) days of receipt thereof will notify the person submitting the plan that it has been approved, approved with modifications, approved with performance reservations, or disapproved. Failure to approve, approve with modifications, approve with performance reservations, or disapprove a complete SEC plan within thirty (30) days of receipt shall be deemed approval. The city will review each revised SEC plan submitted to them and within fifteen (15) days of receipt thereof will notify the person submitting the SEC plan that it has been approved, approved with modifications, approved with performance reservations, or disapproved. Failure to approve, approve with modifications, approve with performance reservations, or disapprove a revised SEC plan within fifteen (15) days of receipt shall be deemed approval. 
7.  Approval. The city shall only approve a plan upon determining that it complies with all applicable state and local regulations for erosion and sedimentation control. Approval assumes the applicant's compliance with the federal and state water quality laws, regulations, and rules. The city shall condition approval of SEC plans upon the applicant's compliance with federal and state water quality laws, regulations and rules. A permit issued under this article shall be valid for a period not to exceed two (2) years from the date of the approval or the time required to complete the permitted project including stabilization of all disturbed areas, which ever is less. 
8.  Disapproval for content. The city shall disapprove a SEC plan or draft SEC plan based on its content. A disapproval based upon a SEC plan's content must specifically state in writing the reasons for disapproval. 
9.  Other disapprovals. The city may disapprove a SEC plan or draft SEC plan where implementation of the plan would result in a violation of the rules adopted by the EMC to protect riparian buffers along surface waters, finding that an applicant, or a parent, subsidiary, or other affiliate of the applicant: 
a.  Is conducting or has conducted land-disturbing activity without an approved SEC plan, or has received notice of violation of a SEC plan previously approved by the commission or a local government pursuant to the SPCA and has not complied with the notice within the time specified in the notice; 
b.  Has failed to pay a civil penalty assessed pursuant to the SPCA or a local ordinance adopted pursuant to the SPCA by the time the payment is due. 
c.  Has been convicted of a misdemeanor pursuant to N.C.G.S. 113A-64(b) or any criminal provision of a local ordinance adopted pursuant to the SPCA or; 
d.  Has failed to substantially comply with state rules or local ordinances and regulations adopted pursuant to the SPCA. 
For purposes of this subsection (9) an applicant's record may be considered for only the two (2) years prior to the application date. In the event that a SEC plan is disapproved pursuant to this subsection, the city shall notify the director of the division of land resources of such disapproval within ten (10) days. The city shall advise the applicant and the director of the division of land resources in writing as to the specific reasons that the SEC plan was disapproved. 
10.  Notice of activity initiation. No person may initiate a land-disturbing activity before notifying the agency that issued the SEC plan approval of the date that land-disturbing activity will begin. 
11.  Preconstruction conference. When deemed necessary by the approving authority, a preconstruction conference may be required. 
12.  Display of plan approval. A SEC plan approval issued under this article shall be prominently displayed until all construction is complete, all permanent sedimentation and erosion control measures are installed and the site has been stabilized. A copy of the approved SEC plan shall be kept on file at the job site. 
13.  Required revisions. After approving a SEC plan, if the city, either upon review of such SEC plan or on inspection of the job site, determines that a significant risk of accelerated erosion or off-site sedimentation exists, the city shall require a revised SEC plan. Pending the preparation of the revised SEC plan, work shall cease or shall continue under conditions outlined by the appropriate authority. If following commencement of a land-disturbing activity pursuant to an approved SEC plan, the city determines that the SEC plan is inadequate to meet the requirements of this section, the city may require any revision of the SEC plan that is necessary to comply with this section. 
14.  Amendment to plan. Applications for amendment of a SEC plan in written and/or graphic form may be made at any time under the same conditions as the original application. Until such time as said amendment is approved by the city, the land-disturbing activity shall not proceed except in accordance with the SEC plan as originally approved. 
15.  Failure to file a plan. Any person engaged in land-disturbing activity who fails to file a SEC plan in accordance with this section, or who conducts a land-disturbing activity except in accordance with provisions of an approved plan shall be deemed in violation of this section. 
F.  Basic control objectives. A SEC plan may be disapproved if the plan fails to address the following control objectives: 
1.  Identify critical areas. On-site areas which are subject to severe erosion and off-site areas which are especially vulnerable to damage from erosion and/or sedimentation, are to be identified and receive special attention. 
2.  Limit time of exposure. All land-disturbing activities are to be planned and conducted to limit exposure to the shortest feasible time. 
3.  Limit exposed areas. All land-disturbing activity is to be planned and conducted to minimize the size of the area to be exposed at any one time. 
4.  Control surface water. Surface water runoff originating upgrade of exposed areas should be controlled to reduce erosion and sediment loss during the period of exposure. 
5.  Control sedimentation. All land-disturbing activity is to be planned and conducted so as to prevent off-site sedimentation damage. 
6.  Manage stormwater runoff. When the increase in the velocity of storm water runoff resulting from a land-disturbing activity is sufficient to cause accelerated erosion of the receiving watercourse, a plan is to include measures to control the velocity to the point of discharge so as to minimize accelerated erosion of the site and increased sedimentation of the stream. 
G.  Design and performance standards. 
1.  Except as provided otherwise in this section erosion and sedimentation control measures, structures and devices shall be so planned, designed and constructed to provide protection from the calculated maximum peak rate of runoff from the ten (10) year storm. Runoff rates shall be calculated using the procedures in the USDA, Soil Conservation Service's "National Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices", or other acceptable calculation procedures. 
2.  HQW zones. In high quality water (HQW) zones the following design standards shall apply: 
a.  Limit on uncovered area. Uncovered areas in HQW zones shall be limited at any time to a maximum total area of twenty (20) acres within the boundaries of the tract. Only the portion of the land-disturbing activity within a HQW zone shall be governed by this section. Larger areas may be uncovered within the boundaries of the tract with the written approval of the director, NC Division of Land Resources. 
b.  Maximum peak rate of runoff protection. Erosion and sedimentation control measures, structures, and devices within HQW zones shall be so planned, designed and constructed to provide protection from the run off of the twenty-five (25) year storm which produces the maximum peak rate of runoff as calculated according to procedures in the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service's "National Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices" or according to procedures adopted by any other agency of this state or the United States or any generally recognized organization or association. 
c.  Settling efficiency. Sediment basins within HQW zones shall be designed and constructed such that the basin will have a settling efficiency of at least seventy (70) percent for the forty (40) micron (0.04 mm) size soil particle transported into the basin by the runoff of that two (2) year storm which produces the maximum peak rate of runoff as calculated according to procedures in the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service's "National Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices" or according to procedures adopted by any other agency of this state or the United States or any generally recognized organization or association. 
d.  Grade. Newly constructed open channels in HQW zones shall be designed and constructed with side slopes no steeper than two (2) horizontal to one (1) vertical (2:1) if a vegetative cover is used for stabilization unless soil conditions permit a steeper slope or where the slopes are stabilized by using mechanical devices, structural devices or other acceptable ditch liners. In any event, the angle for side slopes shall be sufficient to restrain accelerated erosion. 
e.  Ground cover. Ground cover sufficient to restrain erosion must be provided for any portion of a land-disturbing activity in a HQW zone within fifteen (15) working days or sixty (60) calendar days following completion of construction or development, whichever period is shorter. 
H.  Storm water outlet protection. 
1.  Intent. Stream banks and channels downstream from any land disturbing activity shall be protected from increased degradation by accelerated erosion caused by increased velocity of runoff from the land disturbing activity. 
2.  Performance standard. Persons shall conduct land-disturbing activity so that the post construction velocity of the 10-year storm runoff in the receiving watercourse to the discharge point does not exceed the greater of: 
a.  The velocity established by the Table 8-1 of this section; or 
b.  The velocity of the 10-year storm runoff in the receiving watercourse prior to development. 
If conditions (1) or (2) of this paragraph cannot be met, then the receiving watercourse to and including the discharge point shall be designed and constructed to withstand the expected velocity anywhere the velocity exceeds the "prior to development" velocity by ten (10) percent. 
3.  Acceptable management measures. Measures applied alone or in combination to satisfy the intent of this section are acceptable if there are no objectionable secondary consequences. The city recognizes that management of storm water runoff to minimize or control downstream channel and bank erosion is a developing technology. Innovative techniques and ideas will be considered and may be used when shown to have potential to produce successful results. Some alternatives, while not exhaustive, are to: 
a.  Avoid increases in surface runoff volume and velocity by including measures to promote infiltration to compensate for increased runoff from areas rendered impervious; 
b.  Avoid increases in storm water discharge velocities by using vegetated or roughened swales and waterways in place of closed drains and high velocity paved sections; 
c.  Provide energy dissipaters at outlets of storm drainage facilities to reduce flow velocities to the point of discharge; 
d.  Protect watercourses subject to accelerated erosion by improving cross sections and/or providing erosion-resistant lining; and 
e.  Upgrade or replace the receiving device structure, or watercourse such that it will receive and conduct the flow to a point where it is no longer subject to degradation from the increased rate of flow or increased velocity. 
4.  Exceptions. This rule shall not apply where it can be demonstrated that storm water discharge velocities will not create an erosion problem in the receiving watercourse. 
5.  Velocity. The following is a table for maximum permissible velocity for storm water discharges: 
Table 8-1. 
Maximum Permissible Velocities 
Material F.P.S. M.P.S. Fine sand (non-colloidal) 2.5 0.8 Sandy loam (non-colloidal) 2.5 0.8 Silt loam (noncolloidal) 3.0 0.9 Ordinary firm loam 3.5 1.1 Fine gravel 5.0 1.5 Stiff clay (very colloidal) 5.0 1.5 Graded, loam to cobbles (non-colloidal) 5.0 1.5 Graded, silt to cobbles (colloidal) 5.5 1.7 Alluvial silts (non-colloidal) 3.5 1.1 Alluvial silts (colloidal) 5.0 1.5 Coarse gravel (noncolloidal) 6.0 1.8 Cobbles and shingles 5.5 1.7 Shales and hard pans 6.0 1.8  
Source: Adapted from recommendations by Special Committee on Irrigation Research, American Society of Civil Engineers, 1926, for channels with straight alignment. For sinuous channels, multiply allowable velocity by 0.95 for slightly sinuous, by 0.9 for moderately sinuous channels, and by 0.8 for highly sinuous channels. 
I.  Borrow and waste areas. When the person conducting the land-disturbing activity is also the person conducting the borrow or waste disposal activity, areas from which borrow is obtained and which are not regulated by the provisions of the Mining Act of 1971, and waste areas for surplus materials other than landfills regulated by the department of environment and natural resources, division of solid waste management shall be considered as part of the land-disturbing activity where the borrow material is being used or from which the waste material originated. When the person conducting the land-disturbing activity is not the person obtaining the borrow permit and/or disposing of the waste, these areas shall be considered a separate land-disturbing activity. 
J.  Access and haul roads. Temporary access and haul roads, other than public roads, constructed or used in connection with any land-disturbing activity shall be considered a part of such activity. 
K.  Operations in lakes or natural watercourses. Land-disturbing activity in connection with construction in, on, over, or under a lake or natural watercourse shall minimize the extent and duration of disruption of the stream channel. Where relocation of a stream forms an essential part of the proposed activity, the relocation shall minimize changes in the stream flow characteristics. 
L.  Responsibility for maintenance. During the development of a site, the person conducting the land-disturbing activity shall install and maintain all temporary and permanent erosion and sedimentation control measures as required by the approved SEC plan or any provision of this section, the SPCA, or any order adopted pursuant to this section or the SPCA. After site development, the landowner or person in possession or control of the land shall install and/or maintain all necessary permanent erosion and sediment control measures, except those measures installed within a road or street right-of-way or easement accepted for maintenance by a governmental agency. 
M.  Additional measures. Whenever the city determines that significant sedimentation is occurring as a result of land-disturbing activity, despite application and maintenance of protective practices, the person conducting the land-disturbing activity will be required to and shall take additional protective action. 
N.  Existing uncovered areas. 
1.  All uncovered areas existing on the effective date of this section which resulted from land-disturbing activity, exceed one (1) acre, are subject to continued accelerated erosion, and are causing off-site damage from sedimentation, shall be provided with a ground cover or other protective measures, structures, or devices sufficient to restrain accelerated erosion and control off-site sedimentation. 
2.  The city shall serve upon the landowner or other person in possession or control of the land a written notice to comply with the SPCA, this section, a rule or order adopted or issued pursuant to the SPCA by the SCC or by the city. The notice to comply shall be sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, or other means provided in N.C.G.S. 1A-1, Rule 4. The notice will set forth the measures needed to comply and will state the time within which such measures must be completed. In determining the measures required and the time allowed for compliance, the authority serving notice shall take into consideration the economic feasibility, technology, and quantity of work required, and shall set reasonable and attainable time limits of compliance. 
3.  The city reserves the right to require preparation and approval of an SEC plan in any instance where extensive control measures are required. 
4.  This rule shall not require ground cover on cleared land forming the future basin of a planned reservoir. 
O.  Fees. 
1.  The city may establish a fee schedule for the review and approval of erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
2.  In establishing the fee schedule, the city shall consider the administrative and personnel costs incurred for reviewing the plans and for related compliance activities. 
3.  Applicable fees for review and approval of SEC plans shall be reviewed and adopted by city council and may be subject to periodic adjustments. Applicable fees shall be set forth in Section X of the City's Administrative Policy Manual. 
P.  Plan appeals. 
1.  Except as provided herein, the appeal of a disapproval or approval with modifications of a SEC plan shall be governed by the following provisions: 
a.  The disapproval or modification of any proposed SEC plan by the city shall entitle the person submitting the plan to a public hearing if such person submits written demand for a hearing within fifteen (15) days after receipt of written notice of disapproval or approval with modifications. 
b.  Hearings held pursuant to this section shall be conducted by the city within ten (10) days after the date of the appeal or request for a hearing. 
c.  The agency conducting the hearings shall make recommendations to the city council within ten (10) days of date of the hearing on any SEC plan. 
d.  The city council will render its final decision on any SEC plan upon which a hearing is requested within thirty (30) days of receipt of the recommendations from the agency conducting the hearings. 
e.  If the city upholds the disapproval or approval with modification of a proposed SEC plan following the hearing, the person submitting the plan shall then be entitled to appeal the local government's decision to the NC Sedimentation Control Commission (SCC) as provided in N.C.G.S. § 113A-61(c) and Title 15A NCAC 4B.0018(d). 
2.  In the event that a SEC plan is disapproved pursuant to this section, the city shall notify the director of the NC Division of Land Resources of such disapproval within ten (10) days. The city shall advise the applicant and the director in writing as to the specific reasons that the plan was disapproved. The applicant may appeal the city disapproval of the plan pursuant to this section directly to the SCC. 
Q.  Inspections and investigations. 
1.  Inspection. Agents, officials, or other qualified persons authorized by the city will periodically inspect land-disturbing activities to ensure compliance with the SPCA, this section, or rules or orders adopted or issued pursuant to this section, and to determine whether the measures required in the SEC plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation resulting from land-disturbing activity. Notice of the right to inspect shall be included in the certificate of approval of each SEC plan. 
2.  Willful resistance, delay or obstruction. No person shall willfully resist, delay, or obstruct an authorized representative, employee, or agent of the city while that person is inspecting or attempting to inspect a land-disturbing activity under this section. 
3.  Notice of violation. If the city determines that a person engaged in land-disturbing activity has failed to comply with the SPCA, this section, or rules, or orders adopted or issued pursuant to this Section, a notice of violation shall be served upon that person. The notice may be served by any means authorized under N.C.G.S. 1A-1, Rule 4. The notice shall specify a date by which the person must comply with the SPCA, or this section, or rules, or orders adopted pursuant to this section, and inform the person of the actions that need to be taken to comply with the SPCA, this section, or rules or orders adopted pursuant to this section. Any person who fails to comply within the time specified is subject to the civil and criminal penalties for a continuing violation as provided in N.C.G.S. § 113A-64 provided in this section. 
4.  Investigation. The city shall have the power to conduct such investigation as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this section, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land-disturbing activity. 
5.  Statements of reports. The city shall also have the power to require written statements, or filing of reports under oath, with respect to pertinent questions relating to land-disturbing activity. 
R.  Penalties. 
1.  Civil penalties. 
a.  Civil penalty for a violation. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section, or rules or orders adopted or issued pursuant to this section, or who initiates or continues a land-disturbing activity for which a SEC plan is required except in accordance with the terms, conditions, and provisions of an approved SEC plan, is subject to a civil penalty. The maximum civil penalty amount that the city may assess per violation is five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). A civil penalty may be assessed from the date of the violation. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation. 
b.  Civil penalty assessment factors. The director of engineering or designee of the city shall determine the amount of the civil penalty based upon the following factors: 
1)  The degree and extent of harm caused by the violation; 
2)  The cost of rectifying the damage; 
3)  The amount of money the violator saved by noncompliance; 
4)  Whether the violation was committed willfully; and 
5)  The prior record of the violator in complying or failing to comply with this section. 
c.  Notice of Civil Penalty Assessment. The Director of Engineering or designee of the City shall provide notice of the civil penalty amount and basis for assessment to the person assessed. The notice of assessment shall be served by any means authorized under N.C.G.S. 1A-1, Rule 4, and shall direct the violator to either pay the assessment or contest the assessment, within thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice of assessment, by written demand for a hearing. 
d.  Hearing. A hearing on a civil penalty shall be conducted by the city manager within thirty (30) days after the date of the written demand for the hearing. The city manager shall make a recommendation to the city council concerning the appeal within fifteen (15) days after the date of the hearing. 
e.  Final decision. The city manager's recommendation will be forwarded to the city council, and the city council shall render its final decision on the civil penalty within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of the recommendation. 
f.  Appeal of final decision. Appeal from the final decision of the city council shall be to the Superior Court of the County where the violation occurred, or the location of the violator's residence or principal place of business. 
g.  Collection. If payment is not received within thirty (30) days after it is due, the city may institute a civil action to recovery of the amount of the assessment. The civil action may be brought in the Superior Court of the County where the violation occurred, or the violator's residence or principal place of business is located. Such civil actions must be filed within three (3) years of the date the assessment was due. An assessment that is not contested is due when the violator is served with a notice of assessment. An assessment that is contested is due at the conclusion of the administrative and judicial review of the assessment. 
h.  Credit of civil penalties. Civil penalties collected pursuant to this section shall be credited to the civil penalty and forfeiture fund. 
2.  Criminal penalties. Any person who knowingly or willfully violates any provision of this section, or rule or order adopted or issued pursuant to this section, or who knowingly or willfully initiates or continues a land-disturbing activity for which a SEC plan is required except in accordance with the terms, conditions, and provisions of an approved SEC plan, shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor which may include a fine not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) as provided in N.C.G.S. § 113A-64. 
S.  Injunctive relief. 
1.  Violation of local program. Whenever the city council has reasonable cause to believe that any person is violating or threatening to violate this section or any rule or order adopted or issued pursuant to this section, or any term, condition, or provision of an approved SEC plan, it may, either before or after the institution of any other action or proceeding authorized by this section, institute a civil action in the name of the city for injunctive relief to restrain the violation or threatened violation. The action shall be brought in the Superior Court of the County in which the violation is occurring or is threatened. 
2.  Abatement of violation. Upon determination by a court that an alleged violation is occurring or is threatened, the court shall enter any order or judgment that is necessary to abate the violation, to ensure that restoration is performed, or to prevent the threatened violation. The institution of an action for injunctive relief under this section shall not relieve any party to the proceedings from any civil or criminal penalty prescribed for violations of this section. 
T.  Removal of temporary measures. All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be removed within thirty (30) days after final site stabilization is achieved or after temporary measures are no longer needed. Areas containing or receiving trapped sediment shall be approved upland areas, shall be fine graded to receive vegetation and amendments, and shall be permanently stabilized. 
U.  Restoration of areas affected by failure to comply. The city may require a person who engaged in a land-disturbing activity and failed to retain sediment generated by the activity, as required by N.C.G.S. § 113A-57(3), to restore the waters and land affected by the failure so as to minimize the detrimental effects of the resulting pollution by sedimentation. This authority is in addition to any other civil or criminal penalty or injunctive relief authorized under this section. 
(Ord. No. O-2004-65, § 2, 8-9-04; Ord. No. O-2005-34A, § 2, 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2011-32, §§ 2, 3, 4-11-11) 
Sec. 802. - Tar-Pamlico stormwater nutrient management requirements. 
    The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has designated specific local governments in the Tar-Pamlico River Basin and has required them to develop a stormwater management program in conformance with 15A NCAC 2B.0258, Tar-Pamlico River Basin-Nutrient Sensitive Waters Management Strategy. This section is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Article 19 of Chapter 160A, planning and development and the requirements of 15A NCAC 2B.0258. Any modifications to this section are subject to the approval by the NC Division of Water Quality (DWQ). 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  The provisions of this section shall apply within the corporate limits of the City of Rocky Mount and the ETJ, as defined in section 205 of this LDC. 
2.  All land development activity meeting the criteria listed below must comply with the requirements of this section. 
a.  Any activity that disturbs greater than one acre of land to establish, expand, or replace a single family or duplex residential development or recreational facility. For individual single family residential lots of record that are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale, the activity must also result in greater than ten percent built-upon area. 
b.  Any activity that disturbs more than one-half (1/2) acre of land in order to establish, expand or modify a multi-family residential development or a commercial, industrial, institutional or any other non-residential facility. 
B.  Exceptions. 
1.  Projects meeting the criteria listed in 802.A.2.a., b. that replace or expand existing structures or improvements and that do not result in a net increase in built-upon area are not required to comply with the provisions of this section. 
2.  Projects meeting the criteria listed in 802.A.2.a., b. that are located within an area that the city council has designated as a redevelopment area will not be required to achieve nutrient reductions provided the city has a specific redevelopment strategy in place for the area that addresses the following: 
a.  The redevelopment area is a historic community center, traditional central business district, historical district, educational center or other existing developed area specifically designated by the city council. 
b.  The city has an established strategy for reinvestment in the area as appropriate including one or more of the following: 
1)  A "fix it first" policy that reserves public funds for repair of existing infrastructure in these areas before investing in new infrastructure of the same type in new growth areas. 
2)  Mixed use/mixed density zoning provisions. 
3)  Retrofits that are consistent with NC DOT definition for pedestrian scale in traditional neighborhood developments. 
4)  Parking maximums or shared parking ratios. 
5)  Residential density bonuses where parking maximums, pedestrian scale, or "fix it first" are considered. 
6)  The redevelopment plan is conducive to the goals of the Tar Pamlico Nutrient Management Strategy. 
3.  Projects that replace or expand existing structures or improvements resulting in a net increase in built upon area shall achieve a thirty (30) percent reduction in nitrogen loading and no increase in phosphorus loading relative to the previous development. Such projects may achieve these loads through onsite or offsite measures or some combination thereof. 
4.  Phased residential or commercial projects with multiple lots that propose shared stormwater facilities may be permitted as "on-site" facilities not subject to the pretreatment limitations defined section 802E. of this LDC, provided the shared facility is designed and constructed to meet the nutrient reduction and attenuation requirements for the entire project. 
C.  Exemptions. Agriculture, mining or forestry activities are not subject to the new development requirements of this section. 
D.  Establishment and protection of riparian buffers. 
1.  New developments meeting the criteria listed in section 802 A, must protect areas adjacent to intermittent and perennial streams in accordance with the Tar Pamlico Riparian Buffer Rule. A fifty (50) foot wide riparian buffer is established on all sides of intermittent and perennial streams, ponds, and lakes shown on the most recent version of either a Natural Resources Conservation Service Soil Survey of Nash County, Soil Survey of Edgecombe County, or a 1:24,000 scale (7.5 minute quadrangle) topographic map prepared by the U. S. Geological Survey (USGS). Tar Pamlico riparian buffers must be shown on all development plans, preliminary plats and final plats that contain land area within fifty (50) feet of an intermittent or perennial stream. If the plan or plat shows an encroachment into the riparian buffer, approval from the DWQ must accompany the submittal. The city will not approve new development plans that include land area within fifty (50) feet of the banks of a regulated water body except where one of the following conditions apply: 
a.  The development plan does not propose to impact the riparian buffer or, 
b.  The property owner has received approval from the Division of Water Quality (DWQ) of the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources. Approval by the DWQ may be in the form of the following: 
1)  An on-site determination by the DWQ in writing that regulated surface waters are not present on the site. 
2)  A permit for the proposed construction activity. 
3)  An authorization certificate and approval on a mitigation plan for a use designated as allowable with mitigation. 
4)  A variance from DWQ and/or the Environmental Management Commission. 
E.  Nutrient reduction requirements. 
1.  Nitrogen and phosphorus export standards: 
a.  All new development meeting the criteria listed in 802A. must limit nitrogen export to 4.0 pounds per acre per year (lbs/ac/yr) and phosphorus export to 0.4 pounds per acre per year (lbs/ac/yr) through some combination of the following: 
1)  Construction of allowable onsite or offsite stormwater management facilities. Use of offsite facilities is subject to the provisions of 802F.-G. 
2)  Participation in an approved "regional" or "jurisdiction-wide" facility or strategy. 
3)  Dedication of "open space" and/or "conservation" easements. Easements may be onsite or offsite subject to the provisions listed in section 802F.-G. and section 804 of this LDC. Offsite land conservation offsets that drain to the same classified water as the new development and meet the criteria specified in 802H.2.b. may be approved by the stormwater manager or designee. 
4)  Pay a one-time offset payment to the North Carolina Ecosystem Enhancement Program's Riparian Buffer Restoration Fund using the applicable nitrogen and phosphorous offset payment calculations specified in the Nutrient Offset Payments Rule (15A NCAC 02B.0240). Use of offset payment option is subject to the provisions of 802G. 
2.  Calculation of nitrogen and phosphorus export and removal efficiencies. 
a.  The nitrogen and phosphorus export from all new development meeting the criteria listed in 803.A must be calculated in pounds per acre per year (lb/ac/yr). The export values for various types of land use, BMP removal efficiencies and the methodologies to be used in calculating the nitrogen and phosphorus export from the development are specified in the "City of Rocky Mount Standard Specifications and Design Manual" and/or the "Tar-Pamlico River Basin: Stormwater Program for Nutrient Control." These standards and all revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference. 
3.  Allowable best management practices for nitrogen and phosphorus reduction. 
a.  All stormwater management and/or BMP facilities must designed in accordance with section 804 of this LDC. 
b.  Allowable BMPs for nitrogen and/or phosphorus reduction may include but are not limited to the following: 
1)  Wet detention ponds 
2)  Constructed wetlands 
3)  Restored riparian buffers 
4)  Grass swales 
5)  Vegetative filter strips with level spreaders 
6)  Bioretention 
7)  Sand filters 
8)  Proprietary BMP or other BMPs (subject to approval by the stormwater manager and DWQ) 
c.  Specific use of any particular device or strategy is subject to the approval by stormwater manager. 
F.  Peak runoff control. 
1.  No net increase in peak stormwater runoff. New development shall not result in an increase in peak stormwater runoff flow leaving the site from the pre-development conditions for the one-year 24-hour, ten-year 24-hour and the 25-year 24-hour storm events. 
2.  Calculation methods. Calculation methods shall be in accordance with the standards specified in section 804 of this LDC. 
3.  Exceptions to the peak flow requirement. Peak flow control is not required for new developments that meet one or more of the following requirements: 
a.  The overall impervious surface area is less than fifteen (15) percent of the total site and the remaining pervious portions of the site are utilized to the maximum extent practical to convey and control the stormwater runoff, or; 
b.  The increase in peak flow between the pre-development and post-development conditions does not exceed ten (10) percent, or; 
c.  The director of engineering makes a determination that stormwater detention at this particular location will increase flooding, accelerate erosion or negatively impact existing drainage problems in the area. In such cases, an alternate method of peak attenuation management may be required. 
G.  Offsite partial offset option. In accordance with the North Carolina Environmental Management Commission and its amended Nutrient Offset Payments Rule (15A NCAC 02B.0240), developers of residential, commercial, and industrial projects may partially offset their nitrogen and phosphorous loads under the following conditions: 
1.  Except where the project is participating in an approved regional or jurisdiction-wide strategy, as defined in section 802 H, in order for a project to use the offsite partial offset option or the offset payment option, the development plan must first reduce nitrogen export from the site as follows. 
a.  Single-family or duplex residential meeting the criteria in 802 A.2.a must limit nitrogen export to no more than six (6) lb. N/ac/yr. 
b.  Development meeting the criteria in 802 A.2.b. must limit nitrogen export to 10 lb N/ac/yr. 
2.  If the computed nitrogen export is greater than 4.0 lbs/ac/yr but less than 6.0 (or 10.0) lbs/ac/yr, then the balance of the nitrogen reduction, to four (4) lb/ac/yr and phosphorus reduction to 0.4 lb/ac/yr, may be achieved through one or both of the following options: 
a.  Payment of a one-time offset payment to the North Carolina Ecosystem Enhancement Program's Riparian Buffer Restoration Fund using the applicable nitrogen and phosphorous offset payment calculations specified in the Nutrient Offset Payments Rule (15A NCAC 02B.0240). The procedure for calculating nutrient offset payments and processing these payments will be as follows: 
1)  The formula to calculate nutrient offset payments will be adjusted by NC EEP on an annual basis (January of each year) based upon the construction cost index factor published every December in the Engineering News Record. 
2)  In cases where reductions are needed for both nitrogen and phosphorous and the offset option is sought, only the greater value of the two (2) offset payments calculated is required to satisfy the offset reductions for both limits. 
3)  The City of Rocky Mount shall determine or verify correct offset payment amount required and shall issue an approval letter to NC EEP and the developer. The approval letter shall include the project name and location including river basin, the offset payment calculations, and the amount of the offset payment. 
4)  Prior to the City of Rocky Mount issuing a permit, the developer shall provide receipt from NC EEP. 
b.  Provide treatment of an offsite-developed area through construction of an approved BMP or conversion of an existing developed area to protected wooded pervious area. To qualify, the off-site area or facility must meet the following conditions: 
1)  The offsite area and/or facility must drain to the same classified surface water as the new development, as defined in the schedule of Classifications, 15A NCAC 2B .0316 and listed in Table 8-2 of this chapter, or be a part of a jurisdiction-wide facility or approach approved by DWQ as defined in section 802H of this LDC. 
2)  The offsite facility may be used to address only the nutrient requirements, except where the development proposal provides supporting calculations, approved by the stormwater manager or designee, that demonstrate that meeting some or all attenuation requirements offsite will not result in degradation of the classified surface waters to which the new development site discharges. 
3)  The off-site stormwater management and/or BMP facility may serve multiple projects provided the facility is appropriately sized and has a tracking system approved by the stormwater manager or designee to allocate nutrient removal and flow attenuation to the participating development sites. 
4)  The development owner and the owner of the offsite facility, if different from the development owner, must provide a recorded enforceable agreement stating that offsite facilities are dedicated to achieving the specified nutrient and flow reductions for the life of the new development. The responsibility for maintaining these reductions as well as the provisions of any easements and operation and maintenance agreements required in accordance with section 804 of this LDC shall run with the land and be binding upon subsequent owners of both the development project and the offsite facility. 
5)  Operation and maintenance plans and easements must be provided for all onsite and offsite facilities in accordance with the provisions of section 804 of this LDC. 
Table 8-2: 
Tar River Basin Classified 
Surface Waters 
Receiving Stream Name Stream 
Segment Water 
Quality 
Classification Tar River 4,000' upstream of reservoir dam to dam WS-IV, NSW, CA, (28-64) Tar River Reservoir dam to Maple Creek WS-IV, NSW (28-64.5) Grape Branch Source to Tar River WS-IV, NSW (28-65) Maple Creek Source to Tar River WS-IV, NSW (28-66) Tar River Maple Creek to 100' downstream of old CRM intake of HWY 64 WS-IV, NSW (28-66.5) Tar River CRM intake to RM Mills Dam B, NSW (28-67) Stoney Creek Source to Tar River C, NSW (28-68) Tar River RM Mills Dam to 0.9 mi downstream Buck Swamp WS-IV, NSW (28-69) Goose Branch Source to Tar River C, NSW (28-70) Cowlick Branch Source to Tar River C, NSW (28-71) Compass Creek Source to Tar River C, NSW (28-72) Hornbeam Branch Source to Compass Creek C, NSW (28-72-1) Gay branch (Indian Branch) Source to Tar River C, NSW (28-72.5) Buck Swamp Source to Tar River C, NSW (28-73) Beech Branch Source to Hwy 301 B, NSW (28-75-(1)) Beech Branch Hwy 301 to Falling Run C, NSW (28-75-(2)) Little Cokey Swamp Source to Cokey Swamp C, NSW (28-83-3-1)  
H.  Regional and jurisdiction-wide facilities and strategies. The Tar-Pamlico stormwater rule provides the option for local governments to develop regional or jurisdiction-wide stormwater facilities and/or approaches as an alternative means for addressing nutrient or flow control requirements. Regional or jurisdiction-wide approaches will be undertaken by the city on a project-by-project basis and will be incorporated into the city's comprehensive stormwater management program as they are developed and approved by DWQ. 
1.  Regional facilities. 
a.  Regional facility within the context of this section means a stormwater management facility or approach that provides a portion of the nutrient and/or flow control requirements for multiple developments in a specified area within the city's jurisdiction. Examples of regional facilities may include but are not limited to wet detention ponds or constructed wetlands. 
b.  Regional facilities may be publicly or privately owned and operated, but must be approved by DWQ if the facility is proposed to serve more than one classified stormwater basin. 
2.  Jurisdiction-wide approach. 
a.  Jurisdiction-wide approach within the context of this section means a nutrient-reducing management measure or strategy implemented under the authority of the city and approved by DWQ to offset nutrient and/or flow increases throughout the jurisdiction. Examples of nutrient reducing measures may include, but are not limited to, conventional stormwater facilities, constructed wetlands, or land conservation. 
b.  Land conservation offsets are an available option provided the following criteria are met: 
1)  The conserved land must achieve the net nutrient reductions not achieved by the new development that conservation is credited with offsetting. 
2)  Proposals must quantify the reductions including identification of any actions to be taken to achieve nutrient reductions. Examples include: 
(a)  Removal of existing impervious area 
(b)  Reforestation of managed open space such as agricultural land, cleared or vacant lots. 
(c)  Restoration of the buffering functions of land adjacent to existing or new development, e.g. converting pipe or ditch flow to dispersed sheet flow through forested land. 
3)  The conserved land should be no further from the estuary than the new development and within the same jurisdiction except where there is an interlocal agreement that provides for development and offsetting conservation in different jurisdictions. The agreement shall provide assurance of enforceability between jurisdictions, as well as cross-jurisdictional tracking and monitoring procedures. 
4)  There must be adequate protection to ensure that the conserved lands will not be credited to other new developments. 
5)  Lands whose nutrient removal functions are established and protected through other regulatory programs, such as wetlands and riparian buffers, would not be eligible for conservation credit. 
6)  Conserved land may be used to offset flow attenuation requirements if adequate measures are provided to ensure diffuse flow and no hydrologic degradation of the conserved features or surface waters. 
7)  Conserved land must be secured in a recorded permanent conservation easement or equivalent legal mechanism with provisions to prohibit both farming and unapproved logging practices. 
c.  Stormwater management facilities must provide the following information to gain DWQ approval as a regional or jurisdiction-wide system: 
1)  Land uses in the contributing area. 
2)  Type of facility. 
3)  Expected nitrogen and phosphorus removal efficiency and peak shaving capacity. 
4)  Worst-case percent impervious of the contributing area at build out. 
5)  Assumptions for on-lot treatment and attenuation. 
6)  Calculations of nitrogen and phosphorus reduction needed, demonstration that facility meets needs. 
7)  Process for tracking expenditure of treatment and attenuation capacity. 
8)  Easement, restricting land use to protect stormwater management facility and containing adequate access for maintenance where such an instrument would be appropriate. 
9)  An agreement that demonstrates that (a) the developer, (b) a local government, or (c) a private for-profit or non-profit company will operate and maintain the facilities. 
10)  Maintenance guarantees in conformance with the provisions of section 804. If facility is not owned or operated by the city. 
I.  Vested rights. Projects such as landfills, NPDES wastewater discharges, and road construction that have obtained valid state permits prior to August 13, 2004 and projects that can demonstrate that they have vested rights in accordance with chapter 12 of this LDC as of August 13, 2004 will not be required to comply with the requirements of this section for the time periods specified by this LDC except that all vested rights granted by this provision shall expire five (5) years from the date that local or state approval of the project was granted. 
(Ord. No. O-2004-65, § 2, 8-9-04; Ord. No. O-2006-39, §§ 2a.-j., 6-12-06) 
Sec. 803. - Water supply watershed protection regulations. 
    This section is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Article 19 of Chapter 160A, Planning and Development, and N.C.G.S. Chapter 143, Section 214.5, Water Supply Watershed Protection. The provisions of this section shall apply within the areas designated as a public water supply watershed by the North Carolina Environmental Management Commission and shall be defined and established on the map entitled, "Watershed Protection Map of Rocky Mount, North Carolina" ("the watershed map"), which is adopted simultaneously herewith. The watershed map and all explanatory matter contained thereon accompanies and is hereby made a part of this LDC. The provisions of this section shall amend any and all LDC, resolutions or regulations of the city which are in conflict with or may be construed to impair or reduce the effectiveness of the city's watershed regulations. 
A.  Watersheds general. 
1.  The provisions of this LDC relating to watershed protection are adopted pursuant to the authority contained in N.C.G.S. Article 19 of Chapter 160A, Planning and Development, and N.C.G.S. Chapter 143, Section 214.5, Water Supply Watershed Protection. The provisions of this section shall apply within the areas designated as a public water supply watershed by the North Carolina Environmental Management Commission and shall be defined and established on the map entitled, "Watershed Protection Map of Rocky Mount, North Carolina" ("the watershed map"), which is adopted simultaneously herewith. The watershed map and all explanatory matter contained thereon accompanies and is hereby made a part of this LDC. In addition, so long as the only watershed areas in the city's jurisdiction are WS-IV-CA and WS-IV-PA, only activities that require a sedimentation and erosion control plan for the proposed development pursuant to the sedimentation and erosion control section of the LDC or State erosion/sedimentation law are required to meet the provisions of this section. 
2.  Existing development, as defined in this LDC, is not subject to the requirements of this section. Expansions to structures classified as existing development must meet the requirements of this section, however, the built-upon area of the existing development is not required to be included in the density calculations. 
3.  A pre-existing lot owned by an individual prior to the effective date of this section, regardless of whether or not a vested right has been established, may be developed by such individual owner or any subsequent owner for single-family residential purposes without being subject to the restrictions of this section. 
B.  Standards and required improvements. 
1.  All lots shall provide adequate building space in accordance with the development standards contained in this LDC. Lots which are smaller than the minimum required for residential lots shall be identified on the plat as, "not for residential purposes." 
2.  For the purpose of calculating built-upon area, total project area shall include total acreage in the tract on which the project is to be developed. 
3.  Where possible, roads should be located outside of critical areas and watershed buffer areas. Roads constructed within these areas shall be designed and constructed so to minimize their impact on water quality. 
C.  Exceptions. 
1.  Existing development, as defined in this section, is not subject to the requirements of this section. 
2.  A pre-existing lot owned by an individual prior to the effective date of this section, regardless of whether or not a vested right has been established, may be developed by such individual owner or any subsequent owner for single-family residential purposes without being subject to the restrictions of this section. 
D.  Establishment of watershed areas. 
1.  For the purposes of this section the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction is hereby divided into the following areas as delineated on the watershed map: 
a.  WS-IV-CA (critical area) 
b.  WS-IV-PA (protected area) 
E.  Watershed areas described. 
1.  WS-IV watershed areas-Critical area (WS-IV-CA). Only new development activities that require a sedimentation and erosion control plan under the city's sedimentation and erosion control LDC or state erosion/sedimentation law are required to meet the provisions of this section In order to address a medium to high land use intensity pattern, single-family residential uses are allowed at a maximum of two (2) dwelling units per acre. All other residential and nonresidential development shall be allowed twenty-four (24) percent built-upon area. New sludge application sites and landfills are specifically prohibited. 
a.  Permitted uses. 
1)  Agriculture subject to the provisions of the Food Security Act of 1985 and the Food, Agriculture, Conservation and Trade Act of 1990. Agricultural activities conducted after January 1, 1993 shall maintain a minimum ten-foot vegetative buffer, or equivalent control as determined by the soil and water conservation commission, along all perennial waters indicated on the most recent versions of U.S.G.S 1:24,000 (7.5 minutes) scale topographic maps or as determined by the director of engineering. Animal operations greater than one hundred (100) animal units shall employ best management practices by July 1, 1994 as recommended by the soil and water conservation commission. 
2)  Silviculture, subject to the provisions of the Forest Practices Guidelines Related to Water Quality (15 NCAC 1I.6101.0209). 
3)  Residential development. 
4)  Nonresidential development, excluding: 
(a)  The storage of toxic and hazardous material unless a spill containment plan is implemented; 
(b)  Landfills; and 
(c)  Sites for land application of sludge/residuals or petroleum contaminated soils. 
b.  Low density and built-upon limits. 
1)  Single-family residential development shall not exceed two (2) dwelling units per acre on a project-by-project basis. 
2)  All other residential and nonresidential development shall not exceed twenty-four (24) percent built-upon area on a project-by-project basis. For the purpose of calculating the built-upon area, total project area shall include total acreage in the tract on which the project is to be developed. 
c.  High density and built-upon limits. High density and built-upon limits are permitted in this watershed area pursuant to the provisions of chapter 8 of this LDC. 
2.  WS-IV watershed areas-Protected area (WS-IV-PA). Only new development activities that require a sedimentation and erosion control plan under the city's sedimentation and erosion control LDC or state erosion/sedimentation law are required to meet the provisions of this LDC. In order to address a medium to high land use intensity pattern, residential and nonresidential uses are permitted in this watershed area, subject to the requirements of this LDC, including the following: 
a.  Uses permitted. 
1)  Agriculture, subject to the provisions of the Food Security Act of 1985 and the Food, Agriculture, Conservation and Trade Act of 1990. 
2)  Silviculture, subject to the provisions of the Forest Practices Guidelines Related to Water Quality (15 NCAC 1I.6101-.0209). 
3)  Residential development. 
4)  Nonresidential development, excluding the storage of toxic and hazardous material unless a spill containment plan is implemented. 
b.  Low density and built-upon limits. 
1)  Single-family residential development shall not exceed two (2) dwelling units per acre or twenty-four (24) percent built-upon area, on a project-by-project basis. For projects without a curb and gutter street system, development shall not exceed three (3) dwelling units per acre or thirty-six (36) percent built-upon area, on a project-by-project basis. 
2)  All other residential and nonresidential development shall not exceed twenty-four (24) percent built-upon area, on a project-by-project basis. For projects without a curb and gutter street system, development shall not exceed thirty-six (36) percent built-upon area, on a project-by-project basis. 
3)  For the purpose of calculating built-upon area, total project area shall include total acreage in the tract on which the project is to be developed. 
c.  High density and built-upon limits. High density and built-upon limits are permitted in this watershed area pursuant to the provisions of chapter 8 of this LDC. 
F.  Development in watershed areas. Clustering of development is allowed in all watershed areas under the following conditions: 
1.  Minimum lot sizes are not applicable to single-family cluster development projects; however, the total number of lots shall not exceed the number of lots allowed for single-family detached developments in chapter 8 of this LDC. Built-upon area or stormwater control requirements of the project shall not exceed that allowed for the critical area or protected area, whichever applies. 
2.  All built-upon areas shall be designed and located to minimize stormwater run-off impact to the receiving waters and minimize concentrated stormwater flow. 
3.  The remainder of the tract shall remain in a vegetated or natural state. Where the development has an incorporated property owners association, the title of the open space area shall be conveyed to the association for management. Where a property association is not incorporated, a maintenance agreement shall be filed in the appropriate county. 
G.  Buffer areas required. 
1.  A minimum one hundred (100) foot vegetative buffer is required for all new development activities that exceed the low density option; otherwise, a minimum thirty (30) foot vegetative buffer for development activities is required along all perennial waters indicated on the most recent versions of U.S.G.S 1:24,000 (7.5 minute) scale topographic maps or as determined by the director of engineering. Desirable artificial stream bank or shoreline stabilization is permitted. 
2.  No new development is allowed in the buffer except for water development structures and public projects such as road crossings and greenways where no practical alternative exists. These activities should minimize built-upon surface area, direct runoff away from the surface waters and maximize the utilization of stormwater best management practices. 
H.  Rules interpretation of watershed boundaries. Where it is believed that the majority of an existing or proposed lot in its natural, undisturbed, predevelopment state actually drains outside of the watershed (as indicated on the official watershed map), a topographic survey prepared by a registered land surveyor may be submitted to the director of the department of development services as evidence that the lot should be excluded from the official watershed area boundaries. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the watershed area, as shown on the watershed map, the following rules shall apply: 
1.  Where area boundaries are indicated as approximately following either street, alley, railroad or highway lines or centerlines thereof, such lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. 
2.  Where area boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. However, a surveyed plat prepared by a registered land surveyor may be submitted to the director as evidence that one (1) or more properties along these boundaries do not lie within the watershed area. 
3.  Where the watershed area boundaries lie at a scaled distance more than twenty-five (25) feet from any parallel lot line, the location of watershed area boundaries shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the watershed map. 
4.  Where the watershed area boundaries lie at a scaled distance of twenty-five (25) feet or less form any parallel lot line, the location of watershed area boundaries shall be construed to be the lot line. 
5.  Where other uncertainty exists, the director of development services shall interpret the watershed map as to location of such boundaries. This decision may be appealed to the board of adjustment. 
I.  Existing development. Any existing development as defined in this section, may be continued and maintained subject to the conditions provided herein. Expansions to structures classified as existing development must meet the requirements of this section, however, the built-upon area of the existing development is not required to be included in the density calculations. 
J.  Compliance prior to issuance of permits. 
1.  Except where a single-family residence is constructed on a lot of record prior to the effective date of this section, no building or built-upon area shall be erected, moved, enlarged or structurally altered, nor shall any building permit be issued nor shall any change in the use of any building or land be made until the provisions of this section have been complied with. 
2.  No building or structure which has been erected, moved or structurally altered may be occupied nor shall a certificate of occupancy/compliance be issued until the provisions of this section have been complied with. 
K.  High density development. 
1.  The planning board may approve high density development proposed consistent with the following standards: 
a.  WS-IV watershed areas-Critical area (WS-IV-CA). Where new development exceeds either two (2) dwelling units per acre or twenty-four (24) percent built-upon area, engineered stormwater controls shall be used to control runoff from the first inch of rainfall and development shall not exceed fifty (50) percent built-upon area. 
b.  WS-IV watershed areas-Protected areas (WS-IV-PA). Where new development requires a sedimentation and erosion control plan and exceeds either two (2) dwelling units per acre or twenty-four (24) percent built-upon area, or three (3) dwelling units per acre or thirty-six (36) percent built-upon area for projects without curb and gutter street system, engineered stormwater controls shall be used to control runoff from the first inch of rainfall and development shall not exceed seventy (70) percent built-upon area. 
c.  The engineered stormwater management and/or BMP facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the criteria listed in section 804 of this LDC. 
2.  High density development shall meet the requirements of this LDC and the provisions of the LDC relating to watershed protection. 
(Ord. No. O-2004-65, § 2, 8-9-04; Ord. No. O-2005-34B, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 3, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 804. - Design, construction and maintenance of stormwater management and/or BMP facilities. 
A.  Stormwater management facility design. 
1.  All stormwater management and/or best management practices (BMP) facilities shall be designed by a North Carolina registered professional with qualifications appropriate for the type of system required; these registered professionals are defined as professional engineers, landscape architects, to the extent that N.C.G.S. 89A allows, and land surveyors, to the extent that the design represents incidental drainage within a subdivision, as provided in N.C.G.S. 89C-3(7). 
2.  The standards used for the design and construction of all stormwater management and/or BMP facilities shall be in accordance with the "City of Rocky Mount Standard Specifications and Design Manual," latest edition and "The North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources, Division of Water Quality, Water Quality Section, Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual," 1999. These standards and all amendments thereto and are hereby adopted by reference. 
3.  Stormwater management facilities for nutrient reduction and water quality, may consist of one (1) treatment option or a combination of treatment options so long as the following conditions are met: 
a.  Eighty-five (85) percent average annual removal of total suspended solids, and; 
b.  Facility shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of 804 A1-2 and to meet the nutrient reduction requirements of section 802, and 
c.  The discharge rate shall meet the following criteria: 
1)  The discharge rate for constructed wetlands, wet detention basins bioretention areas and other extended detention facilities following the one-inch design storm shall be such that the runoff draws down to the pre-storm design stage within five (5) days, but not less than two (2) days; and 
2)  The post development peak discharge rate shall equal the predevelopment rate for the one-year, 24-hour storm. 
4.  In addition to any required vegetative filters all land areas outside of the stormwater management facility shall be provided with a ground cover sufficient to restrain erosion within thirty (30) days after any land disturbance. Upon completion of the stormwater control structure, a permanent ground cover shall be established and maintained as part of a maintenance agreement. 
5.  A legal description of the area containing the stormwater control structure shall be prepared and included in a separate deed to the owning entity to be filed with the register of deeds in the appropriate county along with any easements necessary for general access to the stormwater management structure. The deeded area shall include the stormwater management structure, vegetative filters, all pipes and water control structures, berms, dikes, etc., and sufficient area to perform inspections, maintenance, repairs and reconstruction. 
6.  Qualifying areas of the stormwater management structure may be considered pervious when computing total built-upon area. However, if the structure is used to compute the percentage built-upon area for one (1) site, it shall not be used to compute the built-upon area for any other site or area. 
B.  Posting of financial security required. 
1.  Plan approval for new stormwater control structures shall be conditioned on the posting of a financial assurance as provided in section 1310 of this LDC for one hundred ten (110) percent of the estimated construction cost for the purpose of construction, repair, or reconstruction necessary for adequate performance of the stormwater management and/or BMP facility. 
2.  Default under the financial assurance. Upon default of the applicant to complete and/or maintain the stormwater control structure as spelled out in the performance bond or other security, the director of engineering may obtain and use all or any portion of the funds necessary to complete the improvements based on an engineering estimate. The director of engineering shall return any funds not spent in completing the improvements to the owning entity; provided, however, no funds shall be returned to the owning entity until the director of engineering is satisfied that adequate provisions have been made for the future maintenance, repair, and if necessary, reconstruction of the stormwater controls. 
3.  Default under cash security. Upon default of the owning entity to maintain, repair and, if necessary, reconstruct the stormwater control structure in accordance with the operation and maintenance agreement, the director of engineering shall obtain and use all or any portion of the cash security to make necessary improvements based on an engineering estimate. Such expenditure of funds shall only be made after exhausting all other reasonable remedies seeking the owning entity to comply with the terms and conditions of the operation and maintenance agreement. The director of engineering shall not return any of the deposited cash funds. 
C.  Maintenance and upkeep. 
1.  All stormwater management facilities and/or best management practice (BMPs) facilities that are constructed or implemented to meet the requirements of this LDC must be maintained in a manner that maintains the nutrient reduction levels and flow attenuation levels anticipated in the design of the facility. 
2.  Prior to final plat approval or issuance of a certificate of compliance, the applicant shall enter into a binding operation and maintenance agreement between the city and all interests in the development. Such agreement shall 
a.  Require the owning entity to maintain, repair and, if necessary, reconstruct the stormwater control structure in accordance with the operation and management plan provided by the developer. 
b.  The operation and maintenance of agreement shall be in recordable form executed by the owning entity and director of engineering and shall be filed with the register of deeds in the appropriate county. 
c.  The owning entity or entities will be responsible for submitting an annual inspection report of the stormwater management and/or BMP facility performed by a knowledgeable professional in the field to the director of engineering. The annual report shall include an assessment of the condition of the facility including any improvements needed to insure that the facility operates safely and achieves the necessary nutrient reduction and flow attenuation levels anticipated in the design of the facility. 
d.  The stormwater management agreement shall clearly delineate the penalties for failure to complete the required inspections, maintenance or improvements and shall grant the city authority to enter the property for the purposes of ensuring compliance with the provisions of the agreement and this LDC. If the owner and/or operator fails to complete the required inspections or any required improvements, the city shall inspect the facilities and make any necessary corrections. Any costs associated with this work, including administrative costs and fines, will be charged to the owner and/or party legally responsible for maintenance of the facility. 
e.  Maintenance agreements shall run with the land and be binding upon subsequent owners of both the development project and/or any offsite facilities. 
3.  As part of the operation and maintenance agreement, an operation and maintenance plan shall be provided by the developer for each stormwater control structure indicating what operation and maintenance actions are needed, what specific quantitative criteria will be used for determining when those actions are to be taken and, consistent with the operation and maintenance agreement, who is responsible for those actions. The plan shall clearly indicate the steps that will be taken for restoring a stormwater control structure to design specifications if a failure occurs. 
4.  Landscaping and grounds management shall be the responsibility of the owning entity. However, vegetation shall not be established or allowed to mature to the extent that the integrity of the control structure is diminished or threatened, or to the extent of interfering with an easement or access to the stormwater control structure. 
5.  Except for general landscaping and grounds management, the owning entity shall notify the director of engineering prior to any repair or reconstruction of the stormwater control structure. All improvements shall be made consistent with the approved plans and specifications of the stormwater control structure and the operation and maintenance plan. After notification by the owning entity, the director of engineering or designee shall inspect the completed improvements and shall inform the owning entity of any required additions, changes, or modifications and of the time period to complete such improvements. The director of engineering may consult with an engineer or landscape architect (to the extent that N.C.G.S. Chapter 89A allow) designated by the planning board. 
6.  Amendments to the plans and specifications of the stormwater management and/or BMP facility, the operation and maintenance agreement or the operation and maintenance plan shall be approved by the planning board. Proposed changes shall be prepared by a North Carolina registered professional engineer or landscape architect (to the extent that the N.C.G.S. ch. 89A allow) and submitted to and review by the department of development services prior to consideration by the planning board. 
a.  If the planning board approves the proposed change, the owning entity of the stormwater control structure shall file sealed copies of the revisions with the department of development services. 
b.  If the planning board disapproves the changes, the proposal may be revised and resubmitted to the board as a new proposal. If the proposal has not been revised and is essentially the same as that already reviewed, it shall be returned to the owning entity. 
7.  If the planning board finds that the operation and maintenance plan is inadequate for any reason, the board shall notify the owning entity of any required changes and the owning entity shall prepare and file copies of a revised operation and maintenance agreement with the department of development services and such revised plan shall be the plan for the development. 
D.  Release of the performance bond. 
1.  The director of engineering shall inspect the stormwater management and/or BMP facility after the developer notifies him that all work has been completed. At or prior to this inspection, the developer shall provide to the city: 
a.  Certified as-built drawings of the stormwater management and/or BMP facility. 
b.  Final plat(s) creating a separate lot of record for the stormwater management facility ready for filing with the register of deeds; 
c.  Signed deed(s) and related easements, as required, to convey the stormwater controls to the owning entity, and 
d.  A certification sealed by an engineer or landscape architect (to the extent that the N.C.G.S. Chapter 89A allow) stating that the stormwater management and/or BMP facility is complete and consistent with the approved plans and specifications. 
2.  If the director of engineering approves the inspection report and accepts the items listed in [section] 804 D1, the director may release up to seventy-five (75) percent of the value of the performance bond or other security, and authorize the issuance of a certificate of compliance for the stormwater management and/or BMP facility. If deficiencies are found, the director of engineering shall direct that improvements and inspections be made and/or documents corrected. 
3.  No sooner than one (1) year after year after the filing date of the deed, easements, and maintenance agreement issuance of the certificate of compliance, the developer may request that the director of engineering release the remaining value of the performance bond or other security. Upon receipt of such request the director of engineering shall inspect the stormwater control structure to determine whether the controls are performing as designed and intended. 
a.  If the director of engineering approves the report and accepts the request, the director of engineering shall release the remaining performance bond or other security. 
b.  If the director of engineering does not accept the report and rejects the request, he shall provide the developer with instructions to correct any deficiencies and all steps necessary for the release of the performance bond or other security. 
4.  In the event the director of engineering discovers the need for corrective action or improvements, he shall notify the owning entity of the needed improvements and the date by which the corrective action is to be completed. All improvements shall be made consistent with the plans and specifications of the stormwater control structure and the operation and maintenance plan. After notification by the owning entity, the director of engineering shall inspect and approve the completed improvements. 
(Ord. No. O-2004-65, § 2, 8-9-04; Ord. No. 0-06-68, § 2, 7-10-06; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 2, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 805. - Permits and enforcement. 
A.  Permits. Permits for all development activities covered by this chapter shall be issued in accordance with section 717 of this LDC. 
B.  Enforcement. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be in accordance with chapter 12 of this LDC. 
C.  Appeals. Except as otherwise noted in this chapter, appeals of any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the director of engineering may be made to and decided by the board of adjustment as provided in chapter 3 of this LDC. 
(Ord. No. O-2004-65, § 2, 8-9-04) 
CHAPTER 9. - FLOODPLAIN PROTECTION ZONING OVERLAY DISTRICT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2013-28, § 1, adopted May 28, 2013, repealed Ch. 9 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 9 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 9, §§ 901-909, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. O-2004-57, adopted July 12, 2004; Ord. No. O-2004-83, § 1a-e, adopted Oct. 11, 2004; Ord. No. O-2004-87, § 2, adopted Nov. 8, 2004; Ord. No. O-2005-34B, § 1(Att. A), adopted May 9, 2005; Ord. No. O-2005-103, § 1, adopted Nov. 14, 2005; Ord. No. 2007-30, § 2, adopted May 14, 2007. 

Sec. 901. - Purposes and intent. 
    It is the purpose of the floodplain protection zoning overlay to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
A.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
B.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.  Minimize and control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
D.  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
E.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-28, § 1, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 902. - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has in Part 6, Article 21 of Chapter 143; Parts 3, 5, and 8 of Article 19 of Chapter 160A; and Article 8 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-28, § 1, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 903. - Findings of fact and objectives. 
A.  Findings of fact: 
1.  The areas of special flood hazard of the city are subject to periodic inundation which can result in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
2.  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
3.  The areas of special flood hazard also include those defined through standard engineering analysis for private developments or by governmental agencies, but which have not yet been incorporated in the "Flood Insurance Study for the County of Nash." This includes detailed flood information generated as required by this ordinance. 
B.  Objectives: 
1.  To protect human life and health; 
2.  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
3.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
4.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
5.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in floodplains; 
6.  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; and 
7.  To promote the notification that property is in a flood area to potential homebuyers. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-28, § 1, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 904. - Establishment of zoning overlay and scope of authority. 
A.  There is hereby established a Floodplain Protection Zoning Overlay District, (Floodplain Protection Overlay) superimposed on the other zoning districts of the city. The boundaries of the Floodplain Protection Overlay which coincide with National Flood Insurance Program Special Flood Hazard Areas, which include all land located within the floodway and 100-year floodplain as defined by FEMA per the Flood Insurance Rate Map for the city dated June 18, 2013 (the "FIRMs of June 18, 2013"). The Special Flood Hazard Areas are those identified under the Cooperating Technical State (CTS) agreement between the State of North Carolina and FEMA in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated June 18, 2013 for Nash County and associated DFIRM panels, including any digital data developed as part of the FIS, which are adopted by reference and declared a part of this Ordinance. Future revisions of the FIS and DFIRM panels that do not change flood hazard data within the jurisdictional authority within the City of Rocky Mount are also adopted by reference and made a part of this Ordinance. 
B.  The portion of the floodway and 100-year floodplain delineated on the FIRMs of June 18, 2013 and the preliminary FIS is hereby designated as the city's regulatory floodplain. 
C.  All existing regulations of the underlying districts remain in effect. 
D.  Where a conflict occurs between regulations of the underlying zoning district and the floodplain protection zoning overlay, the zoning overlay shall apply. 
E.  The floodplain protection zoning overlay is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-28, § 1, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 905. - Compliance, interpretation and disclaimer. 
A.  Floodplain development permit. A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of the floodplain protection zoning overlay prior to the commencement of any land disturbance activity or any development activities within Special Flood Hazard Areas determined in accord with review of Section 909.D. 
    Agricultural activities, passive recreation and open space preservation that do not require the construction of a structure or building do not require the issuance of a floodplain development permit. The movement of soil, fill, removal of soil, and other changes in topography that may affect the floodplain does require the issuance of a floodplain development permit. A fifty (50) foot wide vegetative buffer should be maintained along all streams and soil compaction should be minimized. 
B.  Compliance. No land disturbance activity or new construction, storage of equipment or materials, alteration or expansion of an existing structure or building shall occur without full compliance with the requirements of the floodplain protection zoning overlay. The standards and requirements of the zoning overlay and the individual subdistricts apply only to the portion of a parcel that is located within the boundaries of the zoning overlay and the boundaries of individual subdistricts. 
C.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of the floodplain protection zoning overlay all provisions shall be: (a) Considered as minimum requirements; (b) Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and (c) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. The director shall interpret the floodplain protection zoning overlay. Appeals of the staff's interpretation shall be made to the planning board. 
D.  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by the floodplain protection zoning overlay is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by built or natural causes. The zoning overlay does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. The zoning overlay shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on the zoning overlay or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. If any section, clause, sentence or phrase of the ordinance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. 
E.  Effect upon outstanding building and/or floodplain development permits. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of any building, structure or part thereof for which a building and/or floodplain development permit has been granted by the inspection services administrator or his/her authorized agents before the effective date of the floodplain protection zoning overlay if the "start of construction" date is within one-hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-28, § 1, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 906. - Flood protection zoning overlay district boundaries. 
A.  City: Within the zoning jurisdiction of the city, the floodplain protection zoning overlay is hereby comprised of the following subdistricts, as described below. Revisions to the boundaries of the floodway or non-encroachment area, 100-year floodplain and the 500-year floodplain that occur following the effective date of the floodplain protection zoning overlay shall require adjustment of the subdistrict boundaries to ensure consistency. 
1.  Subdistrict Floodway. Subdistrict Floodway or non-encroachment area includes all land located within the floodway as defined by FEMA and per the FIRMs of June 18, 2013, or as revised. 
2.  Subdistrict AE-100-year Floodplain. Subdistrict AE includes all land located within the 100-year floodplain as defined by FEMA and per the FIRMs of June 18, 2013, or as revised. 
3.  Subdistrict X-500-year and all other watercourses. Subdistrict X includes the 500-year floodplain and all land located within fifty (50) feet of the centerline of all other watercourses or five (5) times the width of the channel measured from the channel centerline, whichever is greater, that lack base flood elevations and/or mapped floodways, whether such watercourses are perennial streams or intermittent streams. 
B.  Annexations and extraterritorial jurisdiction. In addition, upon annexation to the city, or inclusion in the extraterritorial jurisdiction, the floodway, 100-year floodplain and 500-year floodplain identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance study and flood insurance rate map(s) for Unincorporated Edgecombe or Nash Counties, with accompanying maps and other supporting data, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of the floodplain protection zoning overlay and the subdistrict boundaries noted above. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-28, § 1, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 907. - Use regulations. 
    All development shall be in compliance with the following applicable regulations. 
A.  Permitted uses. The permitted uses of the underlying zoning district are hereby permitted, provided: 
1.  Such uses are not expressly prohibited in the zoning overlay per subsection 907C., prohibited uses; and 
2.  Such uses can meet the standards and requirements of the zoning overlay and are issued a floodplain development permit as required herein prior to issuance of a building permit. 
B.  Special uses. The special uses of the underlying zoning district are hereby permitted, provided: 
1.  Such uses are not expressly prohibited in the zoning overlay per subsection 907C., prohibited uses; and 
2.  Such uses can meet the standards and requirements of the zoning overlay and are issued a floodplain development permit as required herein prior to issuance of a building permit. 
3.  Such uses are approved per this LDC. 
C.  Prohibited uses. Uses not expressly permitted in the underlying zoning districts or which are not allowed as a special use, are hereby prohibited in Subdistrict Floodway or non-encroachment area of the floodplain protection zoning overlay: 
1.  Grading, the placement of fill, the removal of fill, dredging and other modifications to topography of the subdistrict. 
2.  Residential uses. 
3.  Commercial, office, industrial, and related uses. 
4.  Quarries, borrow pits, and sand and gravel extraction. 
5.  Critical facilities. 
6.  Outdoor storage. 
7.  Accessory uses and structures, except that the following uses are permitted in compliance with all other applicable regulations including but not limited to a no-rise certification: 
a.  Boat docks, boat ramps, decks, piers, bridges, trail or hard surface stability features and similar structures (excluding parking lots) that do not have any sides with less than seventy-five (75) percent open side areas(s). There shall be no building (sided structures with or without a roof) incorporated in this allowable structure. 
b.  Fences (wooden or wire only) that have not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the fence side consisting of a solid plane (flat surface). 
c.  Removal of fill, grading, extraction and other modifications to a pre-existing encroachment may be permitted if the proposed encroachment has demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood. Such certification and technical data shall be presented to the floodplain administrator prior to issuance of floodplain development permit. 
8.  Temporary uses and structures. No use in Subdistrict Floodway or non-encroachment area shall increase the base flood level, as shown on the FIRMs of June 18, 2013, by more than one (1) foot. An Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65) shall be required for any development in Subdistrict A. In addition, no encroachment which causes any increase in the base flood elevation is permitted in Subdistrict Floodway or non-encroachment area. 
D.  Subdistrict AE-100-Year Floodplain. Uses not expressly permitted in the underlying zoning districts or which are not allowed as a special use, are hereby permitted in Subdistrict AE of the floodplain protection zoning overlay on condition that the use and/or structure comply with the terms of this LDC relating to floodplain development permits and freeboard. 
E.  Subdistrict X-All other watercourses. This LDC is not intended to regulate development in Subdistrict X. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-28, § 1, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 908. - Development standards. 
    The following development standards shall apply to all uses and structures permitted in Subdistrict AE of the floodplain protection zoning overlay. 
A.  General standards: The following general standards shall apply to development permitted outside of the floodway in Subdistrict AE of the floodplain protection zoning overlay. 
1.  Additions. Additions to existing buildings shall comply with the requirements for new construction. 
2.  Altering watercourses. Altering watercourses is strongly discouraged. Applicants shall provide documentation of U.S. Corps of Army Engineers approval of watercourse alterations with the application for a floodplain development permit. 
3.  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure. 
4.  Electrical Systems. All electrical systems shall be located a minimum one (1) foot above the base flood elevation on the FIRMS of June 18, 2013. However, one (1) electrical outlet with ground fault interrupt (GFI) may be permitted below the base flood elevation inside a residential dwelling unit. For the purposes of the Zoning Overlay, this requirement shall not prohibit the underground installation of on-site electrical utilities. 
5.  Flood resistance. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
6.  Foundations. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review the structural design, specifications and plans for the foundation of a building or structure (excluding individual single-family homes), and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted practices to withstand flotation, collapse, lateral movement, erosion and scour, undermining, and the effects of water and wind acting simultaneously on all building components during the base flood. 
7.  HVAC. All HVAC systems shall be located a minimum of one (1) foot above the base flood elevation on the FIRMS of June 18, 2013, except for duct work that shall be located above the base flood elevation. Heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding, and to ensure that such facilities cannot be dislodged by floodwater. 
8.  New construction. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure which is in compliance with the provisions of the floodplain protection zoning overlay, shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in the zoning overlay. 
9.  On-site waste disposal systems. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
10.  Sewage systems. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
11.  Tar-Pamlico buffer. As per subsection 801G. of this LDC, a minimum one hundred (100) foot vegetative buffer is required for all new development activities that exceed the low density option; otherwise, a minimum thirty (30) foot vegetative buffer for development activities is required along all perennial waters indicated on the most recent versions of U.S.G.S. 1:24,000 (7.5 minute) scale topographic maps or as determined by the director of engineering. Desirable artificial stream bank or shoreline stabilization is permitted. 
12.  No new development is allowed in the buffer except for water development structures and public projects such as road crossings and greenways where no practical alternative exists. These activities should minimize built-upon surface area, direct runoff away from the surface waters, and maximize utilization of stormwater best management practices, including preserving natural vegetation. 
13.  Water systems. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
14.  Roads. All new roads shall be constructed such that the lowest road crown elevation is no more than one (1) foot below the 100-year base flood elevation. 
B.  Specific standards: The following provisions are required: 
1.  Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures (sheds, detached garages, etc.) that are proposed to be placed in Subdistrict AE of the floodplain protection zoning overlay require the issuance of a floodplain development permit. Accessory uses and structures that are four hundred (400) square feet in area or less must meet the following criteria. Accessory uses and structures that are larger than four hundred (400) square feet in area must meet all requirements of the zoning overlay. 
a.  Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation (including work, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas); 
b.  Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential; 
c.  Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters; 
d.  Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored per the standards of the zoning overlay; 
e.  Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall meet the standards of the zoning overlay; and 
f.  Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be provided below base flood elevation in conformance with the standards of the zoning overlay and as approved by the director of engineering. 
2.  Critical facilities. Where approved in the floodplain protection zoning overlay, critical facilities shall be constructed on properly compacted fill and have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least one (1) foot above the elevation of the 500-year flood. A critical facility shall have at least one (1) access road connected to land outside the 500-year floodplain (Subdistrict X) that is capable of supporting a four thousand (4,000) pound vehicle. The top of the road must be no lower than six (6) inches below the elevation of the 500-year flood. 
3.  Construction, non-residential. 
a.  Freeboard. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential structure shall have the lowest finished floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation on the FIRMS of June 18, 2013. Provided, however, when repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or remodeling within an existing structure is proposed, a property owner or authorized agent may make such repair, reconstruction, remodeling, or rehabilitation with the lowest finished floor elevation at or above the base flood elevation on the FIRMs of June 18, 2013, subject to the following conditions: 
1)  Existing finished floor elevation is at or above base flood elevation; 
2)  Proposed finished floor elevation is at or above the existing floor elevation; and 
3)  All construction occurs within the existing building and foundation (no expansion or addition). 
b.  Measuring lowest finished floor. For the purposes of the zoning overlay, the lowest floor shall be measured from the top of the finished floor as defined herein. 
c.  Flood proofing. Structures may be flood proofed to the flood protection level in lieu of elevation provided that all areas of the structure below the required elevation plus one (1) foot above the required elevation on the FIRMS of June 18, 2013, are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. 
d.  Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. A completed elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31 as amended) shall be provided to the administrator prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the city (see subsection 909F.3.). 
4.  Construction, residential. 
a.  Freeboard. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the lowest finished floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation on the FIRMS of June 18, 2013. Provided, however, when repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or remodeling within an existing structure is proposed, a property owner or authorized agent may make such repair, reconstruction, remodeling, or rehabilitation with the lowest finished floor elevation at or above the base flood elevation on the FIRMs of June 18, 2013, subject to the following conditions: 
1)  Existing finished floor elevation is at or above base flood elevation; 
2)  Proposed finished floor elevation is at or above the existing floor elevation; and 
3)  All construction occurs within the existing building and foundation (no expansion or addition). 
b.  Measuring lowest finished floor. For the purposes of the zoning overlay, the lowest floor shall be measured from the top of the finished floor as defined herein. 
c.  Solid foundations. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided. 
d.  Anchoring manufactured homes. Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement, in accordance with the State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured/Mobile Homes, 1995 Edition, and any revision thereto adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 143-143.15. Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis thirty-six (36) inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength. When the elevation of the chassis is above thirty-six (36) inches in height an engineering certification is required. 
e.  Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. A completed elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31 as amended) shall be provided to the administrator prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the city. (See section 909F.3.). 
5.  Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas that are usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to preclude finished living space and be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1)  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2)  The bottom of all required openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and, 
3)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
b.  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas. 
e.  The owner shall sign an agreement to not convert the lower enclosed area to a use that is subject to water damage. 
6.  Fill and mitigation. 
(a)  Fill is not permitted in Subdistrict Floodway or non-encroachment area. 
(b)  It is the policy of the city to limit the amount of fill placed in Subdistrict AE to maximize floodwater carrying capacity. But in recognizing the necessity to provide flexibility the following standards are adopted. The director of engineering shall approve all plans for fill and mitigation. 
(c)  The applicant for a floodplain development permit and/or special use permit may propose one (1) of the following options relative to placement of fill and mitigation. Fill mitigation, where required, shall be calculated up to the base flood elevation of the subject site. 
(1)  Option 1. No mitigation shall be required if the standard for the appropriate category is met. For category 1, the director of engineering may permit additional fill not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the amount allowed to provide for supporting structures (such as driveways and sidewalks), but not accessory uses and structures. 
_____
Table 9-1: Fill Mitigation. 
Category Portion of Parcel in Subdistrict AE of the Floodplain Protection Zoning Overlay Amount of Permitted Fill Without Required Mitigation (cubic yards) 1 1/4 acre 200 2 1/2 acre 400 3 3/4 acre 600 4 1 acre 800 5 2 acres 1,600 6 Each additional acre 800  
_____ 
(2)  Option 2. For parcels where the proposed fill exceeds the category under subsection (1), but is less than forty-nine thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (49,999) cubic yards, the applicant/owner may pursue the following compensatory options: 
a.  A payment may be made to the city of a fee that can be used in a stormwater mitigation project. For category 1 through 4, the director of engineering shall approve the proposal under this option. For category 5 and 6, the planning board shall approve the proposal to pay a fee. The fee shall be established by city council and shall be paid to the city within thirty (30) days of the approval of a floodplain development permit. The fee shall be placed in a special fund and used by the city to construct equivalent compensatory storage on a parcel owned by the city within the same sub watershed/sub basin. 
b.  Provide compensatory storage equal to the volume of fill in excess of the exemptions listed in paragraph 6.c.(1) of this chapter subject to the following conditions: 
i.  The compensatory storage location is subject to approval by the director of engineering and must be located within or connected to the same FEMA regulated floodplain boundary. 
ii.  The fill offset may not be in a location subject to federal, state or local regulatory limitations on fill. 
iii.  The amount of fill offset by conservation of unexcavated existing floodplain shall be considered equal to the amount of fill allowed under paragraph 6.c.(1) of this chapter, eight hundred (800) cubic yards per acre. The director of engineering may approve higher volumes provided the applicant/owner submits a topographic survey and supporting calculations certified by a surveyor or engineer registered in the State of North Carolina. 
iv.  A conservation easement dedicated to the city shall be placed on the compensatory storage facility to prevent development of the site or removal of the storage facility in perpetuity. 
c.  Alternative fill mitigation measures may be approved by the director of engineering provided the applicant/owner submits a floodplain analysis of the effective floodplain model prepared by a professional engineer, registered in the State of North Carolina, which demonstrates the proposed fill and alternative fill mitigation, if required, will not increase flood elevations in the model. The director of engineering shall approve the analysis and may at his option, require an independent third party review of the analysis prior to approval of the development plan. Furthermore, the director of engineering shall require certification from the engineer that all fill and associated mitigation measures are installed in conformance with the approved plan prior to final approval of the completed improvements. 
(3)  Option 3. For projects with proposed fill in the floodplain in excess of fifty thousand (50,000) cubic yards the applicant/owner is required to submit a floodplain analysis of the effective floodplain model prepared by a professional engineer, registered in the State of North Carolina, which demonstrates the proposed fill and recommended fill mitigation, if required, will not increase flood elevations in the model. The director of engineering shall approve the analysis and may, at his option, require an independent third party review of the analysis prior to approval of the development plan. Furthermore, the director of engineering shall require certification from the engineer that all fill and associated mitigation measures are installed in conformance with the approved plan prior to final approval of the completed improvements. 
7.  Manufactured home parks. The following standards shall apply to manufactured home parks: 
a.  Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites: 
1)  Outside of the manufactured home park or subdivision; 
2)  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
3)  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
4)  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated a minimum one (1) foot above the FIRMS of June 18, 2013 and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist floatation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
b.  Within existing manufactured home parks, individual homes may be replaced under the following conditions: 
Chapter 6-The replacement unit is of similar size, located on an approved space within the park; 
Chapter 7-The location of the replacement unit meets requirements for building separation; 
Chapter 8-Vehicle parking; and 
Chapter 9-The replacement unit is elevated as required by the standards contained in this floodplain protection overlay. 
c.  Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites: 
1)  Outside of the manufactured home park or subdivision; 
2)  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
3)  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
4)  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated a minimum of two (2) feet above the base flood elevation on the FIRMs of January 20, 1982, or one (1) foot above the preliminary FIS, whichever is greater, and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist floatation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
d.  Manufactured homes that are not subject to Section 908.7.C above shall be elevated so that either: 
1)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is a minimum of one (1) foot above the FIRMS of June 18, 2013; or 
2)  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and are securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist floatation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
8.  Outdoor storage. The following standards shall apply to outdoor storage: 
a.  Outdoor storage is prohibited in Subdistrict Floodway or non-encroachment area. 
b.  Outdoor storage is a special use in the portion of Subdistrict AE. As a special use, outdoor storage must meet one (1) of the following standards: 
1)  The location of the outdoor storage shall be above the base flood elevation on the FIRMs of June 18, 2013 plus two (2) feet; or 
2)  The applicant shall demonstrate appropriate measures that will secure such outdoor storage from leaving the site due to storm flow in the event of a flood or storm event, to the satisfaction of the director or planning board, as required. 
3)  New solid waste disposal facilities, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not be permitted in the special flood hazard areas, except by variance as specified in subsection 909E.1.c. A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment facility or wastewater treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood protection elevation plus two (2) feet and certified according to subsection 908B.3.d. 
9.  Recreational vehicles. 
a.  Temporary placement. Recreational vehicles placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall: 
1)  be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
2)  be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities, and security devices has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms stairs, decks, and porches). 
b.  Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles that do not meet the limitations of Temporary placement shall meet all the requirements for new construction. 
10.  Subdivisions and major developments. 
a.  Proposals for subdivisions and major developments shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
b.  Proposals for subdivisions and major developments shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
c.  Proposals for subdivisions and major developments shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
d.  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for all subdivision proposals and other proposed development. 
e.  Preliminary and final plats shall continue to indicate subdistrict boundaries. 
f.  The design of subdivisions and major developments that are partially impacted by the zoning overlay and individual subdistricts shall ensure that components and phases of such developments are integrated and interconnected to the extent feasible. Master planning of such sites shall take these considerations into account. 
11.  Temporary uses and structures. Prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for a temporary use and/or structure the following requirements must be met: 
a.  All applicants must submit to the city prior to the issuance of the floodplain development permit a plan for the removal of such structure(s) in the event of a hurricane or flash flood warning notification. The plan must include the following information: 
1)  The specified time period for which the temporary use will be permitted; 
2)  The name, address and phone number of the individual responsible for the removal of the temporary structure; 
3)  The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be removed; 
4)  A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with a trucking company to insure the availability of removal equipment when needed; and 
5)  Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside the floodplain to which the temporary structure will be moved. 
6)  The above information shall be submitted with the application for a floodplain development permit. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-28, § 1, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 909. - Administration. 
A.  NFIP administrator. 
1.  The director of development services, or his/her designee, is hereby designated as the NFIP administrator. The director of development services, or his/her designee, may designate staff to assist in the administration of the NFIP program and this overlay district. 
2.  The duties shall include: 
a.  Review and approve Class 1 floodplain development permits to assure that the requirements of the floodplain protection zoning overlay have been satisfied; 
b.  Issue Class 2 floodplain development permits approved by the planning board. In issuing such permits, the director shall certify that all conditions required by the board have been met by the applicant prior to issuing the permit; 
c.  Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permits are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the floodplain development permit; 
d.  Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina Department of Crime Control and Public Safety, division of emergency management, state coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the federal emergency management agency; 
e.  Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished; 
f.  Prevent encroachments within floodways unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of the floodplain protection zoning overlay are met; 
g.  Obtain the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest finished floor including basement of all new or substantially improved structures; 
h.  Obtain the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level to which new or substantially improved structures have been flood proofed; 
i.  When flood proofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
j.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of the 100-year floodplain, 500-year floodplain, and/or a zoning overlay subdistrict make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall have a right of appeal to planning board within thirty (30) days of receipt of the written interpretation; 
k.  When base flood elevation data or floodway data has not been provided per the National Flood Insurance Program, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, including data developed pursuant to the floodplain protection zoning overlay, in order to administer the provisions of the zoning overlay; 
l.  When the exact location of boundaries of the 100-year floodplain (special flood hazard area), 500-year floodplain, and/or a zoning overlay subdistrict conflict with the current, natural topography information at the site the property owner may apply and be approved for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) by FEMA. A copy of the letter of map amendment issued from FEMA will be maintained by the administrator in the permit file; 
m.  Make on-site inspections of projects; 
n.  Serve notices of zoning violations, revoke floodplain development permits and take corrective actions; 
o.  Maintain all records pertaining to the administration of the floodplain protection zoning overlay and make these records available for public inspection; and 
p.  Monitor development activity, including the placement or removal of fill, in the floodplain protection zoning overlay through on-site inspections on a regular and ongoing basis. Identify illegal activity and issue stop work orders. 
B.  Inspections service administrator. 
1.  In administering the building code, the inspections service administrator and/or the administrator's representatives shall assist the director as directed in administering the requirements of the floodplain protection zoning overlay. 
2.  In particular, the approval of a building permit shall be in full conformance with an approved floodplain development permit. 
3.  The administrator can issue a stop work order for construction activity that is in violation of an approved floodplain development permit. 
C.  Zoning inspector. 
1.  In administering the LDC, the zoning inspector shall assist the director as directed in administering the requirements of the floodplain protection zoning overlay. 
2.  In particular, the approval of a zoning certificate shall be in full conformance with an approved floodplain development permit. 
D.  Floodplain development permit. 
1.  Standards. 
a.  Floodplain development permit. A floodplain development permit shall be required before any land disturbance activity, storage of equipment of materials, new construction, or substantial improvement, alteration or expansion of an existing structure or building may take place in the floodplain protection zoning overlay. 
b.  Expiration of permit. The approved floodplain development permit shall expire if a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the work approved has not been completed within twenty-four (24) months of issuance of the permit. If in that period there has been no significant change to the project and no significant changes to the floodplain protection zoning overlay, then the director may continue the floodplain development permit for another twenty-four (24) months. 
c.  Class 1 and Class 2 permits. The process for issuing a floodplain development permit is administrative. There are two (2) permit types based on the nature of the proposed development. 
a)  Class 1 permit. The Class 1 permit shall be reviewed and approved by the Director. 
b)  Class 2 permit. The Class 2 permit shall be reviewed and approved by the planning board, with a recommendation by the director. 
d.  The following table indicates the development activity that requires the appropriate permit. Any use not explicitly noted shall require a minor permit, unless in the opinion of the director the development is of sufficient size and magnitude that a major permit is appropriate. 
Table 9-2: Floodplain Development Permits. 
Development Activity Class Staff 
Approval Planning 
Board 
Approval Accessory uses and structures 1 Yes No Agricultural uses only when requiring construction of a structure or building 1 Yes No Commercial, office, industrial, religious and related uses with an area of 10,000 square feet or less 1 Yes No Commercial, office, industrial, religious and related uses with an area of more than 10,000 square feet 2 No Yes Special uses1 2 No Yes Critical facility 2 No Yes Grading, placement of fill, removal of fill and other modifications of topography-Category 1-4 (See Note 2.) 1 Yes No Grading, placement of fill, removal of fill and other modifications of topography-Category 5 and 6 (See Note 2.) 2 No Yes Manufactured home park 2 No Yes Nonconforming uses 2 No Yes Off-street parking areas and commercial drives 1 Yes No Outdoor storage that does not meet the definition of a critical facility 1 Yes No Outdoor storage that meets the definition of a critical facility 2 No Yes Passive recreation only when requiring construction of a structure or building 1 Yes No Public building, structure or facility 2 No Yes Recreational vehicles 1 Yes No Residential structure (includes manufactured home) 1 Yes No Residential subdivision plat-Four lots or less 1 Yes No Residential subdivision plat-More than four lots 2 No Yes Temporary uses and structures 1 Yes No  
Notes: 
1 Special Uses shall govern over all other uses relative to permit process. 
2 "Removal of fill" includes all quarries, borrow pits, and sand and gravel extraction. 
2.  Floodplain Development Permit-Class 1. 
a.  Application. The applicant shall submit a complete application to the Director, who will certify as to its completeness. Incomplete applications will not be considered. 
b.  Site plan. The application shall include a site plan drawn to scale (one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet) that indicates existing and proposed topography (two (2) foot contours), elevations, the floodplain protection zoning overlay boundaries, structures (existing and proposed), utilities, easements, and other site improvements. The site plan shall be prepared by a registered surveyor or civil engineer. City staff will verify the location of the proposed development relative to the regulatory floodplains. 
c.  Process. Once a complete application has been certified by the director, it will be considered. The director will have no less than ten (10) working days and no more than twenty (20) working days to review the application and provide a written decision to the applicant. Notification to adjacent property owners by the city shall occur by certified letter once the application has been certified as complete. 
Applicants are encouraged to meet with the director and/or his/her representative to review the application prior to submittal. The director shall apply the criteria indicated below in considering the application. In rendering the decision, the director shall address each of these criteria. A written report shall be prepared. Appropriate conditions may be placed on the applicant by the director. 
d.  Basis for decision. In considering applications for floodplain development permits, all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and standards specified in other sections of the floodplain protection zoning overlay shall be considered. A report shall be prepared indicating how the intent and objectives of the floodplain protection zoning overlay are fully met by the proposal and indicating that all applicable standards and requirements are met or adjustments are recommended to the proposal to ensure all standards and requirements are met. The following criteria shall be considered and conditions may be placed on the applicant to ensure that they are addressed sufficiently to ensure the public health, safety and general welfare are protected to the degree possible. 
1)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
7)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program; 
9)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
11)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
e.  Appeal. The decision of the director may be appealed to the planning board within thirty (30) days of receipt of the written decision. 
3.  Floodplain Development Permit-Class 2. 
a.  Application. The applicant shall submit a complete application to the director, who will certify as to its completeness. Incomplete applications will not be scheduled for consideration by the planning board. Once a complete submittal is certified, the director will schedule the application before the planning board. A submittal schedule will be established by the planning board each year. 
b.  Site plan. The application shall include a site plan drawn to scale (one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet) that indicates existing and proposed topography (two (2) foot contour), elevations, the floodplain protection zoning overlay boundaries, structures (existing and proposed), utilities, easements, and other site improvements. The site plan shall be prepared by a registered surveyor or civil engineer. City staff will verify the location of the proposed development relative to the regulatory floodplains. 
c.  Process. Once a complete application has been certified by the director, it will be placed on the agenda of the planning board. Notification to adjacent property owners by the city shall occur by certified letter once the application has been certified as complete. The director will have no less than ten (10) working days and no more than twenty (20) working days to review the application and provide a written recommendation with the application to the planning board. Applicants are encouraged to meet with the director and/or his/her representative to review the application prior to submittal. 
d.  Basis for decision. In considering applications for floodplain development permits, all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and standards specified in other sections of the floodplain protection zoning overlay shall be considered. A report shall be prepared indicating how the intent and objectives of the floodplain protection zoning overlay are fully met by the proposal and indicating that all applicable standards and requirements are met or adjustments are recommended to the proposal to ensure all standards and requirements are met. The following criteria shall be considered and conditions may be placed on the applicant to ensure that they are addressed sufficiently to ensure the public health, safety and general welfare are protected to the degree possible. 
1)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
7)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program; 
9)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
11)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
e.  Appeal. The decision of the planning board shall be subject to review by the superior court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. Any petition for review shall be filed with the clerk of superior court of the county in which the property is located within thirty (30) days after service of the written decision on the aggrieved party. 
4.  Additional submittal information. 
a.  Elevation. Where base flood elevation data is available, the application shall indicate the elevation of the lower floor (including basement) of all new and improved structures. If a non-residential structure is to be flood-proofed, the application shall indicate the elevation to which the structure will be flood proofed. 
b.  Watercourse alterations. Where any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development, the application shall include: a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; an engineering report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation. Where applicable, evidence of U.S. Corps of Engineers approval shall be submitted with the application. 
E.  Variances-Board of adjustment. The board of adjustment shall not have the authority to hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of the floodplain protection zoning overlay. 
1.  Exceptions: 
a.  Historic structures. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
b.  Functionally dependent facilities: Variances may be issued for the construction, repair or rehabilitation of functionally dependent facilities as defined b this LDC. 
c.  A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards and chemical storage facilities that are located in Special Flood Hazard Areas provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
1)  The use serves a critical need in the community. 
2)  No feasible location exists for the use outside the Special Flood Hazard Area. 
3)  The reference level of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood protection level. 
4)  The use complies with all other applicable federal, state and local laws. 
5)  The City of Rocky Mount ahs notified the Secretary of the North Carolina Department of Crime Control and Public Safety of its intention to grant a variance at least (30) days prior to granting the variance. 
2.  Considerations for decision. In order to approve a variance request, the board of adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of the floodplain protection zoning overlay, and the following considerations: 
a.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
b.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
d.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
e.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
f.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
g.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
h.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program; 
i.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
j.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
k.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
3.  Application. A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be submitted with the application for a variance. 
4.  Conditions. Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of the floodplain protection zoning overlay, the board of adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of the zoning overlay. The following standards shall apply: 
a.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result; 
b.  Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or other ordinances; and 
c.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
5.  Basis for decision. Variances shall only be issued upon all of the following findings, which shall be referenced in the board's decision: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances, taking into account the criteria of subsection d above. 
6.  Notice. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and a written statement that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. 
7.  Written record. The administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the federal emergency management agency upon request. 
F.  Zoning certificates, building permits and FEMA certificates: 
1.  Zoning certificate. 
a.  The application of a zoning certificate shall be fully consistent with the approval of a floodplain development permit, including fulfilling all conditions of the permit approval. 
b.  The approval of a zoning certificate by the city shall only occur if the zoning certificate is in full conformance with an approved floodplain development permit. In the case of a conflict, the requirements of the floodplain protection zoning overlay and the approved floodplain development permit shall take precedence. 
2.  Building permit. 
a.  The application for a building permit shall be fully consistent with the approval of a floodplain development permit, including fulfilling all conditions of the permit approval. 
b.  The approval of a building permit by the city shall be in full conformance with an approved floodplain development permit. 
3.  FEMA certificates. 
a.  An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) or a flood proofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65) is required. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the city a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor or flood proofed elevation whichever is applicable, and HVAC equipment, as built in relation to mean sea level. The elevation certificate shall be based upon a survey prepared by a professional surveyor. 
b.  The flood proofing certificate shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer or architect and shall indicate that the non-residential flood proofed structure meets the flood proofing criteria of the floodplain protection zoning overlay and FEMA. 
c.  These certificates shall be filed with and approved by the city prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the city. 
G.  Penalties. 
1.  Any person who violates any provisions of this ordinance or fails to comply with any of the requirements of the floodplain protection zoning overlay, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall be guilty a misdemeanor as provided in N.C.G.S. § 14-4 and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a maximum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment, or both. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
2.  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
H.  Nonconformities. Nonconforming buildings or uses may not be enlarged, replaced, or rebuilt unless such enlargement or reconstruction is accomplished in conformance with the provisions of the floodplain protection zoning overlay. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-28, § 1, 5-28-13; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 3, 8-13-18) 
CHAPTER 10. - HISTORIC OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 1001. - Purpose. 
A.  Historic district overlay defined. Historic district overlay applies to entire neighborhoods that include more than one (1) property. These areas are found significant to the community as a historical, cultural, or archeological resource. All uses permitted in any such district, whether by right or as a special use, shall be permitted in the historic district. (See chapter 5 special use-Historic preservation commercial use for additional information.) 
B.  Designation. 
1.  Historic districts, as provided for in this section, may from time to time be designated, amended, or repealed by the city council, provided however that no district shall be recommended for designation unless it is deemed to be of special significance in terms of its historical, archeological, architectural or cultural importance. Such district must also possess integrity of design, setting, workmanship, materials, feeling and/or association. No district shall be designated, amended, or repealed until the following procedure has been carried out: 
a.  An investigation and report describing the significance of the buildings, structures, features, sites or surroundings included in any such proposed district, and a description of the boundaries of such district has been prepared; and 
b.  The North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources, acting through the state historic preservation officer or designee, shall have made an analysis of and recommendations concerning such report and description of proposed boundaries. Failure of the department to submit its written analysis and recommendations within thirty (30) calendar days after a written request for such analysis has been received by the department of cultural resources shall relieve the city council of any responsibility for awaiting such analysis, and the city council may at any time thereafter take any necessary action to adopt or amend its zoning LDC. 
2.  The city council may also, in its discretion, refer the report and the proposed boundaries to any other interested body for its recommendations prior to taking action to amend the zoning LDC. 
3.  With respect to any changes in the boundaries of such district subsequent to its initial establishment, or the creation of additional districts within the jurisdiction, the investigative studies and reports required by this section shall be prepared by the commission and shall be referred to the planning board for its review and comment according to the procedures set forth in the zoning LDC. Changes in the boundaries of an initial district or proposal for additional districts shall be submitted to the department of cultural resources in accordance with the provisions of subdivision (b) of this section. 
4.  Upon receipt of these reports and recommendations the city council may proceed in the same manner as would otherwise be required for the adoption or amendment of any appropriate zoning LDC provisions. 
Sec. 1002. - Local historic landmark overlay. 
A.  Local historic landmarks defined. Historic landmarks apply to designated individual buildings, structures, sites, areas, or objects which are judged to have historical, architectural, archeological or cultural value. HPC guidelines and standards will apply in review and a fifty (50) percent tax credit is available so long as the significant historic character is maintained according to the LDC and the HPC procedures. 
B.  Designating local historic landmarks. 
1.  Upon complying with the required landmark designation procedures set forth herein, the city council may adopt and from time to time amend or repeal an ordinance designating one (1) or more historic landmarks. No landmark shall be recommended for designation as a landmark unless it is deemed and found by the commission to be of special significance in terms of its historical, pre-historical, architectural or cultural importance, and to possess integrity of design, setting, workmanship, materials, feeling and/or association. 
2.  The ordinance shall describe each property designated in the LHL, the name or names of the owner or owners of the property, those elements of the landmark that are integral to its historical, architectural or pre-historical value, including the land area of the property so designated, selected interior features of importance, and any other information the city council deems necessary. For each building, structure, site, area or object so designated as a landmark, the LDC shall require that the waiting period set forth in this division be observed prior to its demolition. A suitable sign for each property designated as a landmark may be placed on the property at the owner's consent; otherwise the sign may be placed on a nearby public right-of-way. All signage shall be in conformance with the city's sign regulations. 
3.  No landmark shall be designated as a landmark until the following steps have been taken: 
a.  As a guide for the identification and evaluation or properties of historical, architectural, pre-historical and cultural significance within Rocky Mount; 
b.  The commission shall make or cause to be made an investigation and report on the historic, architectural, pre-historical, educational or cultural significance of each building, structure, site, area or object proposed for designation or acquisition. Such report shall be forwarded to the Division of Archives and History, North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources; 
c.  Specific or general interior features which may include elements, materials, spaces, or designs important to the historic nature of the property at the time of designation may be selected by the commission for preservation. With approval of the property owner, these interior features would then fall under the guidance of the HPC and the historic preservation guidelines and standards for any future modifications to the property. 
d.  The department of cultural resources, acting through the state historic preservation officer, or designee, shall either upon request of the department or at the initiative of the commission be given an opportunity to review and comment upon the substance and effect of the designation of any landmark. All comments will be provided in writing. If the department does not submit its comments to the commission within thirty (30) days following receipt by the department of the report, the commission and the city council shall be relieved of any responsibility to consider such comments. 
e.  The commission and the city council shall hold a joint public hearing (or separate public hearings) on the proposed LHL. Reasonable notice of the time and place thereof shall be given. 
f.  Following the public hearing(s) the city council may adopt the LHL as proposed, adopt the LHL with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the proposed LHL. 
g.  Upon adoption of the ordinance the owners and occupants of each landmark shall be given written notification of such designation insofar as reasonable diligence permits. One (1) copy of the ordinance and all amendments thereto shall be filed by the commission in the office of the Registers of Deeds of Edgecombe and Nash Counties. Each landmark shall be indexed according to the name of the owner of the property in the grantor and grantee indexes in the register of deeds office and the commission shall pay a reasonable fee for filing and indexing. A second copy of the ordinance and all amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the office of the Rocky Mount City Clerk and be made available for public inspection at any reasonable time. A third copy of the ordinance and all amendments thereto shall be given to the building inspector. The fact that a building, structure, site, area or object has been designated a landmark shall be clearly indicated on all tax maps maintained by Edgecombe and Nash Counties for such period as the designation remains in effect. 
h.  Upon the adoption of the landmark ordinance or any amendments thereto, it is the duty of the administrator to give notice thereof to the tax supervisors of Edgecombe and Nash Counties. The designation and any recorded restrictions upon the property limiting its use for preservation purposes shall be considered by the tax supervisor in appraising it for tax purposes. 
i.  A report shall be generated yearly by the HPC on the condition of the historic landmark, documenting there has been no unauthorized changes which negate the historic qualities of the property. Violations will be reported to the property owner, city council and the appropriate tax office. Violation may result in the negation of all tax reductions retroactively to the time of designation for failure to maintain the landmark consistent with HPC guidelines and standards. 
Sec. 1003. - Certificate of appropriateness required. 
A.  Certificate of appropriateness required. 
1.  From and after the designation of a landmark or a historic district, no exterior portion of any building or other structure (including masonry walls, fences, light fixtures, steps and pavement, or other appurtenant features), nor any above-ground utility structure nor any type of outdoor advertising sign shall be erected, altered, restored, moved or demolished on such landmark or within the historic district until after an application for a certificate of appropriateness as to exterior features has been submitted to and approved by the commission. Such a certificate is required to be issued by the commission prior to the issuance of a building permit or other permit granted for the purposes of constructing, altering, moving or demolishing structures, which certificate may be issued subject to reasonable conditions necessary to carry out the purposes of this division. Landmark properties with designated interior features are also required to have a certificate of appropriateness before interior alterations affecting the designated aspects of the property are begun. A certificate of appropriateness shall be required whether or not a building or other permit is required. 
2.  For purposes of this division, "exterior features" shall include the architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including the kind and texture of the building material, the size and scale of the building, and the type and style of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and other appurtenant features. Exterior features may also include historic signs, significant landscape, archaeological and natural features of the area. In the case of outdoor advertising signs, "exterior features" shall be construed to mean the style, material, size and location of all such signs. 
3.  Applications for a certificate of appropriateness shall be obtained from and when completed, filed with the administrator. The application shall be filed not less than three (3) weeks prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the commission. Each application shall be accompanied by sketches, drawings, photographs, specifications, descriptions and other information of sufficient detail to clearly show the proposed exterior alterations, additions, changes or new construction. The names and mailing addresses of property owners filing and/or subject to the application and the addresses of property within one hundred (100) feet on all sides of the property which is the subject of the application must also be filed. An application which does not include the aforementioned information will not be accepted. 
4.  The secretary of the commission shall notify, by mail, not less than ten (10) days prior to the meeting at which the matter is to be heard, the owners of property within one hundred (100) feet on all sides of the subject property. Applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be acted upon as soon as practical, but no more than ninety (90) days after filing a complete application, otherwise the application shall be deemed to be approved and a certificate shall be issued. An extension of time may be granted by mutual consent of the commission and the applicant. As part of the review procedures the commission may view the premises and seek the advice of the department of cultural resources or other such expert advice as it may deem necessary under the circumstances. The commission may hold a public hearing on any application when deemed necessary. The action on an application shall be approval, approval with conditions or denial and the decision of the commission must be supported by specific findings of fact indicating the extent to which the application is or is not congruous with the special character of the historic district or landmark. 
5.  Prior to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness the applicant and other property owners likely to be materially affected by the application shall be given an opportunity to be heard by the commission. All meetings of the commission shall be conducted in accordance with the North Carolina Open Meetings Law. 
6.  The commission shall have no jurisdiction over interior arrangement, except as provided below, and shall take no action under this division except to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, moving or demolition of buildings, structures, appurtenant features, outdoor advertising signs or other significant features which would be incongruous with the special character of the historic district or landmark. 
7.  The jurisdiction of the commission over interior spaces shall be limited to specific interior features of architectural, artistic, or historical significance in publicly and privately owned landmarks for which consent for interior review has been given by the owners. Said consent of an owner for interior review shall bind future owners and/or successors in title, provided such consent has been filed in the register of deeds office and indexed according to the name of the owner of the property in the grantor and grantee indexes. The landmark designation shall specify the interior features to be reviewed and the specific nature of the commission's jurisdiction over the interior. 
B.  Appeal. 
1.  An appeal may be taken to the board of adjustment from the commission's action in granting or denying any certificate by any aggrieved party. Appeals shall be filed with the board of adjustment in accordance with established procedures. 
2.  Appeals from the decisions of the board of adjustment shall be heard by the Superior Court of the County in which the affected property is located, Edgecombe or Nash County. 
3.  The State of North Carolina shall have a right of appeal to the North Carolina Historical Commission, which shall render its decision within thirty (30) days from the date that a notice of appeal by the State is received by the historic preservation commission. The decision of the historical commission shall be final and binding upon both the state and the commission. 
C.  Administrative approval of minor works. 
1.  Notwithstanding the subsection above (action on certificates of appropriateness), upon receipt of a completed application the administrator may issue a certificate of appropriateness for minor works. 
2.  Minor works are defined as those exterior changes which do not involve substantial alterations, additions, or removals that could impair the integrity of the property and/or district as a whole. Such minor works shall be limited to those listed in the commission's "bylaws and rules of procedure." No application may be denied without the formal action of the commission. All minor works applications approved by the administrator shall be forwarded to the commission in time for its next scheduled meeting. 
D.  Review criteria. 
1.  No certificate of appropriateness shall be granted unless the commission finds that the application complies with the principles and guidelines adopted by the commission for review of changes and new construction. It is the intent of these regulations to insure insofar as possible that construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, moving, or demolition of buildings, structures, appurtenant fixtures, outdoor advertising signs, or other significant features in the district or of landmarks shall be congruous with the special character of the district or landmark. 
2.  In considering new construction, the commission may encourage contemporary design which is harmonious with the character of the district. 
3.  In granting a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall take into account the historic or architectural significance of the structure under consideration and the exterior form and appearance of any proposed additions or modifications to that structure as well as the effect of such change or additions upon other structures in the vicinity. 
4.  In addition to the principles and guidelines, the following features or elements of design shall be considered in reviewing applications for certificates of appropriateness: 
a.  Lot coverage, defined as the percentage of the lot area covered by primary structures; 
b.  Setback, defined as the distance from the lot lines to the building; 
c.  Building height; 
d.  Spacing of buildings, defined as the distance between adjacent buildings; 
e.  Proportion, shape, positioning, location, pattern, sizes, and style of all elements of fenestration and entry doors; 
f.  Surface materials and textures, roof shapes, forms and materials; 
g.  Use of regional or local architectural traditions; 
h.  General form and proportion of buildings and structures, and the relationship of additions to the main structure; 
i.  Scale, determined by the size of the units of construction and architectural details in relation to the human scale and also by the relationship of the building mass to adjoining open space and nearby buildings and structures; maintenance of pedestrian scale; 
j.  Proportion of width to height of the total building facade; 
k.  Effect of trees and other landscape elements; 
l.  Major landscaping which would impact known archaeological sites; 
m.  Style, material, size and location of all outdoor advertising signs; 
n.  Appurtenant features and fixtures, such as lighting; 
o.  Structural condition and soundness; 
p.  Walls-Physical ingredients, such as brick, stone or wood walls, wrought iron fences, evergreen landscape masses, or combinations of these; 
q.  Ground cover or paving; 
r.  Significant landscape, archaeological, and natural features; and 
s.  The secretary of the interior's "Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings" shall be the sole principles and guidelines used in reviewing applications of the State of North Carolina for certificates of appropriateness. 
Sec. 1004. - Certain changes permitted. 
    Nothing in this division shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in a historic district or of a landmark which does not involve a change in design, materials, or outer appearance thereof; the ordinary maintenance or repair of streets, sidewalks, pavement markings, street signs, or traffic signs; the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration or demolition of any such feature which the building inspector shall certify is required by the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent (a) the maintenance or replacement, or (b) in the event of an emergency, the immediate restoration, of any existing utility structure without approval by the commission. 
Sec. 1005. - Conflict with other laws. 
    Whenever this division requires a longer waiting period or imposes other higher standards with respect to a designated historic landmark or district than are established under any other statute, charter provision, LDC, or regulation, this division shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute, Charter provision, LDC, or regulation require a longer waiting period or impose other higher standards than are established under this division, such other statute, charter provision, LDC, or regulation shall govern. 
Sec. 1006. - Enforcement and remedies. 
    Compliance with the terms of the certificate of appropriateness shall be enforced by the administrator. Failure to comply with the certificate shall be a violation of the zoning LDC and is punishable according to established procedures and penalties for such violations. In case any building, structure, site, area or object designated as a landmark or within a historic district is about to be demolished, whether as a result of deliberate neglect or otherwise, materially altered, remodeled, removed or destroyed except in compliance with this division, the city council, the commission, or other party aggrieved by such action may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful demolition, destruction, material alteration, remodeling or removal, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such a building or structure. 
Sec. 1007. - Demolition delay: landmarks or buildings in historic districts. 
A.  An application for a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the demolition, removal, or destruction of a designated landmark or a building, structure or site within a historic district may not be denied except as provided in subsection C. below. However, the effective date of such a certificate may be delayed for up to three hundred sixty-five (365) days from the date of approval. The period of delay shall be reduced by the commission if it finds that the owner would suffer extreme hardship or be permanently deprived of all beneficial use or return from such property by virtue of the delay. During the delay period the commission shall negotiate with the owner in an effort to find a means of preserving the building, structure or site. If the commission finds that a building, structure or site has no special significance or value toward maintaining the character of a district, it shall waive all or part of such period of delay and authorize earlier demolition or removal. 
B.  If the commission has voted to recommend the designation of a landmark or the designation of an area as a historic district, and final designation has not been made by the city council, the demolition or destruction of any building, structure or site in the proposed district or of the designated landmark may be delayed by the Commission for up to one hundred eighty (180) days or until the city council takes final action on the designation, whichever occurs first. 
C.  The city council may enact an LDC to prevent the demolition by neglect of any designated landmark or any structure or building within the established historic district. Such LDC shall provide appropriate safeguards to protect property owners from undue hardship. 
D.  An application for a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the demolition of a building, structure or site determined by the state historic preservation officer as having statewide significance as defined in the criteria of the national register of historic places may be denied except where the commission finds that the owner would suffer extreme hardship or be permanently deprived of all beneficial use or return by virtue of the denial. 
CHAPTER 11. - NONCONFORMITIES 

Sec. 1101. - General. 
A.  Purpose and scope of regulations. 
1.  Within the districts established by this LDC or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist lots, structures, and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this LDC was passed or amended but that would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this LDC or future amendment. 
2.  It is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. 
3.  It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, not be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged after adoption of this LDC. 
4.  Any use which was in violation of a provision of the LDC of the city in effect at the time of the adoption of this LDC, or amendments thereto, and which does not conform to the provisions of this LDC, as amended, shall be considered a violation of this LDC and shall not have any of the rights granted below. 
B.  Authority to continue. Nonconformities shall be allowed to continue in accordance with the regulations of this chapter. 
1.  Except as provided in subsection 1107.C, addressing adult establishments, any nonconforming use may continue to operate subject to the following conditions and requirements and subject to the provisions of chapter 11 dealing with the termination of nonconforming uses. A nonconforming use may not be changed to another nonconforming use unless the Board of Adjustment determines that such change shall be no more detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing use; however, no change of title, possession or right to possession of property shall be construed to prevent the continuance of a nonconforming use. 
2.  No building or sign may be extended or enlarged or the amount of land devoted to a use increased unless such extensions or enlargements comply with all the provisions of this LDC for the district in which it is located. However, a nonconforming use may be extended throughout a building designed and arranged for such nonconforming use, so long as no structural alterations other than normal maintenance are made therein, and no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
3.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the strengthening of any building to a safe and lawful condition when the building has been declared unsafe by the inspection services administrator or authorized agents. 
4.  A nonconforming use may be changed to a use of a higher classification, and whenever the use is changed to a higher or conforming classification, then it shall not be allowed to change to the original use or to a lower use. 
5.  All wireless communication towers operative on the effective date of this LDC shall be allowed to continue their present usage in accordance with the nonconforming use provisions of this LDC except that co-location on such towers shall be permitted where all physical requirements for co-location are met. The addition of antennas to a nonconforming structure is not considered an expansion of said nonconforming use. 
C.  Determination of nonconformity status. The burden of establishing that a nonconformity lawfully exists is the owner's burden, not the city's. 
D.  Repairs and maintenance. Repairs and normal maintenance required to keep nonconforming uses, structures and lots in a safe condition are permitted, provided that no alterations may be made except those allowed by this chapter or required by law or LDC. 
E.  Change of tenancy or ownership. Changes of tenancy, ownership or management of an existing nonconformity are permitted, provided that no changes in the nature or character, extent or intensity of such nonconformity may occur except those allowed by this chapter. 
Sec. 1102. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
    In any district in which a legal lot (as defined in chapter 14) exists of record on the effective date of adoption or amendment of this LDC that does not conform in size or area to the provisions of this LDC, buildings for the uses permitted in such district may be erected on such lot, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of the LDC; provided that such lot is in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. 
Sec. 1103. - Nonconforming structures. 
    Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this LDC that could not be built under the terms of this LDC by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
A.  No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. 
B.  Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than sixty-six and two-thirds (66 2/3 ) percent of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this LDC. 
C.  Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
Sec. 1104. - Nonconforming signs. 
A.  Amortization period. Any sign existing on the date of the adoption of this LDC or any amendment thereto ("adoption date") and not conforming to its provisions shall be considered a presently-existing, nonconforming sign, and may continue to be used for a period of three (3) years from the adoption date, provided it is not: 
1.  Expanded or enlarged in sign area or height; 
2.  An abandoned sign that must be removed as required elsewhere in this LDC; 
3.  Reestablished after becoming an abandoned sign as required elsewhere in this LDC; 
4.  Reestablished after damage or destruction, by any means, exceeding fifty (50) percent of the estimated replacement value of a similar sign; 
5.  Moved in whole or in part to another location unless the sign is made to conform to all of the provisions of this LDC; or 
6.  A hazard to safety, health or welfare. 
B.  Maintenance of signs and changing of sign message. 
1.  Any legal nonconforming sign may be repaired and any sign message, name of business or logo may be replaced with another sign message, business name or wording as long as the sign area or height is not enlarged or expanded. 
2.  Any change of sign message, business name or logo may not be performed on a legal nonconforming sign more than ninety (90) days after a business ceases to operate without the sign being brought into full compliance with all provision of this LDC. 
C.  Annexed nonconforming signs. Annexed nonconforming signs formerly outside planning area. Relative only to freestanding business identification signs located on property annexed into the city's corporate limits, when such property was not previously within the city's planning jurisdiction, the following provisions shall apply, irrespective of other applicable sign provisions of this LDC. 
1.  An existing (as of the date of annexation) freestanding business identification sign may be maintained in its nonconforming status for a period of ten (10) years from the date of annexation. A sign may be replaced by a new sign under this provision. 
2.  The sign may be repaired or altered as long as any nonconformity (sq. ft. of sign area, yard setback, or height) is not increased. 
3.  Any additional freestanding business identification sign must comply with the standard freestanding business identification sign provisions contained in chapter 7, business identification signs. 
4.  After the expiration of the ten (10) years after the date of annexation, any maintenance or alteration of the sign shall comply with this LDC. Anytime there is a change in ownership, occupancy or use, nonconforming signs shall be brought into compliance with the requirements of this LDC. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-95, § 5, 12-12-16) 
Sec. 1105. - Nonconforming uses. 
A.  Nonconforming use of land. Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this LDC, lawful uses of land exist that are no longer permissible under the terms of this LDC as enacted or amended, such uses may be continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful, subject to the following provision: 
1.  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this LDC. 
2.  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land that was occupied at the effective date of adoption of this LDC. 
3.  If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than one hundred eighty (180) days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this LDC for the district in which such land is located. However, nonconforming uses that have existed for over fifty (50) years are exempt from this regulation. 
B.  Nonconforming use of structure. If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this LDC that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this LDC, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
1.  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this LDC in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
2.  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building that were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this LDC, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
3.  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superceded by a permitted use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not be resumed. 
4.  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
5.  Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of land. 
6.  As an exception to the provisions above, repairs or improvements will be permitted to existing single-family detached dwellings in commercial or industrial district. In addition, the reconstruction of existing single-family detached dwellings will be permitted in any districts where existing single-family dwellings have been destroyed by a natural disaster. 
Sec. 1106. - Changes in nonconformity. 
    A nonconforming use of a structure, or of a structure and land in combination, shall not be changed unless changed to a use permitted in the district in which located; except that the board of adjustment may permit a change to a more restricted nonconforming use and such change shall be construed as an abandonment of the former permitted nonconforming use. 
Sec. 1107. - Termination of nonconforming uses. 
A.  General. If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or for more than eighteen (18) months in any three (3) year period, the future use of the building or land must be a conforming use. Existing uses as of June 13, 1988 situated in the floodway are hereby exempt from provisions of chapter 7 of this LDC. 
B.  Termination of nonconforming use by excessive damage. Nothing in this LDC shall be construed to prevent the reconstruction within one (1) year of any building damaged by any means, unless the building is damaged to such extent that replacement cost is more than sixty-six and two-thirds (66 2/3 ) percent of its value as determined by the inspection services administrator or authorized agents. Such determination by the inspection services administrator or authorized agents may be appealed to the board of adjustment. If the building replacement cost is more than sixty-six and two-thirds (66 2/3 ) percent of its value, any reconstruction, repair or use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this LDC for the district in which it is located. 
C.  Termination of nonconforming adult business uses. The use of property by an adult establishment, because of its very nature, is recognized as having serious objectionable characteristics which cause adverse effects on residential zoning districts, schools, churches, childcare centers, public parks and playgrounds, and therefore should be subject to nonconforming use provisions which amortize such objectionable use over a reasonable period of time, following which such nonconforming use is terminated. Any adult establishment lawfully operating prior to the effective date of this LDC that is rendered in violation hereof shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Any adult establishment which is made nonconforming by the application of the provisions of this section shall be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed three (3) years. Following completion of such three (3) year amortization period it shall be unlawful to operate such nonconforming adult establishment in violation of this LDC. During the three (3) year amortization period such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, altered, or changed to another nonconforming use unless the board of adjustment determines that such change shall be no more detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing use. If such nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days it may not be reestablished and the future use of the building or structure housing the adult establishment must be a conforming use. If two (2) or more adult establishments are within five hundred (500) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the business which was first established, as determined by the certificate of occupancy, and continually operated at its present location shall be considered the conforming use and the later-established business(es) shall be considered nonconforming. An adult establishment lawfully operating as a conforming use shall not be rendered nonconforming by the subsequent location of a residential zoning district, school, church, childcare center, park, or playground within five hundred (500) feet of the adult establishment. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05) 
Sec. 1108. - Nonconformities created by public action. 
A.  Lot area and setbacks. When lot area or setbacks are reduced as a result of a taking by a federal, state or local government for a public purpose, and the remaining area is at least seventy-five (75) percent of the minimum standard for the district in which it is located, then that lot shall be deemed to be in compliance with the minimum lot size and setback standards of this LDC. 
B.  Off-street parking and buffers. When off-street parking or buffers are reduced as a result of a taking by a Federal, State or local government for a public purpose, the owner of such property shall be required to replace, to the maximum extent deemed practicable by the director, the reduced off-street parking or buffers. Such replacement shall occur no more than ninety (90) days after construction activity that reduces the available off-street parking or buffers. 
C.  Sites with prior nonconformities. Sites that are nonconforming at the time of a taking by a federal, state or local government for a public purpose shall meet the same standards as other nonconformities. 
CHAPTER 12. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 1201. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
    This LDC shall be enforced by the director of development services or designee who are hereby appointed the enforcement officers with the duties of enforcing the provisions of this LDC. If a ruling of the director of development services or designee is questioned, the aggrieved party or parties may appeal such ruling to the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 3, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 1202. - Zoning certificate. 
    A zoning certificate is required as follows: 
A.  No building or structure or any part thereof designed or intended to be used for other than farm or agricultural purposes shall be erected or repaired until a zoning certificate therefore has been issued by the director of development services or designee. A fee, which shall be as set by resolution of the city council and published in the City's Fees and Charges Manual, shall be charged for the issuance of each zoning certificate. 
B.  Each application for a zoning certificate shall be accompanied by a plat, drawn to scale, showing accurate dimensions of the lot to be built upon, accurate dimension of the building to be erected, its location on the lot and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of this LDC. A careful record of such applications and plats, together with a record of the action taken thereon, shall be kept in the office of the director of development services or designee. 
C.  No permit for excavation for or erection of any building or part of a building, or for repairs to or alteration of a building, or the relocation of a building from the lot on which it is situated shall be issued until after a statement of its intended use has been filed by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 3, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 1203. - Certificate of occupancy/compliance. 
    A certificate of occupancy is required as follows: 
A.  No land shall be used or occupied, except for farm purposes, and no building or structure erected, altered, used or changed in use for other than farm purposes until a certificate of occupancy/compliance shall have been issued by the inspection services administrator or authorized agents, stating that the building and/or the proposed use has been determined to be in compliance with the provisions of this LDC. A like certificate shall be issued for the purpose of changing any existing use, as well as for maintaining, renewing, changing or extending any nonconforming use. A temporary certificate of occupancy/compliance may be issued for a portion or portions of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion and occupancy of the entire building. A certificate of occupancy/compliance, either for the whole or part of a building, shall be applied for coincident with the application for a zoning certificate and/or building permit and shall be issued within five (5) days after the erection or alterations of such building or part shall have been found in compliance with the provisions of this LDC and other applicable codes and LDC. A record of all such certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the inspection services administrator or authorized agent and shall be furnished, on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land. A fee, which shall be as set by resolution of the city council and published in the city's manual of city policies, shall be charged for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy/compliance. 
B.  A certificate of occupancy/compliance may, in the discretion of the inspection services administrator or authorized agent, be issued with respect to any building which is not then fully in compliance with this LDC but may be brought into compliance with some slight additional work or alterations; provided, however, that the certificate of occupancy/compliance shall only be issued upon the posting of a bond in the amount as established in the city's fees and charges manual to secure compliance with this LDC. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy/compliance in these cases shall be at the sole discretion of the inspection services administrator or authorized agents. 
Sec. 1204. - Types of violations. 
    All of the following represent violations of this LDC and of law and will be subject to the remedies and penalties provided in this LDC, the City Code and state law. 
A.  Zoned lot or subdivision without required permits or approvals. It is a violation of this LDC to engage in any subdividing, development, use, construction, remodeling or other activity of any nature without obtaining all the permits, approvals, certificates and other forms of authorization required by this LDC. 
B.  Zoned lot or subdivision inconsistent with permit. It is a violation of this LDC to engage in any development, use, construction, remodeling, or other activity and any nature in any way inconsistent with the terms and conditions of any permit, approval, certificate or other form of authorization required in order to engage in such activity. 
C.  Zoned lot or subdivision inconsistent with conditions. It is a violation of this LDC to violate, by act or omission, any term, condition, or qualification imposed by a decision-making body upon a required permit, certificate, or other form of authorization. 
D.  Zoned lot or subdivision inconsistent with LDC. It is a violation of this LDC to erect, construct, reconstruct, remodel, alter, maintain, move, or use any building or structure or to use any land in violation or contravention of any zoning, subdivision, or other regulation of this LDC, or any amendment thereof. 
E.  Lots or setbacks inconsistent with this LDC. It is a violation of this LDC to reduce or diminish any lot area so that the setbacks or open spaces are smaller that prescribed by this LDC. 
F.  Increasing intensity of use. It is a violation of this LDC to increase the intensity of use of any land or structure, except in accordance with the procedural and substantive requirements of this LDC. 
G.  Sign installation inconsistent with permit. It is a violation of this LDC to install a sign of a type not permitted by this LDC, or to locate a sign in an area not expressly set forth in the substantive requirements of this LDC, or to install a sign that exceeds the size requirements set forth in this LDC. 
H.  Other violations of this LDC not specified above. Any violation not specified above shall still be considered unlawful and will be subject to penalties as established in this LDC. Each day that each violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
I.  Continuing violations. It is a violation of this LDC to continue any of the violations specified in this chapter. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
Sec. 1205. - Remedies and enforcement powers. 
A.  Remedies and enforcement powers. The provisions of this LDC may be enforced by any one (1), all, or a combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed by this chapter. If a person does not comply with a particular provision of the regulations of this LDC after the imposition of any one (1) type of penalty, the person shall continue to remain subject to all the remedies prescribed by this chapter for the continued violation of such regulation. The director of development services or designee shall have the power to impose fines and penalties for a violation of this LDC as provided herein, and may secure injunctions and abatement orders to further ensure compliance with this LDC as provided for in this chapter. Each day's continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct offense and may be subject to any one (1), all, or a combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed by this chapter. 
B.  Withhold permits. 
1.  The city may deny or withhold all permits, certificates or other forms of authorization on any land or structure or improvements thereon upon which there is an uncorrected violation of this LDC or of a condition or qualification of a permit, certificate, approval or other authorization previously granted by a decision-making body. 
2.  Instead of withholding or denying an authorization, the city may grant such authorization subject to the condition that the violation be corrected. 
3.  This enforcement provision applies regardless of whether the current owner or applicant is responsible for the violation in question. 
4.  The city may deny or withhold all permits, certificates or other forms of authorization on any land or structure or improvements owned by a person who owns, developed or otherwise caused an uncorrected violation of a provision of this LDC or of a condition or qualification of a permit, certificate, approval or other authorization previously granted by a decision-making body. This provision applies regardless of whether the property for which the permit or other approval is sought is the property in violation. 
C.  Revoke permits. A permit may be revoked when the inspection services administrator determines that: 
1.  There is departure from the plans, specifications, or conditions as required under terms of the permit; 
2.  The plans, specifications, or conditions were obtained by false representation or was issued by mistake; or 
3.  Any of the provisions of this LDC are being violated. 
D.  Stop work. With or without revoking permits, the city may stop work on any building or structure on any land on which there is an uncorrected violation of a provision of this LDC or of a permit or other form of authorization issued hereunder, in accordance with its power to stop work under the Building Code. 
E.  Criminal penalties. Any person who knowingly or willfully violates any provision of this LDC shall have committed a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
F.  Civil citations. 
1.  The director of development services or designee is empowered to issue citations to any person if there is reasonable cause to believe that the person has violated any provision of this LDC. A violator may be the owner of the premises, the agent of the owner authorized to be responsible for the premises, or the occupant, lessee, or person having immediate beneficial use of the property. The nonoccupant owner or agent responsible for the premises has a duty to maintain the premises in compliance with the regulations of this LDC. A citation shall be issued to a nonoccupant owner, agent or occupant, or mailed to the last known mailing address as shown by public records, or by making other reasonable efforts to communicate the existence of the violation to the owner, agent, or occupant. 
2.  The initial citation for each violation shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). The issuance of the second citation for any violation that has not been corrected shall be in an amount up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) upon the day of issuance, up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) thereafter. Any unpaid citations and delinquency charges shall be cumulative and shall subject the violator to a civil penalty to be recovered in a civil action in the nature of a debt. The citations may be delivered in person to the violator or, if the violator cannot be readily found, then the citation may be mailed. If the address of the violator is unknown the violator may be served by publication. 
3.  The citation shall direct the violator to make payment at the department of development services within fifteen (15) days of the date of the citation, or alternatively pay the citation by mail. If the violator does not make such payment or does not mail the citation and payment within fifteen (15) days of the issuance, the citation shall be delinquent, and a delinquency charge of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be added to the amount shown on the citation. The citation shall inform the violator that a civil complaint or criminal summons may be filed if the citation and delinquency charge is not paid within fifteen (15) days from the date of the citation became delinquent. Further, the citation shall state that the violation is a continuing violation and additional citations may be issued with escalating amount for a continuing violation. 
G.  Civil judicial remedies. 
1.  If a building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this LDC or other regulations made under authority conferred thereby, the city, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, use, or occupancy of the building or structure, and to restrain, correct or abate the violation, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about the premises. The General Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders as may be appropriate. 
2.  If this LDC makes unlawful a condition existing upon or use made of real property then this LDC may be enforced by injunction or order of abatement and the General Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders. When a violation of this LDC occurs the city may apply to the appropriate division of the General Court of Justice for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction requiring the violator to correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the unlawful use of the property. 
3.  In addition to an injunction, the court may enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the cause. An order of abatement may direct that buildings, or other structures on the property be closed, demolished, or removed; or that any other action be taken that is necessary to bring the property into compliance with this LDC. If the violator fails or refuses to comply with an injunction or with an order of abatement within the time allowed by the court, such person may be cited for contempt and the city may execute the order of abatement. The city shall have a lien on the property for the cost of executing the order of abatement in the nature of the mechanic's and materialman's lien. The violator may secure cancellation of an order of abatement by paying all costs of the proceedings and posting a bond for compliance with the order. The bond shall be given with sureties approved by the clerk of superior court of the county in which the citation is pending in an amount approved by the judge before whom the matter is heard and shall be conditioned on the violator's full compliance with the terms of the order of abatement within a time fixed by the judge. Cancellation of an order of abatement shall not suspend or cancel an injunction issued in conjunction therewith. 
H.  Other remedies. The city shall have such other remedies as are and as may be from time to time provided by North Carolina law and other city codes for the violation of zoning, subdivision or related LDC provisions. 
I.  Remedies cumulative. The remedies and enforcement powers established in this chapter are cumulative. 
J.  Appeal. Appeals of this section shall follow the provisions set forth in this LDC, chapter 5, section 510, appeal of administrative officer's decision. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2018-78, §§ 2, 3, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 1206. - Enforcement procedures. 
A.  Non-emergency matters. 
1.  In the case of violations of this LDC that do not constitute an emergency, the director of development services or designee shall give notice of the nature of the violation to the property owner and to any other person who is party to the agreement and to any applicant for any relevant permit, after which the persons receiving notice shall have ten (10) days, or such longer period as the director of development services or designee allows, to correct the violation. 
2.  If the violation is not corrected within the required time frame, the director of development services and the city shall use all penalties, remedies and enforcement powers available under this chapter. 
3.  Notice must be given in-person, by United States Mail, or by posting notice on the premises. Notice of violation must State the nature of the violation, the time period allowed for coming into compliance, the corrective steps necessary and the nature of subsequent penalties and enforcement actions should the situation not be corrected. 
B.  Emergency matters. In the case of violations of this LDC that do constitute an emergency situation, the city shall use all remedies, penalties and enforcement powers available under this article without prior notice, but the director of development services or designee must send notice simultaneously with beginning enforcement action to the property owner, to any other person who is party to the agreement and to applicants for any relevant permit. 
C.  Continuation. Nothing in this LDC shall prohibit the continuation of previous enforcement actions, undertaken by the city pursuant to previous and valid LDC and laws. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 3, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 1207. - Specific penalties for historic preservation violations. 
    Historic preservation violations. 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation who violates the provisions of chapter 10 shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor against the city and shall be punishable by a fine as established in the city's fees and charges manual. A violation exists whenever there is a performance of an act that is prohibited, or a failure to perform and act which is required. Each day this section is violated shall be considered a separate offense. 
B.  In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, externally reconstructed, externally altered, added to or demolished in violation of this LDC, the city or any person may initiate an appropriate action or proceeding in a court with competent jurisdiction to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, exterior alteration, addition or demolition, and the violating party shall pay all court costs and expenses, including reasonable attorneys' fees, if the court should find in favor of the city or persons suing on behalf of the city to enforce this LDC. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05) 
Sec. 1208. - Vested rights. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to implement the provisions of N.C.G.S. § 160A-385.1 pursuant to which a statutory zoning vested right is established upon the approval of a site-specific development plan. As used in this section the following terms shall have the meaning indicated: 
1.  Approval authority. The planning board is authorized to grant a zoning vested right pursuant to application and public meeting upon submission and approval of a site-specific development plan. 
2.  Landowner. Means any owner of a legal or equitable interest in real property, including the heirs, devisees, successors, assigns, and personal representatives of such owner. The landowner may allow a person holding a valid option to purchase to act as an agent or representative for the purpose of submitting a proposed site-specific development plan under this LDC. 
3.  Site specific development plan. Means a plan of development submitted to the planning board for approval for obtaining one (1) of the following land use permits: 
a.  Subdivision preliminary plat. 
b.  Subdivision construction plat. 
c.  Conditional use permit. 
d.  Planned building group preliminary plan. 
e.  Planned building group construction plan. 
f.  Multi-family. 
A site-specific development plan also includes any other site plan indicating with reasonable specificity the following: 
a.  Approximate boundaries of the site. 
b.  Significant topographical and natural features affecting development of the site. 
c.  Approximate location on the site of proposed buildings and structures and other improvements. 
d.  Approximate dimensions including height of the proposed buildings and other structures. 
e.  Approximate location of all existing and proposed infrastructure on the site including water, sewer, drainage, roads, and pedestrian walkways. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a variance or any other document that fails to describe with reasonable certainty the type and intensity of use for a specified parcel or parcels of property shall not constitute a site-specific development plan. 
B.  Establishment of a zoning vested right. 
1.  A zoning vested right shall be deemed established upon the valid approval, or conditional approval, by the planning board, as applicable, of a site-specific development plan, following notice and public meeting. 
2.  The planning board may approve a site-specific development plan upon such terms and conditions as may reasonably be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
3.  Notwithstanding subsections A. and B. of this section, approval of a site-specific development plan with the condition that a variance be obtained shall not confer a zoning vested right unless and until the necessary variance is obtained. The two (2) year period during which the zoning vested right is valid shall begin to run on the date the site-specific development plan is approved notwithstanding the condition that a variance be obtained. 
4.  A site-specific development plan shall be deemed approved upon the effective date of the planning board's action relating thereto. 
5.  The establishment of a zoning vested right shall not preclude (i) the application of overlay zoning that imposes additional requirements but does not affect the allowable type or intensity of use, or (ii) LDC or regulations that are general in nature and are applicable to all property subject to land-use regulation by the city, including, but not limited to, building, fire, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical codes. Otherwise, applicable new or amended regulations affecting the type or intensity of use shall become effective with respect to property that is subject to a site specific development plan upon the expiration or termination of the vested right, in accordance with this chapter. 
6.  A zoning vested right is not a personal right, but shall attach to and run with the applicable property. After approval of a site specific development plan, all successors to the original landowner shall be entitled to exercise such right while applicable. 
7.  A site-specific development plan may be vested from the requirements of this LDC on condition that the plan is submitted in accordance with the requirements of this section and is granted approval from the Planning Board no more than six (6) months from the effective date of this LDC. The two (2) year period during which the zoning vested right is valid shall begin to run on the date the site-specific development plan is approved notwithstanding a condition that a variance be obtained. 
C.  Approval procedures and approval authority. 
1.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, an application for site specific development plan approval shall be processed in accordance with the procedures established by this chapter and shall be considered by the planning board. 
2.  In order for a zoning vested right to be established upon approval of a site specific development plan, the applicant must indicate at the time of application, on a form to be provided by the city, that a zoning vested right is being sought. The applicant shall pay the fee set by the city council which is listed in the "fees and charges" section of the policy manual. 
3.  Each map, plat, site plan or other document evidencing a site specific development plan shall contain the following notation: "The Planning Board has granted a zoning vested right under N.C.G.S. § 160A-385.1 on _______ valid for two (2) years from this date." The site-specific development plan shall not be valid unless signed by the director. 
4.  Following approval or conditional approval of a site specific development plan, nothing in this chapter shall exempt such a plan from subsequent reviews and approvals to ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of the original approval, provided that such reviews and approvals are not inconsistent with the original approval. 
5.  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the revocation of the original approval or other remedies for failure to comply with applicable terms and conditions of the approval or the zoning LDC. 
D.  Duration. 
1.  A zoning right that has been vested as provided in this chapter shall remain vested for a period of two (2) years. This vesting shall not be extended by any amendments or modifications to a site-specific development plan. 
2.  Upon issuance of a building permit, the expiration provisions of N.C.G.S. § 160A-418 and the revocation provisions of N.C.G.S. § 160A-422 shall apply, except that a building permit shall not expire or be revoked as long as the vested right remains valid, regardless of whether or not work has commenced or been discontinued for more than twelve (12) months. 
E.  Termination. A zoning right that has been vested as provided in this chapter shall terminate: 
1.  At the end of the applicable vesting period with respect to buildings and uses for which no valid building permit applications have been filed; 
2.  With the written consent of the property owners; 
3.  Upon findings by the planning board, after notice (as provided in this chapter) and a public meeting that natural or man-made hazards on or in the immediate vicinity of the property, if uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare if the project were to proceed as contemplated in the site specific development plan; 
4.  Upon payment to the affected landowner of compensation for all costs, expenses, and other losses incurred by the landowner, including, but not limited to, all fees paid in consideration of financing, and all architectural, planning, marketing, legal, and other consultant's fees incurred after approval by the city and prior to receipt of notice of termination by the city, together with interest thereon at the legal rate until paid. Compensation shall not include any diminution in value of the property which is caused by such action; 
5.  Upon findings by the planning board, after notice (as provided in this chapter) and a meeting that the property owner(s) or representative intentionally supplied inaccurate information or made material misrepresentations which made a difference in the approval by the planning board of the site specific development plan; or 
6.  Upon the enactment or promulgation of a state or federal law or regulation that precludes development as contemplated in the site specific development plan, in which case the planning board may modify the affected provisions, upon a finding that the change in state or federal law has a fundamental effect on the plan, after notice (as provided in this chapter) and a hearing. 
F.  Voluntary annexation. A petition for annexation filed with the city under N.C.G.S. § 160A-31 or N.C.G.S. § 160A-58.1 shall contain a signed statement declaring whether or not any zoning vested right with respect to the properties subject to the petition has been established under N.C.G.S. § 160A-385.1 or N.C.G.S. § 153A-344.1. A statement that declares that no zoning vested right has been established under N.C.G.S. § 160A-385.1 or N.C.G.S. § 153A-344.1, or the failure to sign a statement declaring whether or not a zoning vested right has been established, shall be binding on the landowner and any such zoning vested right shall be terminated. The failure to file a signed statement declaring whether or not any zoning vested right has been established shall constitute a waiver of any vested rights established prior to the date of the petition and the same shall be terminated. The city will honor valid approved vested rights upon submission of proof per N.C.G.S. § 160A-385.1. 
G.  Existing vested rights agreements. The planning board will honor all valid approved vested rights upon submission to and subsequent approval by the planning board. 
H.  Limitations. Nothing in this chapter is intended or shall be deemed to create any vested right other than those established pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 160A-385.1. 
I.  Repealer. In the event that N.C.G.S. § 160A-385.1 is repealed, this LDC shall be deemed repealed effective as of the date of the repeal of N.C.G.S. § 160A-385.1 and the provisions hereof no longer effective. 
J.  Effective date. This section refers to the site specific development plans approved before the end of six (6) months from the effective date of this LDC. 
K.  Effect on rights and liabilities under existing LDC. This LDC in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the provisions of the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, watershed protection, flood protection regulations enacted October 16, 1969, and subsequently, as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue to enforce, without interrupting such existing provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued hereunder are reserved and may be enforced. The enactment of this LDC shall not affect any action, suit or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the LDC of the city enacted on October 16, 1969, and subsequently, as amended, which are not reenacted herein are repealed. 
L.  Effect upon outstanding building permits. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of any building, structure or part thereof for which a building permit has been granted by the director of development services or authorized agents before the time of passage of this LDC; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such outstanding permit within a period of sixty (60) days subsequent to passage of this LDC, construction or use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this LDC. 
M.  Validity. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this LDC is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this LDC. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed this LDC and each section, subsection, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more sections, subsections, sentences or clauses be declared invalid. 
N.  Sanctions. In addition to the remedies described in this LDC and consistent with N.C.G.S. § 160A-175, the city may seek enforcement of this section through a civil penalty assessed by the city council to be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty in a prescribed period of time after being cited for violation of this section. Such violation may be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction. The court may issue an injunction and order of abatement commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the unlawful use of the property. The action shall be governed in all respects by the laws and rules governing civil proceedings, including the Rule of Civil Procedure in general and Rule 65 in particular. If the defendant fails or refuses to comply with an injunction or with an order of abatement within the time allowed by the court, the defendant may be cited for contempt and the city may execute the order of abatement. The city shall have a lien on the property for the cost of executing an order of abatement in the nature of a mechanic and material lien. The defendant may secure cancellation of an order of abatement by paying all costs of the proceedings and posting a bond for compliance with the order. The bond shall be given with sureties approved by the clerk of superior court in an amount approved by the judge before whom the matter is heard and shall be conditioned on the defendant's full compliance with the terms of the order of abatement within a time fixed by the judge. Cancellation of an order of abatement shall not suspend or cancel an injunction issued in conjunction therewith. Enforcement of this section may be by any one, all, or a combination of the remedies authorized in this LDC. Each day's continuing violation shall be separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 3, 8-13-18) 
CHAPTER 13. - MINIMUM DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENTS REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 1301. - Right-of-way width, street design. 
A.  Street design. 
1.  Street pattern. Streets shall be arranged to fit the contour of the land, to create usable lots and blocks, and to discourage through traffic in residential neighborhoods. 
2.  Coordination of streets. Street access may be provided to adjoining undeveloped tracts of land and shall be coordinated with existing and planned streets as required by the departments of community development and public works. Access shall be provided to adjacent property at locations deemed necessary and desirable by the planning board. 
B.  Minimum street right-of-way widths. 
Table 13-1. Street Width and ROW 
Street Type Section 
Type Minimum Right-of-Way Street Width 
(bc or ep) Sidewalk 
Required Sidewalk 
Standard (ft) (ft) (y/n) Private Local (one-way) CG 42 17 n 1 side Private Local CG 42 27 n 1 side Private Local (one-way) Ribbon 46 12 n 1 side Private Local Ribbon 46 22 n 1 side Residential 
Local CG 42 27 feet n 1 side Residential 
Local CG 46 27 feet n 2 side Residential 
Collector CG 60 30 feet n 1 side Commercial Local CG 50 35 feet y 1 side Commercial Collector CG 65 40 feet y 1 side Industrial 
Local CG 50 35 feet n 1 side Industrial 
Collector CG 65 40 feet n 1 side Industrial Park Local Ribbon 50 30 n 1 side Industrial Park Collector Ribbon 65 35 n 1 side Minor Arterial TBD 90 TBD y 2 sides Major Arterial TBD TBD TBD y 2 sides  
1.  The minimum street paving widths and standards required herein shall be in accordance with the typical sections as set forth in the city's Typical Street Design Standards. 
2.  Subdivisions that adjoin existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way to meet the above minimum street width requirements from each side of the centerline of the existing street. When the subdivision is located on only one (1) side of an existing street, one-half (1/2) of the required right-of-way and in no case less than twenty-six (26) feet, measured from the centerline of the existing right-of-way, shall be provided. 
3.  When a tract fronts on a local street or collector streets, the planning board may require affected lots fronting on such major streets to be provided with frontage roads. 
4.  Curb and gutter improvements shall be centered on the centerline of the street except where it is determined sidewalk improvements or future street widening will be performed by the city. In these cases the director of engineering may require the improvements to be off center. Rolled curb and gutter will be allowed on noncollector streets upon submission and approval of storm drainage calculations and design by the director of engineering and public works director. 
5.  Within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, all street construction shall conform at the city construction standards. 
6.  All rights-of-way shall be cleared of trees and vegetation that are greater than three (3) feet tall for a distance of at least five (5) feet back to the curb of culs-de-sac and local streets and eight (8) feet back of the curb on collectors. Right-of-way clearance on arterials shall be as determined by the director of engineering. 
7.  The clear sight triangle shall be cleared and graded. 
8.  The typical section shall provide for grading back of the curb to the right-of-way line to a maximum or minimum slope of two (2) feet horizontal for each one (1) foot vertical (2:1) using the elevation of the top of the curb as the reference elevation. This slope will continue until it intersects with natural ground. 
9.  In areas where underground utilities are to be located (electrical, gas, telephone, and cablevision), the area shall be graded from the back of the curb to the right-of-way line at a maximum slope of three (3) feet horizontal for each one (1) foot vertical (3:1) using the elevation or the top of the curb as the reference elevation. This grade shall extend for a maximum of eight (8) feet or to the right-of-way line, whichever is less, behind the curb and thereafter may be changed to 1:3 until it intersects with natural ground. 
C.  Street requirements. 
1.  Horizontal street alignment. When a continuous street centerline deflects at any point, a circular curve shall be introduced having a radius of curvature on said centerline of not less than the following table: 
Table 13-2. Horizontal Alignment. 
Type of Street Minimum Radius 
(in feet) Cul-de-sac 100 Local 150 Collector (feeder) 450 Minor Arterial To be determined by the Director of Engineering Major Arterial To be determined by the director of engineering  
2.  Tangents. A tangent at least one hundred (100) feet long shall be provided between reverse curves on collector, minor and major arterials. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet shall be avoided and prohibited on major and minor arterials. 
3.  Vertical curves. All changes in street grades shall be connected with vertical curves and the length (L) of both sag and crest vertical curves in feet shall be related to the algebraic difference in grade (A) and a constant K = 35 for cul-de-sacs and local streets, K = 50 for collector (feeder) and minor arterials and K = 80 for major arterials by the formula L = KA 
4.  Maximum and minimum grades. Grades on major and minor arterials, collector (feeder) streets, and within one hundred (100) feet of all intersections shall not exceed five (5) percent except when approved by the director of engineering; grades on other public streets may exceed five (5) percent but not eight (8) percent. Street grades at the gutter shall not be less than four-tenths (0.4) percent. 
5.  Streets and alleys. Proposed streets shall be adjusted to the contours of the land so as to produce usable lots and streets of reasonable gradient. 
6.  Corner lot sight easement. A sight distance easement shall be established for each lot located at street intersections in conformance with the Subdivision Roads Standards of NCDOT as adopted July 1, 1979, and subsequently amended. 
7.  Non-access easement. Along all major arterials as designated on the city's adopted arterial plan, the planning board may require a nonaccess easement on property frontage abutting designated major arterials at locations where such property is zoned for residential development. 
8.  Street intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible, and no intersections shall be at an angle of less than eighty-five (85) degrees. Intersections of two (2) different street right-of-way lines shall have rounded corners having a minimum radius of twenty (20) feet. 
9.  Street corner radius. 
a.  Within the city limits and ETJ, a street intersection radius shall be installed as follows: 
Table 13-3. Street Corner Radii 
Street Pavement Width (face-to-face curb and gutter) 
(in feet) Street Curb 
Face Radius 
(in feet) 26 20 30 25 36 25 48 30  
D.  Street intersections. 
1.  Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle less than eight-five (85) degrees. Detailed designs of intersections may be required by the director of engineering as part of the submittal. 
2.  Property line radius at street intersections shall not be less than twenty (20) feet, and where the angle of street intersection is less than ninety (90) degrees, the planning board may require a greater radius. 
3.  Curb line radius at street intersections shall be at least fifteen (15) feet, and where the angle of street intersection is less than ninety (90) degrees, the planning board may require a greater radius. 
4.  Crossing intersections (X) shall not be permitted. 
5.  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall not be permitted. 
D.  Cul-de-sac streets. Cul-de-sac streets or courts designed to have ends permanently closed shall be no more than nine hundred (900) feet long. 
E.  Traffic-control signs. Traffic-control signs, including street name signs, of a type and number approved by the director of engineering shall be installed at all intersections of proposed and existing streets within the subdivision according to city specifications. 
F.  Street lighting. Street lighting shall be installed to city standards. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-37, §§ 4, 5, 5-9-11) 
Sec. 1302. - Easements. 
    Adequate easements shall be required by the planning board as recommended by the director of engineering to accommodate all utilities and storm drainage needs. The developer shall demonstrate such adequacy by furnishing drawings showing all utilities and storm drainage. The director of engineering shall recommend easement widths needed to accommodate such utilities and storm drainage systems to the planning board. 
Sec. 1303. - Blocks and lots. 
A.  Blocks. 
1.  Residential blocks shall not be less than three hundred (300) feet or more than one thousand (1,000) feet in length, except as the planning board considers necessary to secure efficient use of land or to achieve desired features of the street system. The planning board may require public crosswalks across the block. 
2.  Residential blocks shall be wide enough to provide two (2) tiers of lots of minimum depth, except when such blocks front onto freeways, expressways, or major arterials or topographical conditions of size of the property prevents such design, in which case the planning board may approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth. 
B.  Lots. 
1.  Lot area, size, shape, arrangement and dimensions shall conform to the requirements of this LDC. 
2.  Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines. 
3.  Each lot shall abut upon a public street or road, except as may be provided in this LDC. 
4.  The planning board may grant subdivision approval for private streets if all conditions for the protection of public health, safety and welfare are met and provided that all private streets are built to public street standards outlined in this LDC. 
5.  The size, shape and orientation of every lot shall be as the planning board deems appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated. 
6.  For residential lots not served by the city sanitary sewer system, a larger lot may be required. Lot sizes shall be determined as follows. The subdivision shall secure a percolation test, which meets the North Carolina State Department of Environment and Natural Resources regulations for on-site septic tanks on each proposed lot in a subdivision. The location and result of each test shall be indicated on the preliminary plat. The dimensions and area of each lot may be established at the level necessary to fulfill the requirements of the State Health Department. Septic tank disposal fields shall not be located over or adjacent to rock outcrops which serve as present sources of water or which may serve as future sources of water supply. In no case shall a lagoon system be allowed for residential or commercial subdivisions. 
7.  Building lines for residential lots shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet from each street property line provided, however, that under a planned development residential or conditional use permit, the front and side lot lines may be varied, in order to afford a variety of building arrangements. In no case shall a dwelling unit be closer than ten (10) feet to any public street. 
8.  Corner lots shall be at least sixty-five (65) feet wide at the building line. 
9.  Lots, other than corner lots, fronting on two (2) streets shall not be platted except under exceptional circumstances, in which case building lines shall be established on both frontages. 
Sec. 1304. - Subdivision improvements. 
A.  General. 
1.  The design requirements and required improvements set forth in this section are minimum standards and improvements. Development improvement requirements in environmentally sensitive areas (sensitive soils, slopes, flood hazard areas, woodlands, and the like) may be more stringent as determined by the director of engineering and director. 
2.  Every subdivider shall be required to install all improvements as required by this chapter. 
B.  Street grading. All streets shall be cleared and graded as approved by the director of engineering. Finished grades shall be at levels approved by the director of engineering. 
C.  Street paving. All streets shall be paved with either bituminous asphalt or concrete to meet standards specified in the city's design standards manual. Internal streets shall be paved to widths specified in chapter 13 of this LDC. 
D.  Curbs and gutters. Concrete curbs and gutters shall be installed on all streets within the city limits and ETJ. Installations shall be in accordance with city specifications. 
E.  Sidewalks. All site development plans and subdivision construction plans shall provide for the installation of sidewalks in accordance with the location and design requirements established below. 
1.  Sidewalk shall be required along all street frontages listed in Table 13.4 unless otherwise exempted by this LDC. 
  Table 13-4. Street 
  Classification/Sidewalk Location 
Street Classification Sidewalk Location Commercial Collector 1 side Commercial Local 1 side Arterial Both sides  Commercial street is defined as a local or collector street segment that does not abut lands predominately zoned for single family detached or duplex dwelling units.  
2.  Sidewalks must meet ADA standards and shall be constructed in accordance with the standards established in the City of Rocky Mount Standard Specifications Standard Details. The standard sidewalk width shall be five (5) feet. 
3.  Sidewalks are not required for internal local and collector streets serving single-family, duplex, and Industrial subdivisions. Sidewalks shall be required along any arterial streets within or adjacent to the subdivision or development site. 
4.  Sidewalk construction required for as a part of subdivision development may be delayed, with the consent of the director of engineering, until the time of site development provided the developer posts a bond in an amount that is one hundred ten (110) percent of the estimated cost of sidewalk construction. 
5.  Payment in lieu of construction. Payment in lieu of construction will be required when a proposed sidewalk will be in conflict with future construction plans or where the director of engineering determines that installation of required sidewalk would be in conflict with pedestrian safety. The payment shall be in accordance with the standard construction rates for sidewalk construction established in the Administrative Policy Manual X.2.1 Rates and Charges for Street and Sidewalk Construction. 
F.  Water and sewer service required. Any subdivision located within the city limits shall install water and sewer to provide service to each lot in the subdivision. Any subdivision located within the extraterritorial jurisdiction and which has either the public water or the public sewer system reasonably available or to be made reasonably available for extension, as determined by the director of engineering, shall have such systems extended to provide service to each lot in the subdivision. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
G.  Water utilities. Where the subdivision is connected to the city water supply, or any other public water supply, or is provided with a private water distribution system, the following improvements shall be provided: 
1.  Water lines shall be sized as designated by the director of engineering. 
2.  Fire hydrants shall be located and installed as required by the fire chief and director of engineering for all types of development. 
a.  In single-family subdivisions, fire hydrants shall be located not less than five hundred (500) feet of each front minimum building line and located at street intersections, with intermediate hydrants between intersections, unless otherwise specified by the fire chief and director of engineering. 
b.  For nonresidential subdivisions "The Guide for Determination of Required Fire Flow," as updated, published by the Insurance Services Offices, will be utilized in determining the estimated water needs for fire protection. Fire hydrants shall be located as not to exceed eight hundred (800) feet between hydrants and located at street intersections, with intermediate hydrants between intersections, unless otherwise specified by the fire chief and city manager. 
A subdivision which is located outside the city limits and is not reasonably available to the municipal water system may be served by private individual wells. All subdivisions proposed to be serviced by private individual wells shall obtain the appropriate permit from the respective county health department prior to approval of a final plat. 
H.  Sanitary sewer. All subdivisions proposed to be served by the city sewerage system shall obtain certification from the appropriate state and federal agencies prior to city approval of the final plat. The following improvements shall be provided: 
1.  Minimum grade of pipe shall be that which will maintain a minimum velocity of two (2) feet per second. 
2.  Automatic lift stations shall be provided where the need for such lift stations is evident and cannot be avoided. The lift station capacity shall be determined by the director of engineering. 
3.  A subdivision that is located outside of the city limits and is not reasonably available to the municipal sewerage system service may provide a private sewage package treatment plant, upon state approval. The sewerage disposal system must be approved by the director of engineering. All subdivisions proposed to be served by a new or existing private sewage disposal system shall obtain a permit from the appropriate state and federal agencies prior to approval of a preliminary plat. 
4.  For subdivisions utilizing septic tanks, the subdivider shall obtain the appropriate permit from the respective county health department prior to city approval of a final plat. 
I.  Utility lines. The location of utility lines, including electrical, telephone, gas, cable television and other utility facilities shall be context sensitive and in keeping with community design standards. In recognition of the importance of safety considerations and the view from the public right-of-way, utility lines and facilities shall be placed underground where feasible. Above ground utilities and facilities may only be approved by the director of utilities when cost, technical, maintenance or other system-related considerations are deemed to be significant factors. Electric transmission lines and related facilities, due to their special nature and extreme cost, shall be permitted to be maintained, expanded, repaired, and constructed above ground, based on the requirements of the electric system. Any utility or facility approved for above ground installation shall be reported to the planning board. 
J.  Natural gas utilities. Natural gas service lines where available shall be provided underground in easements or rights-of-way outside of curb lines where practical. 
K.  Street signs and street lights. 
1.  Street name signs shall be placed on diagonally opposite corners or each street intersection in conformance with specifications adopted by the city. Streetlights shall be required by the city and installed to specifications adopted by the city. 
2.  Street lighting inside the corporate limits of the city shall be installed by the city to municipal standards. If the developer desires a different lighting support than wood poles used by the city, the developer shall pay the city an amount equal to the difference in material and installation cost. City standards consist of a thirty (30) foot (wood, metal or concrete) pole with one hundred (100) watt HPS fixtures (cobra head design). 
3.  Street lighting outside the corporate limits is not required. However, if street lighting outside the corporate limits is proposed, a street lighting design plan is required with the submission of the preliminary plat for approval. 
L.  Special exceptions for design waivers. If at any time before or during the construction of the required improvements, it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director of engineering that unforeseen conditions make it necessary to modify the location or design of such required improvements as were approved in the preliminary plat, the director of engineering may authorize such modifications, provided these modifications are within the spirit and intent of the planning board approval and do not extend to waiver, or substantially alter the function of any improvements required by the board. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-37, § 6, 5-9-11) 
Sec. 1305. - Stormwater, flood hazard areas. 
A.  Purpose and scope. 
1.  These regulations and standards are designed, intended and should be administered in a manner to protect the various drainage areas in the city from flooding; to provide clean and sanitary channels for runoff; to prevent pollution of watersheds, streams and natural drainage channels; to prevent the encroachment of buildings and improvements on natural drainage channels; to equitably apportion the cost of improvements; to protect natural scenic areas; to provide for the conservation of the natural resources of the area, and to implement resolutions established by the Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA). 
2.  All subdivisions of land and all improvements of any character which affect drainage in any portion of the city shall be subject to the provisions of these regulations for the protection of public health, safety and general welfare of the city. 
B.  Finding of fact. The periodic flooding of areas within the city results in hazards to life and property, in the disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. Flood and associated losses are caused by the location in flood hazard areas of buildings, structures and uses of land which are inadequately protected from flooding and erosion, and which contribute to flooding by impeding the flow of drainage and by increasing flood heights through displacement of stormwater in flood hazard areas. 
C.  Classification of drainage channels. For the purpose of these regulations drainage shall be classified as follows: 
1.  Surface drainage is runoff of such a limited quantity and/or slow rate that it does not cause erosion of a defined channel. 
2.  A minor tributary is any drainage channel having a drainage basin of one hundred (100) acres or less in area. 
3.  A major tributary is any channel having a drainage basin of not less than one (1) square mile or greater than twenty-five (25) square miles. 
D.  Designation of responsibility. It is intended that responsibility for drainage be allocated as follows, unless otherwise specifically designated: 
1.  The developer of a subdivision is responsible for the following: 
a.  Construction of facilities to accommodate the increased surface drainage within the subdivision and future developed flows from upstream properties and shall convey same to a point on an identified existing watercourse or storm drainage network system. Such storm drainage system shall have the hydraulic capability to accommodate the increased surface water flow or be modified by the developer in a manner which will do so. 
b.  Obtaining off-site flowage easements and the construction of facilities to accommodate increased flow. Such shall be dedicated to the city. Where such off-site facilities are necessary, the city shall allow the developer the option of constructing on-site retarding and retention structures to limit the peak flow to predeveloped rates when environmental and economic conditions prohibit or make unfeasible off-site improvements. 
c.  The improvement of all minor and major tributaries and channels lying within the subdivision. 
d.  Mitigate any increase in rate or quantity of runoff in any storm drain pipe minor or major tributary or major channel which results from the development of the subdivision. 
e.  Provision for the maintenance of all stormwater systems and fringe areas of tributaries and channels which have not been dedicated to the public. 
2.  The city and other levels of government will be responsible for the maintenance of drainage facilities dedicated to the public. 
E.  Drainage and sewers outside subdivision boundaries. The city reserves the right to require improvements, provisions of drainage easements, and for provision of agreements beyond the boundaries of the subdivision to facilitate flow of water through the addition, to avoid probability of law suits based on damage from changed runoff in the subdivision, and to provide continuous improvement of the overall storm drainage system. Requirements outside the addition may include: 
1.  Improvements may be required in channels or storm sewers flowing to or from the addition, or in channels or storm sewers located in adjacent areas that are affected by flow of water from the addition. 
2.  The following kinds of improvements may be required: 
a.  Enlargement or replacement of undersized drainage structures to provide free flow. 
b.  Removal of obstructions. 
c.  Straightening of channel. 
d.  Widening or deepening of the channel. 
e.  Construction of erosion control structures. 
f.  Back sloping, sodding and/or rip rapping of bank. 
g.  Construction of closed or open paved storm sewers for the purposes of closing gap or continuation of overall storm sewer system. 
3.  Property owner agreements, where required, shall be designed to protect the city from probable lawsuits for damage, caused by changed runoff condition. 
4.  When subdivision development will result in increased runoff beyond the boundaries of the subdivision which cannot be accommodated through channel improvements without causing downstream flooding or erosion, the planning board may require the construction of one (1) or more retention reservoirs on the subdivision which will temporarily impound and discharge water from the subdivision site at the rate of volume equivalent to the discharge from the underdeveloped subdivision site at a rate and volume that the off-site channel is capable of taking. The design shall be as indicated in the city's specifications. Plans shall be approved by the director of engineering. The construction shall be the responsibility of the developer. The responsibility for maintenance shall be determined on a case-by-case basis during the subdivision review process. 
Sec. 1306. - Storm drainage. 
A.  Design. The storm drainage system shall be designed to conform to the existing topography and shall not be rearranged to fit a designed lot pattern. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. The director of engineering may allow a minor ditch relocation provided that such modifications are designed in conformance with the city specifications, standards and designs, latest edition. Storm frequencies required to be used for the capacity design of the draining system shall be as follows: 
1.  Undeveloped collectors 10-year storm; 
2.  Undeveloped cross-drainage 25-year storm; 
3.  Residential collectors 10-year storm; 
4.  Residential cross-drainage 25-year storm; 
5.  Commercial 25-year storm; 
6.  Industrial 25-year storm. 
B.  Enclosed surface drains. Exclusive of perennial and intermittent streams, all watercourses that require a forty-eight (48) inch pipe or less to carry the ten (10) year design storm shall be piped. Watercourses shall be defined as ditches, canals, collector systems, etc., intended to carry surface runoff from or through the site. 
C.  Open watercourse. All open watercourses not subject to the provisions of this section and not classified as perennial or intermittent streams shall be graded to a minimum three (3) foot bottom width with side slopes of three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical and grassed to prevent erosion. Erosion-control devices such as matting or straw may be required by the director of engineering to protect the side slopes during the seed germination period. The maximum velocity within these open ditches shall not exceed three (3) feet per second unless ditch liners of plain class I, as described by NCDOT standard specifications, concrete, asphalt liners are provided. Soil ditches shall maintain a minimum grade of five-tenths of one-half (0.5) percent. The director of engineering may waive the 3:1 side slope in cases where such slopes are neither desirable nor necessary. 
D.  Drainage easements. 
1.  Easements shall be provided along all storm drainage courses. Such easements for enclosed or piped drainage courses shall be twenty (20) feet, plus the diameter width of the drainage structure. 
2.  Easement widths for open watercourses shall be determined by the director of engineering based on the factors below, but not limited to: 
a.  Design storm frequency. 
b.  An open watercourse with a three (3) foot side bottom and side slopes of three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical, plus an additional ten (10) feet on each side of the watercourse. 
3.  Appropriate drainage easements must be secured prior to the submission of the preliminary plat of the subdivision if said easement is entirely or partially located on land which is not part of the subdivision. 
4.  A five (5) foot easement for drainage and general amenities, including, but not limited to, gas, electrical, communication, water and sewer service, shall be provided along the entire perimeter of each lot adjacent to the lot property line. The easement for drainage and general amenities shall in no way restrict the full use of the property by the owners with respect to placing fences, trees or other vegetation thereon; provided, however, that no fence, tree or vegetation shall interfere with the proper functioning of the easement and that any use of the five (5) foot easement on the perimeter of each lot by the property owner shall be subject to the provisions of the city's LDC. In instances where lots or portions of lots are held in the same ownership and those lots are to be developed as a single parcel of land, any standard five (5) foot drainage and utility easement located within but not adjacent to the perimeter of the parcel may be declared null and void. The procedure for releasing any five (5) foot standard easement under this provision is the recording of a plat signed by the director of engineering and the director showing such release. 
5.  Watershed drainage. If the proposed subdivision or any portion thereof is located within a public water supply watershed, as defined in this LDC, shall comply with chapter 8 of this LDC. 
6.  General requirements. 
a.  All storm drainage improvements shall conform to the construction and material specifications of the city. 
b.  Profiles and cross sections for existing and proposed drainage courses shall be required. 
c.  No stormwater drainage shall be discharged into a sanitary sewer. 
d.  Access to the drainage easement from the public street shall be provided. 
Sec. 1307. - Miscellaneous. 
    Sites for community facilities. 
    When a sketch subdivision plat is submitted for city approval and the area proposed to be subdivided encompasses an area designated in the adopted Rocky Mount Comprehensive Plan, or any other long-range development plan approved by the city council, as a site for a community facility, the director shall advise the city manager of such fact, and the city council shall notify the subdivider within sixty (60) days from submission of the sketch plan to the department of development services whether it still wishes the site to be reserved, and if so, the specific location and size of the site to be reserved. If the city council does wish to reserve the site, the subdivision sketch plat shall not be approved without such reservation. The city or any other public or quasi-public organization with authority to condemn property for public use under the right of eminent domain shall then have eleven (11) months, beginning on the date of approval of the construction plat, within which to acquire the site by purchase, gift or initiating condemnation proceedings. If the city or such other public or quasi-public organization has not acquired or begun proceedings to condemn the site within eleven (11) months, the subdivider may treat the land as freed of the reservation. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 2, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 1308. - Bonus density design. 
A.  The bonus density design provision applies to all residential zoning districts except the PDR districts. In cases of dedication to and acceptance by the city of open space specifically for park land without monetary compensation by the city to the subdivider, and/or in case of property located within the floodway and/or property constituting the fifty (50) foot arterial buffer required for residential development adjacent to major arterials, the following bonus density provision may be employed; however, in no case may a lot be reduced in area or frontage below the minimum requirement of the next higher density single-family zoning designation. The bonus density design provision is applied in the following manner: 
1.  The square footage of the area reserved for park/open space, floodway or arterial buffer purposes is divided by the square footage of the total area to be subdivided; 
2.  The minimum lot area and frontage of the lot requirements specified by the zone of the subject property is multiplied by the resulting quotient (representative of the percentage of land eliminated from residential land use development) obtained from step (1) above; 
3.  The resulting lot area and lot frontage of step (2) is then considered to be the minimum lot specifications upon which the subdivision may be designed. 
B.  For example, if a thirty (30) acre tract of land were zoned R-15 (minimum lot area of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet and lot frontage of one hundred (100) feet) and the subdivider desires to dedicate three (3) acres of land, the bonus density design provision would be applied as follows: 
1.  3 acres = 43,560 × 3 = 130,680 square feet; 43,560 × 30 = 1,306,800 square feet; 130,680/1,306,800 = 10 percent. 
2.  Minimum lot area (R-15): 15,000 × 10 percent = 1,500; 15,000 - 1,500 = 13,500. Minimum lot frontage (R-15): 100 × 10 percent = 10; - 100 10 = 90. 
3.  13,500 square feet minimum lot area; 90 feet minimum lot frontage. 
The same foregoing bonus density design provision may be employed in developments so designed to have common green or open space to be utilized by the residents therein and not to be owned by the general public. 
Sec. 1309. - Design and improvements only in PDR subdivisions and cluster developments. 
    Street requirements. These requirements shall apply to both public and private streets. 
1.  Street pattern. Streets shall be arranged to fit the contour of the land, to create usable lots, and to discourage through traffic in residential neighborhood. 
2.  Coordination of streets. Street access shall be provided in conformance with the city council's adopted arterial plan and feeder street plan. When a proposed street depicted in those plans traverses a PDR subdivision, the street design and construction specifications shall comply with chapter 13 of this LDC. Street access may be provided to adjoining undeveloped tracts of land and shall be coordinated with existing and planned streets as required by the department of development services and department of engineering. Access shall be provided to adjacent property at locations deemed necessary and desirable by the planning board. 
3.  Street right-of-way and construction widths. All private streets must be paved. Curb and gutter shall not be required at locations where curb and gutter are not necessary as determined by the director of engineering. Within the city limits, curb and gutter streets are required and shall be constructed to the following standards in Table 25. Any street improvement designated by the feeder street plan or the arterial plan shall be designed and constructed to standards identified in chapter 13. 
Table 13-5. Private Street Requirements. 
Type of Street Minimum Right-of-Way Construction Width Private street 46 feet 12 feet one-way 
22 feet two-way 
24 feet cul-de-sac 
26 feet through Cul-de-sac 46 feet, with a 45-foot end radius 26 feet, with a 40-foot end radius Local 46 feet 26 feet back of curb to back of curb Residential Collector 60 feet 30 feet back of curb to back of curb Commercial Collector 65 feet 40 feet back of curb to back of curb Industrial Collector 65 feet 40 feet back of curb to back of curb Arterial street 85 feet To be determined by director of engineering Private street with residential sidewalks 50 feet min 12 feet one-way 
22 feet two-way 
24 feet cul-de-sec 
26 feet through  
4.  Horizontal street alignment. When a continuous street center line deflects at any point, a circular curve shall be introduced having a radius of curvature on said center line of not less than a minimum radii of one hundred fifty (150) feet. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet shall be avoided and prohibited relative to intersections with major and minor arterials. 
Table 13-6. Horizontal Alignment in PDR Subdivisions. 
Type of Street Minimum Radius (in feet) Cul-de-sac 100 Local 150 Collector (feeder) 450 Minor Arterial To be determined by the director of engineering Major arterial To be determined by the director of engineering  
5.  Vertical curves. All changes in street grades shall be connected with vertical curves and the length (L) of both sag and crest vertical curves in feet shall be related to the algebraic difference in (A) and a constant K = 35 for the formula L - KA. 
6.  Maximum and minimum grades. Grades on streets may not exceed eight (8) percent. Street grades at the gutter shall not be less than four-tenths (0.4) percent. If streetside ditches are developed, street side ditch grades shall not be less than five-tenths (0.5) percent. Steeper section velocity protection shall be required where the erodible velocity of the soil is exceeded. 
7.  Streets. Proposed streets shall be adjusted to the contours of the land so as to produce usable lots and streets of reasonable gradient. 
8.  Sight easement. A sign distance easement shall be established at each public or private street intersection in conformance with the Subdivision Roads Standards of NCDOT as adopted July 1, 1979, and subsequently amended. 
9.  Non-access easement. Along all major arterials as designated on the city's adopted arterial plan, the planning board may require non-access easement on property frontage abutting designated major arterials at locations where each property is zoned for residential development. 
10.  Street intersection. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible, no intersection shall be at an angle of less than eighty-five (85) degrees. 
11.  Street corner radius. The street shall have street type curves matching the requirement of a local type street construction where the street intersects an existing public right-of-way per chapter 13. 
12.  Street name. Proposed private streets in alignment with existing name private streets shall bear the names of such existing streets. In no other cases shall the name of a proposed private street duplicate or closely resemble an existing public or private street name recorded in the register of deeds office. 
13.  Traffic control signs. Traffic control signs, including street name signs, of a type and number approved by the director of engineering shall be installed at all intersections of proposed and existing streets within the subdivision. Signs on a publicly dedicated right-of-way shall comply with chapter 13 of this LDC. 
14.  Strip paving will be allowed on contiguous, continuous designated parkways within a PDR area subject to no driveway access and minimum parkway system length of one (1) mile. Minimum parkway construction width shall be twenty-four (24) feet. 
15.  Rolled curb and gutter will be allowed in PDR developments upon submission and approval of submitted calculations providing for storage of stormwater within the project site meeting an established design frequency. 
16.  Traffic islands in cul-de-sac streets are permitted in PDR developments with homeowners associations and subject to approval by the technical review committee. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-37, § 7, 5-9-11; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 2, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 1310. - Assurance of improvements and inspection procedures. 
A.  Improvement completion. Prior to approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall either complete the required improvements or post bond sufficient to guarantee their satisfactory completion. The procedures in each case are as follows: 
1.  Completion of improvements. Upon approval of as-built plans and when the developer has completed all improvements to the satisfaction of the director of engineering, the director of engineering shall issue to the developer certification that the improvements have been installed and have the final approval of the city; or 
2.  Guarantee of completion of improvements. If the subdivider has not completed all of the required improvements or has completed the improvements which have not been approved by the director of engineering, the subdivider shall file with the city a performance bond from a surety company authorized to do business in North Carolina, an irrevocable letter of credit or other instrument readily convertible to cash at face value payable to the city from a financial institution licensed in the State of North Carolina with a local office, within sixty (60) miles of the city, or cash placed in escrow with a financial institution designated as an official depository of the city in the amount of one hundred ten (110) percent of the estimated cost of said improvements as estimated by the director of engineering. Said bond, letter of credit or check shall be in a form or manner acceptable to the city prior to approval of the final plat. Said guarantees shall be for a specific period of time not to exceed two (2) years from the date of planning board approval of the final plat. Improvements encompassed under this financial guarantee may include, but not be limited to, street name signs, stormwater, sewer, electrical and water utility lines; street construction, street lighting and incidental improvements thereto. For financial guarantees of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or less, only irrevocable letters of credit or cash placed in escrow will be accepted. 
3.  Damage. If an approved phase of construction is damaged during subsequent phases of construction prior to a final approval of the completed construction for the entire development (subdivision), the developer shall be responsible for repair of the damage. All construction must be in acceptable operating condition for one (1) year prior to complete acceptance of maintenance and responsibility by the city. 
B.  Inspection of construction. The inspection of all required improvements shall be required prior to the issuance of the certification of satisfactory installation and completion of said improvements. The subdivider shall arrange to have the necessary inspections conducted at times prearranged through the office of the director of engineering. 
C.  Modifications of design improvements. If at any time before or during the construction of the required improvements, it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director of engineering that unforeseen conditions make it necessary to modify the location or design of such required improvements as were approved in the preliminary plat, the director of engineering may authorize such modification, provided these modifications are within the spirit and intent of planning board approval and do not extend to waiver, or substantially alter the function of any improvements required by the planning board. 
D.  Variances. The planning board may vary the requirements of chapter 13, minimum design and improvement requirements, when strict compliance with the standards would cause an unusual or unnecessary hardship on the subdivider due to the size of the tract to be subdivided, topography, condition or nature of adjoining areas, or existence of other unusual physical conditions. In granting variances from section 1302, the planning board may, where practical, require conditions that will secure the objectives and the requirement(s) varied. The issuance and justification for said variance shall be entered in the planning board's minutes. 
E.  No permit to be issued. No permit shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation for the construction, reconstruction, alteration, or repair of any building, structure, or improvement upon real estate which has been subdivided in violation of this LDC. 
F.  Actions against illegal transfer. The city, through its attorney or other official designated by the planning board, may bring an action for injunction of any illegal subdivision, transfer, conveyance, or sale of real estate and the court shall, upon appropriate findings, issue an injunction and order requiring the offending party to comply with the subdivision LDC. In addition to the foregoing, the provisions of this LDC may be enforced by any one (1), all, or a combination of the remedies authorized by N.C.G.S. § 160A-175. 
G.  Metes and bounds description. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used to sell or transfer real estate shall not exempt the transaction from any penalty, action, or remedy provided for in this LDC. 
CHAPTER 14. - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 1401. - Objectives, jurisdiction, definition, principles and types of subdivision. 
A.  Objectives. 
1.  Provide for the orderly growth and development of the city; 
2.  Provide for coordination of street alignment, community facilities and utilities within future subdivisions; 
3.  Assure the provisions of streets, utilities, recreation and public school facilities; 
4.  Locate population in a spatial distribution that will decrease the potential of congestion and overcrowding and will establish physical conditions essential to public health, safety and general welfare; 
5.  Provide for proper legal description, monumentation and recordation of land that will facilitate identification and permanent location of real estate boundaries; 
6.  Encourage the wise, productive and beneficial use of the natural resources of the city without damage to the environment; maintain a healthy and pleasant environment; and preserve the utility of the land within the city's planning jurisdiction. 
B.  Establishment of subdivision regulation jurisdiction. The provisions of this chapter shall apply within the corporate limits of the city and within the ETJ as shown on the city's official zoning map. 
C.  Definition of subdivision. All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, building sites or other subdivisions when any or more of those divisions is created for the purpose of sale or building development, whether immediate or future; subdivision shall include all divisions of land involving the dedication or a new street or a change in existing streets. 
D.  Basic subdivision principles. 
1.  The land to be subdivided shall possess the potential to be developed for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood or other menace. 
2.  The general layout of streets, lots, blocks and utilities proposed to serve the subdivision shall be coordinated with its surroundings and with the city's development plans. 
3.  All required improvements shall be constructed and/or installed to conform to the city construction specifications which may be obtained from the director of engineering. Permits for construction shall be obtained prior to the beginning of any construction in conformance with the city's standard design and specification manuals. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
E.  Types of subdivision. 
1.  Minor subdivision. Any subdivision of four (4) lots or less fronting on any existing dedicated public street and meeting all city regulations. Minor subdivision may involve either rural or urban land, and may be used to combine lots or otherwise re-plat land where no public dedication is required. Minor plat submissions shall meet the requirements set forth in chapter 14, subdivision regulations. The DRC has the authority to review and approve minor subdivision plats. 
2.  Major subdivision. Any subdivision of land that does not fit the definition of a minor or exempt subdivision. 
3.  Exempt subdivision plats. The following shall not be included within this definition of subdivision and shall not be subject to the regulations authorized herein: 
a.  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the city as shown in the subdivision regulations; 
b.  The division of land into parcels greater than ten (10) acres where no street right-of-way dedication is involved; 
c.  The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets; and 
d.  The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is no greater than two (2) acres into not more than three (3) lots, where no street right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. 0-2006-2, § 2, 1-9-06) 
Sec. 1402. - Subdivision application procedure and approval process. 
A.  General procedure. 
1.  Recordation of final plat. No final plat of a subdivision within the jurisdiction of this LDC shall be filed or recorded by the register of deeds unless and until it has been signed by the director of development services and the director of engineering. 
2.  Conveyance of the lots. No lot in any subdivision shall be offered for sale or conveyed until the final plat of such subdivision has been recorded in the register of deeds of the county in which the subdivision is located. 
3.  Approvals required prior to construction. No construction may begin on the improvements required by this LDC until the plans for those improvements have been approved by the planning board and the plans and preliminary plat duly signed by the director of development services and director of engineering. Any party who initiates construction without an approved plan may be subject to the fines and penalties outlined in "Penalties for violations of the provisions of this LDC". 
B.  Standards and required improvements. 
1.  Monuments. Within each subdivision at least two (2) monuments designed and designated as "control corners" shall be installed. All monuments shall be constructed of concrete and be at least four (4) inches in diameter or square and not less than three (3) feet in length. Each monument shall have imbedded in its top or attached by a suitable means a metal plate of noncorrodible material marked plainly with the point, the bench mark elevation and coordinates of the North Carolina grid system, if said coordinates are available from the city, within two thousand (2,000) feet of the subdivision. This monument shall be installed flush with the existing ground elevations unless this requirement is impractical because of unusual topographic features. 
2.  Property markers. A steel pipe or equivalent, not less than one-half (1/2) inch in diameter and at least thirty (30) inches in length, shall be set at every point of curvature, point of intersection, property corner, point of tangency and reference point, unless a monument has already been placed at said point. 
3.  Blocks. Residential blocks shall not be more than one thousand (1,000) feet nor less than three hundred (300) feet in length and shall be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth, unless extreme physical conditions lend themselves to a deviation from this norm as approved by the planning board. A cul-de-sac shall not exceed nine hundred (900) feet in length. 
4.  Lots. 
a.  Lot size, depth, width and building setbacks shall be in accordance with the requirements of the LDC; provided, however, that lot area and yard requirements may be modified when the dedication of park lands, floodways or arterial buffer lands is exercised according to this LDC. In subdivisions where septic tanks, private individual wells and/or community water systems are to be employed, in addition to meeting the minimum lot size of the city, such lots will have to meet the size requirements of the respective county health department for the installation of the aforementioned utility systems. 
b.  Each lot shall front on a public street except as provided in chapter 7 of this LDC and except whenever said lot shall be developed solely for a utility station or substation provided that an access easement is recorded which grants access to the lot from a public street to the owners of the lot and to employees of the city who need access to the lot to perform their municipal duties and provided further that the seller of the lot shall enter into a written agreement with the buyer of the lot to dedicate right-of-way access to said lot in the event said lot is no longer used as a utility station or substation (said agreement to be approved by the director and to become an encumbrance on the deed of the abutting property owned by the subdivider). 
c.  Lots shall be of such configuration and location to provide adequate building sites which do not encroach in the floodway zone. 
d.  All lot sizes shall meet or exceed the minimum width and area requirements as specified in the zoning LDC for the district in which they are located. 
e.  All lot lines characterized by subdividing an existing building or portion thereof shall meet all applicable North Carolina State Building Code regulations including, but not limited to, fire walls. 
f.  [Reserved.] 
5.  Lots shall be of such configuration and location to provide adequate building sites which do not encroach in the floodway zone. 
6.  All lots shall provide adequate building space. Lots which are smaller than the minimum required for residential lots shall be identified on the plat as, "not for residential purposes." 
7.  For the purpose of calculating built-upon area, total project area shall include total acreage in the tract on which the project is to be developed. 
8.  Where possible, roads should be located outside of critical areas and watershed buffer areas. Road constructed within these areas shall be designed and constructed so to minimize their impact on water quality. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 3, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 1403. - Minor subdivision plats. 
    Minor subdivision shall occur in a single stage through submission requirements of this LDC. The DRC shall review a final plat to ensure compliance with all requirements established in this section. The contents of the plat for a minor subdivision shall be reduced from those for a major subdivision to include only the following: 
A.  The minor subdivision plat shall be drawn by an engineer or surveyor registered in the State of North Carolina. Any construction plans to accompany or to be part of a construction plat shall be prepared by a registered engineer only or other professionals granted authority under N.C.G.S. [ch.] 89 as amended. 
B.  A minor subdivision plat submitted for recording must be of a material acceptable to the Register of Deeds in the county in which the map is to be recorded. Each minor subdivision plat shall be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, shall have an outside marginal size of eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches and shall show the following information: 
1.  Title block: 
Name of subdivision; 
Registered engineer's or surveyor's name and seal; 
Name of property owners; 
North arrow; 
Bar scale; 
Date; 
Names of streets; 
Label of "Minor Plat." 
2.  Project information: 
Area of subdivision in square feet or acres; 
Total number of proposed lots. 
3.  Existing data: 
a.  Location of existing platted property, street right-of-way lines, existing buildings, water mains, fire hydrants, sewers, drainpipes, culverts, bridges, watercourses, electric power lines, gas lines, railroad tracks, corporate limit line, parks, public utility easements (both on the land to be subdivided and on the land immediately adjoining), names of existing streets on and adjoining the land to be subdivided, names of all adjoining subdivisions and the names of owners of adjoining unsubdivided tracts of land; 
b.  Adjacent property owner. 
c.  Data relating to proposed subdivision: 
1.  Proposed property lines with all exact distances shown; 
2.  Type, location and purpose of areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use; 
3.  Lot numbers and house numbers (address numbers); 
4.  Floodway boundary, if applicable; 
5.  Proposed improvements including water, sewer, drainage, fire hydrants, etc.; proposed drainage to be shown by arrows indicating direction of surface water flow; 
6.  Proposed easements for all utility and drainage improvements; 
7.  If the proposed subdivision is designed to have individual septic tanks and/or individual wells for each proposed lot, the minor subdivision plat shall have an appropriate certificate of approval from the respective county health department; 
8.  Topographic data if requested by the director of engineering; 
9.  Sedimentation and erosion control plan if requested by the city engineer. 
4.  Signature blocks: 
a.  County health department certificate: Insertion of the appropriate county health department certificate relative to the installation of septic tanks and/or wells as specified by the respective county health department. 
b.  Preparation of plat and accuracy certificate: 
I, ________, certify that this map was (drawn by me) (drawn under my supervision) from (an actual survey made by me) (an actual survey made under my supervision) (deed description recorded in Book ______, page ______); that the error of closure as calculated by latitudes and departure is 1: __________; that the boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken lines plotted from information found in Book ______, page ______, ________ County Registry; that this map was prepared in accordance with N.C.G.S. [§] 47-30 as amended. Witness my original signature, registration number and seal, this _____ day of _________, A.D., 20__. 
c.  Certificate of ownership and dedication: The undersigned hereby acknowledge(s) that (they) (he) (is) (are) owners of the property shown on this plat having acquired title thereto by deed recorded in Book ______, Page ______ of the __________ County Register, and that (they) (he) hereby dedicate(s), unless otherwise noted thereon, to public use, playgrounds, parks, open space, and easements forever all areas as shown or indicated on this plat. The City is authorized to record this plat at the appropriate Register of Deeds. (In the event the dedicated property so dedicated is owned by a corporation, the corporation shall include the signature of the corporate officer, attested by the corporate secretary and the corporate seal.) 
d.  Review officer certificate: 
State of North Carolina 
County of 
I, ___________, Review Officer of County, certify that the map or plat to which this certification is affixed meets all statutory requirements for recording. 
Review Officer   Date 
e.  Notary public certificate: 
Subscribed and sworn to me this _____ day of __________, 20__. 
My Commission Expires: ___ _______ 
Notary Public 
f.  Director and director of engineering certificate: By signing below, I/we certify that this plat was approved by the Development Review Committee on __________ (date) and meets the city standards for minor subdivisions. 
__________Director of Engineering Director of 
Development 
Services  
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 3, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 1404. - Major subdivision plats. 
    Before submitting a construction plat for a major subdivision it is recommended that a preliminary plat be submitted, in an effort to minimize development costs, avoid misunderstanding or misinterpretation, and ensure compliance with the requirements of this section. However, the applicant may choose to omit the preliminary plat process and submit a construction plat. 
A.  Submission and review of preliminary plat. The applicant shall submit plats in accordance with the submission guidelines established in section 312 of this LDC and shall include the number of sets of plats as established in the City's Administrative Manual drawn to the standards listed below. The DRC shall review the plats for compliance with the standards of this LDC and other city requirements and shall forward a recommendation to the planning board for consideration. 
1.  Standards for presentation. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn. The size for the plat shall not be smaller than eighteen (18) by twenty-four (24) inches. The plat shall be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, unless otherwise determined by the city. The seal of a professional engineer registered in the State of North Carolina is required on all plans and documents submitted for approval. 
2.  Preliminary plat data. The preliminary plat shall contain the following information and meet the specifications of chapter 13 (minimum design and improvements requirements). 
a.  Proposed name of the subdivision and proposed names of any public streets. 
b.  Name and address of the owner or record, the subdivider, the land surveyor and the engineer preparing the plat, date of survey, north point and graphic scale. 
c.  Tax parcel identification number (PIN) 
d.  Preliminary engineering certificate and location of the tract by legal description, giving acreage. 
e.  Vicinity map location streets and highways, sections lines, railroads, schools, parks, and other significant features within one half (1/2) mile of the proposed subdivision. 
f.  Exact boundary lines of the tract, indicated by a heavy line, giving, dimensions, angles and at least one (1) bearing. 
g.  Contour intervals to sea level datum of not more than two (2) feet when the slope is less than four (4) percent, and not more than five (5) feet when the slope is greater than four (4) percent, referenced to a United States Geological Survey or Coast and Geodesic Survey bench mark or monument. 
h.  Natural features within and surrounding the proposed subdivision including streams, drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas and other significant natural features. On all watercourses leaving the tract, the direction of flow shall be indicated, and for all watercourses entering the tract, the drainage area below the point of entry shall be noted. 
i.  Man-made and other cultural features within and surrounding the proposed subdivision, including existing and platted streets, bridges, culverts, utility lines, pipe lines, power transmission line structures, all easements, park areas, city and county lines, and other significant information. 
j.  Names of owners of un-subdivided property abutting the proposed subdivision. 
k.  Zoning districts and land uses for the subject property and all adjacent property. 
l.  Proposed layout, including lot lines with rough dimensions, lot numbers, block numbers, street and alley lines with proposed street names, right-of-way widths, and sites reserved for parks, playgrounds, schools, etc., sites for nonresidential, non-public uses, and building lines with dimensions. 
m.  Such other information as the subdivider wishes to bring to the attention of the planning board and the city. 
3.  Technical documentation. The preliminary plat submitted shall also be accompanied by the following written information: 
a.  Source of water supply and distribution. 
b.  Horizontal alignment for sanitary sewer, water supply, drainage and flood control. 
c.  Typical cross sections of all streets. 
4.  Certifications and endorsements: 
a.  Certification by the department of development services that this preliminary plat was approved by the city planning board on _____ day of __________, 20__. 
___________ 
Director of Development 
Services 
b.  Certification by the city engineering department that this preliminary plat meets the appropriate city standards. 
___________ 
Director of Engineering 
c.  Insertion of the appropriate county health department certificate relative to the installation of septic tanks and/or wells as specified by the respective county health department. 
1.  Construction plan approval from the City of Rocky Mount shall be obtained prior to construction of any street, water and/or sanitary sewer and storm drainage system. 
2.  All required improvements shall conform to the City of Rocky Mount's Manual of Standard Designs and Details. 
3.  All lots shall equal or exceed the minimum development standards of the City of Rocky Mount's Zoning Ordinance. 
B.  Submission and review of construction plat. The applicant shall submit plats in accordance with the submission guidelines established in section 312 of this LDC and shall include the number of sets of plats as established in the City's Administrative Manual drawn to the standards listed below. The DRC shall review the plats for compliance with the approved preliminary plat as well as for compliance with the requirements of this LDC and other city requirements. The DRC shall advise the planning board of minor deviations from the approved preliminary plat. Plans with major deviations from the approved preliminary plat, as determined by the director, shall require reapproval from the planning board and shall follow the procedure for preliminary plat. 
1.  Standards for presentation. The construction plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn. The size for the plat shall not be smaller than eighteen (18) by twenty-four (24) inches. The plat shall be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, unless otherwise determined by the city. The seal of a professional engineer registered in the State of North Carolina is required on all plans and documents submitted for approval. 
2.  Construction plat data. The construction plat shall contain the following information and meet the specifications of chapter 13. 
a.  Proposed name of the subdivision and proposed names of any public streets. 
b.  Parcel identification number (PIN). 
c.  Name and address of the owner or record, the subdivider, the land surveyor and the engineer preparing the plat, date of survey, north point and graphic scale. 
d.  Preliminary engineering certificate and location of the tract by legal description, giving acreage. 
e.  Vicinity map location streets and highways, sections lines, railroads, schools, parks, and other significant features within one half (1/2) mile of the proposed subdivision. 
f.  Exact boundary lines of the tract, indicated by a heavy line, giving, dimensions, angles and at least one (1) bearing. 
g.  Contour intervals to sea level datum of not more than two (2) feet when the slope is less than four (4) percent, and not more than five (5) feet when the slope is greater than four (4) percent, referenced to a United States Geological Survey or Coast and Geodesic Survey bench mark or monument. 
h.  Natural features within and surrounding the proposed subdivision including streams, drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas and other significant natural features. On all watercourses leaving the tract, the direction of flow shall be indicated, and for all watercourses entering the tract, the drainage area below the point of entry shall be noted. 
i.  Man-made and other cultural features within and surrounding the proposed subdivision, including existing and platted streets, bridges, culverts, utility lines, pipe lines, power transmission line structures, all easements, park areas, city and county lines, and other significant information. 
j.  Names of owners of un-subdivided property abutting the proposed subdivision. 
k.  Zoning districts for the subject property and all adjacent property. 
l.  Proposed layout, including lot lines with rough dimensions, lot numbers, block numbers, street and alley lines with proposed street names, right-of-way widths, and sites reserved for parks, playgrounds, schools, etc., sites for nonresidential, non-public uses, and building lines with dimensions. 
m.  Such other information as the subdivider wishes to bring to the attention of the planning board and the city. 
n.  Street profiles and cross sections shall depict existing centerline and property line grades, proposed street grades, water and sewer mains, drainage pipes, culverts, bridges and watercourses. 
o.  Location, size and invert elevations of water, sewer, storm drainage and electric utilities. 
p.  Submission of a comprehensive sedimentation and erosion control plan for the proposed subdivision in compliance with the city's sedimentation and erosion control ordinance. 
q.  On-site and off-site profiles of all easements for drainage courses and utility lines. 
3.  Technical documentation. The construction plat submitted shall also be accompanied by the following written information: 
a.  Source of water supply and distribution. 
b.  Horizontal alignment for sanitary sewer, water supply, drainage and flood control. 
c.  Typical cross sections of all streets. 
4.  Certifications and endorsements: 
a.  Certification by the department of development services that this construction plat was approved by the city planning board on _____ day of __________, 20__. 
___________ 
Director of Development 
Services 
b.  Certification by the city engineering department that this construction plat and required improvement drawings meet the appropriate city standards. 
___________ 
Director of Engineering 
c.  Insertion of the appropriate county health department certificate relative to the installation of septic tanks and/or wells as specified by the respective county health department. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2018-78, §§ 2, 3, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 1405. - Exempt subdivision plats. 
    An exempt subdivision plat submitted for recording shall show the following information: 
1.  Title block: 
Name of subdivision; 
Registered engineer's or surveyor's name and seal; 
Name of property owners; 
North arrow; 
Bar scale; 
Date; 
Names of streets; 
Label of "Plat." 
2.  Project information: 
Area of subdivision in square feet or acres; 
Total number of proposed lots. 
3.  Signature blocks: 
a.  Preparation of plat and accuracy certificate: 
I, ________, certify that this map was (drawn by me) (drawn under my supervision) from (an actual survey made by me) (an actual survey made under my supervision) (deed description recorded in Book _____, page _____); that the error of closure as calculated by latitudes and departure is 1: __________; that the boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken lines plotted from information found in Book _____, page _____, __________ County Registry; that this map was prepared in accordance with N.C.G.S. § 47-30 as amended. Witness my original signature, registration number and seal, this _____ day of __________, A.D., 20__. 
b. Certificate of ownership and dedication: 
I certify that I am (we are) the owner of the property shown and described hereon, which is in the subdivision jurisdiction of the County of Edgecombe/Nash and that I (we) herby adopt this plat with my (our) free consent. 
Owner:___________ 
Date:_______ 
c.  Notary Public Certificate: 
Subscribed and sworn to me this _____ day of __________, 20__. 
My Commission Expires: ________ ________ 
Notary Public 
d.  Review Officer Certificate: 
State of North Carolina 
County of___________ 
I, ___________ Review Officer of County, certify that the map or plat to which this certification is affixed meets all statutory requirements for recording. 
Review 
Officer___________ 
Date___________ 
e.  Director and Director of Engineering Certificate: By signing below, I/we certify that this plat was approved by the DRC on _______ (date) and meets the City standards for minor subdivisions. 
___________ 
Director of Development 
Services 
Date___________ 
___________ 
Director of 
Engineering 
Date___________ 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 3, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 1406. - Final plat process. 
A.  Submission of the final plat for approval. A final plat shall be drafted pursuant to the preliminary/construction plat as approved by the Rocky Mount Planning Board. Such submission shall include the necessary copies properly signed for city review and recordation in the register of deeds in the appropriate county, along with necessary probate and recording fees. A copy of the appropriate permits from the State of North Carolina relative to water and sewer must accompany the final plat before the director of development services or the director of engineering shall consider approving (signing) the plat. If the development is staged, the final plat shall include only that portion of the approved/construction plat which the subdivider proposed to record and develop at that time. No final plat shall be approved unless and until the subdivider dedicates all lands and improvements required by this LDC and has guaranteed the installation of improvements as provided for in this section. The final plat shall be drawn to specifications as designated in this section and must be signed by the director of engineering and director and recorded in the respective county register of deeds prior to the sale of any of the lots depicted thereon. Approval of the final plat shall become effective upon certification on the plat by the director of development services and the director of engineering that the final plat conforms with the preliminary plat/construction as approved by the planning board. However, if there is any significant deviation as determined by the director in the subdivision of property shown on the final plat and the approved preliminary plat, a revised preliminary plat must be considered by the planning board prior to the approval of the final plat. The city staff shall be responsible for recording a final plat in the appropriate county register of deeds within forty-eight (48) hours of the effective date of the final plat, excluding weekends and legal holidays. 
B.  Specifications of a final plat. A final plat shall be drawn by an engineer or surveyor registered in the State of North Carolina. A final plat shall be drawn in black ink upon a reproducible stable base or other permanent material to a scale of one hundred (100) feet to the inch, which shall be shown in bar graph and numerical forms, and shall have an outside marginal size of eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches, including one and one-half (11/2) inches for binding on the left margin and one-half (1/2) inch border on each of the other sides. Where size of land areas or suitable scale to assure legibility so require, maps may be placed on two (2) or more sheets with appropriate match lines. Any map submitted for recording must be of a material which is acceptable to the register of deeds in the county in which the map is to be recorded. 
    Each final plat shall depict the following specifications: 
1.  Title block: 
a.  Name of subdivision. 
b.  Registered engineer's or surveyor's name and seal. 
c.  North arrow. 
d.  Scale (bar graph mandatory) one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet. 
e.  Date. 
f.  Number of sheets. 
g.  Label of "final plat." 
h.  Minimum setback requirements. 
i.  Zoning of tract(s) in subdivision with any conditional uses. 
j.  Parcel identification number (PIN). 
2.  Technical information: 
a.  North arrow. An accurately positioned north arrow coordination with the bearings shown on the map. Indication shall be made as to whether the north index is true, magnetic or grid. 
b.  Bearings and exact lineal distances. All property lines, street right-of-way lines and curves shall be noted by precise bearings, lineal distances and curvature data. 
c.  Property corner stakes. All corners or points which are marked by monuments or natural objects shall be so identified on the plat. 
d.  Floodway boundary. If a proposed subdivision is located within or partially within a floodway boundary, then such boundaries shall be shown on the plat. 
e.  Data necessary to reestablish. All rights-of-way, watercourses, roadways, crosswalk ways, lots, blocks, boundaries, easements, building and other such improvements shall be accurately depicted where crossing or forming any boundary of the property. 
f.  Minimum building lines. 
g.  Names and designations. The names and property lines of all owners, subdivisions and streets adjoining or crossing the platted area shall be shown. Each block within the subdivision shall be appropriately identified by a block letter, and each lot or tract shall be appropriately identified by a lot number. House numbers shall be designated on each individual lot. 
3.  Certificates and endorsements: 
a.  Preparation of plat and accuracy certificate. 
I, ________, certify that this plat was drawn under my supervision from (an actual survey made under my supervision); or (deed description recorded in Book _____, page _____, etc.); or (other); that the error of closure as calculated by latitude and departure is 1: __________; that the boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken lines plotted from information found in Book _____, page _____; that this plat was prepared in accordance with N.C.G.S. [§] 47-30 as amended. 
Witness my original signature, registration number and seal this _____ day of __________, A.D., 20__. 
___________ 
Surveyor 
___________ 
Registration Number 
b.  Certificate of ownership and dedication: The undersigned hereby acknowledge(s) that (they) (he) (is) (are) owners of the property shown on his plat having acquired title thereto by deed recorded in Book _____, Page _____ of the __________ County Register, and that (they) (he) hereby dedicate(s), unless otherwise noted thereon, to public use, streets, playgrounds, parks, open space, and easements forever all areas as shown or indicated on this plat. The City is authorized to record this plat at the appropriate Register of Deeds. (In the event the dedicated property so dedicated is owned by a corporation, the corporation shall include the signature of the corporate officer, attested by the corporate secretary and the corporate seal.) 
Property Owner Date 
c.  Review Officer Certificate: 
State of North Carolina 
County of 
I,, Review Officer of County, certify that the map or plat to which this certification is affixed meets all statutory requirements for recording. 
Date 
d.  Notary public certificate: 
Subscribed and sworn to me this _____ day of __________, 20__. 
Notary Public___________ 
My Commission Expires:________ 
e.  Director of development services and director of engineering certificate: By signing below, I/we certify that this final plat conforms to the construction plat that was approved by the DRC/Planning Board on ________ (date). 
___________ 
Director of Development 
Services 
Date___________ 
___________ 
Director of Engineering 
Date___________ 
f.  Certificate of improvements. 
Know all men by these present, that I hereby certify that on this, the _____ day of __________, 20__, all required improvements have been installed in this subdivision in an approved manner or that the subdivider has entered into a contract and posted sufficient bond with the City for installation and guaranteeing that all required improvements in this subdivision will be completed on or before the _____ day of __________, 20__. 
___________ 
Director of Engineering 
g.  North Carolina Department of Transportation Construction Standards Certification is not required for this subdivision. 
C.  Final plat approval. 
1.  Completion of improvements. A letter shall be submitted by the subdivider's engineer and approved by the director of engineering stating that all improvements and installations to the subdivision required for its approval under the terms of these rules and regulations have been made, added or installed and done so in accordance herewith; or that a financial guarantee has been posted by the subdivider for any uncompleted improvements. 
2.  Issuance. The director and director of engineering shall sign and execute the final plat, certifying such on the face of the plat, together with other necessary certifications, the acceptance of the plat by the city. 
D.  Acceptance of dedications. Approval for a final plat shall constitute acceptance of any of the public dedications shown on the plat. 
E.  Public right-of-way and easement closures. Requests for the closure of a public right-of-way must be submitted to the city council for approval. After the street closure has been approved by the city council, a plat, combining the street right-of-way into the adjacent lots must be submitted to the DRC for review and approval. Requests for closure of easements shall be submitted to the director in the form of a plat which shall be forwarded to the DRC for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. O-2005-34b, § 1(Att. A), 5-9-05; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 3, 8-13-18) 
CHAPTER 15. - DOUGLAS BLOCK OVERLAY DISTRICT (DBOD) 
    Douglas Block Overlay District (DBOD). The Douglas Block Overlay District (DBOD), described on the following pages, focuses on the preservation and rehabilitation of existing historic structures and their elements where feasible and enables new development in a creative manner where appropriate. The goal of new construction in the DBOD is to ensure compatibility with existing and new development. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-10, § 2, 2-9-09) 

Sec. 1501. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the DBOD is to complement existing downtown initiatives and provide additional development incentives. Specifically: 
 Complement the city's Tier I comprehensive plan, local downtown historic district and downtown streetscape plan to achieve specific land use and design objectives. 
 Accommodate mixed-use buildings and parcels with neighborhood-serving retail, service and office uses on the ground floor and residential units above the non-residential space. 
 Encourage the revitalization of the downtown core, complement the area's character and environmental appeal and encourage the preservation and reuse of historic structures. 
 Promote new infill residential and non-residential development in a comprehensive matter. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-10, § 2, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 1502. - Establishment and designation. 
    The Douglas Block Overlay Zoning District is established in conjunction with the base B-4 and B-5 zoning districts. Except as modified by the overlay zoning district, the provisions of the B-4 and B-5 zoning districts shall apply to all development within the boundary of the designated area. In the event the regulations conflict, the applicable overlay zoning district regulations shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-10, § 2, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 1503. - Design guidelines. 
    All properties located within the Rocky Mount Central City Local Historic District must comply with design guidelines adopted by the historic preservation commission. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-10, § 2, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 1504. - Applicability. 
    The extent and limits of the Douglas Block Overlay District (DBOD) are described as follows: 
BEGINNING at a common corner of Gerald L Holland (DB. 1392 PG. 348) and the City of Rocky Mount (DB. 1420 PG. 932) and having NAD 83 coordinates of 801375.688 and 2357309.25, thence S 79°29'38" E a distance of 118.23 feet; thence S 11°2'1" W a distance of 94.05 feet; thence S 11°37'34" W a distance of 84.36 feet; thence S 10°41'5" W a distance of 53.94 feet; thence S 9°1'16" W a distance of 57.40 feet; thence S 9°8'39" W a distance of 157.31 feet; thence S 17°23'32" W a distance of 83.64 feet; thence S 17°32'21" W a distance of 70.93 feet; thence N 71°41'19" W a distance of 43.45 feet; thence S 16°49'38" W a distance of 31.00 feet; thence S 72°21'29" E a distance of 42.98 feet; thence S 17°31'55" W a distance of 44.92 feet; thence S 72°20'52" E a distance of 45.31 feet; thence S 71°14'15" E a distance of 138.35 feet; thence S 71°22'11" E a distance of 34.82 feet; thence S 70°46'37" E a distance of 20.12 feet; thence S 73°32'23" E a distance of 45.88 feet; thence S 18°21'48" W a distance of 47.61 feet; thence N 75°16'6" W a distance of 29.99 feet; thence N 71°43'6" W a distance of 36.86 feet; thence N 71°36'44" W a distance of 61.70 feet; thence S 17°30'44" W a distance of 61.31 feet; thence S 18°19'59" W a distance of 44.51 feet; thence S 27°45'30" W a distance of 10.74 feet; thence S 43°27'6" W a distance of 13.09 feet; thence S 44°39'3" W a distance of 72.57 feet; thence S 71°15'31" E a distance of 22.18 feet; thence S 18°24'39" W a distance of 47.49 feet; thence N 71°43'11" W a distance of 7.37 feet; thence S 17°54'45" W a distance of 26.01 feet; thence S 18°15'54" W a distance of 146.77 feet; thence N 71°53'21" W a distance of 76.81 feet; thence N 17°8'26" E a distance of 139.12 feet; thence N 17°21'52" E a distance of 20.10 feet; thence N 17°26'33" E a distance of 43.37 feet; thence N 16°29'15" E a distance of 59.90 feet; thence N 17°51'23" E a distance of 9.78 feet; thence N 17°44'40" E a distance of 9.84 feet; thence N 16°45'32" E a distance of 131.78 feet; thence N 71°41'11" W a distance of 363.41 feet; thence N 11°22'24" E a distance of 121.70 feet; thence N 8°47'16" E a distance of 13.09 feet; thence N 11°51'16" E a distance of 238.52 feet; thence S 83°53'43" E a distance of 184.55 feet; thence N 17°45'46" E a distance of 295.89 feet; to the point and place of BEGINNING, containing 5.174 acres, more or less; 
(Ord. No. O-2009-10, § 2, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 1505. - Allowed uses. 
    In order to accomplish the general purpose of promoting residential and mixed use development in downtown, special consideration is given to establishing new land uses in addition to the established uses in the B-5 district. 
    The following list illustrates the land uses that are permitted: 
Table 15-1 Permitted Uses 
Assembly: assembly hall, coliseum, movie theater, stadium Automobile off street parking Automobile off street parking deck/garage commercial Bakery on-premises and retail only Beauty shop/barber service Childcare center in nonresidential district (see note 8 of Table 5-2) Dwelling multifamily Apartments Condos and town homes Farmers' market Financial institutions (bank, savings and loan companies, and other financial activities) Funeral homes Government operation Health club/gym spa Historical preservation commercial use Library Lodge (fraternal organizations) Hotel (see note 16 of Table 5-2) Museum/art gallery Nightclub, bar and tavern Office use (of a doctor, dentist, osteopath, chiropractor, optometrist, physiotherapist, or other medically-oriented profession) Office use (with no on premise stock of goods for sale to the general public and the operations and services which are customarily conducted by written, verbal, or mechanical means Open/passive space Public recreation, such as community center building, parks, museum, playgrounds, and similar facilities operated on a nonprofit basis Private recreation club such as swimming, tennis, racket ball, etc. Radio or television studio activities only Recreation or amusement enterprise (conducted outside a building for profit); (see note 20 of Table 5-2) Restaurant Retailing or servicing with operations conducted and merchandise displayed inside and/or outside a building and not otherwise listed herein (see note 12 and 22 of Table 5-2) School: commercial, trade or vocational (i.e. dance studio, karate, instructional teaching)  
(Ord. No. O-2009-10, § 2, 2-9-09; Ord. No. O-2009-107, § 7, 10-12-09) 
Sec. 1506. - Development criteria. 
    Development regulations-The following regulations (in this section) apply to all infill development in the DBOD. 
A.  Building guidelines. 
 Commercial establishment size limits. The gross floor area of commercial establishments shall not exceed fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
 Indoor/outdoor operations. All permitted uses except farmers market, must be conducted within completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise expressly authorized. This requirement does not apply to off-street parking or loading areas, automated teller machines or outdoor dining areas. 
 Floor-to-floor heights and floor area of ground-floor spaces. 
a.  All commercial floor space provided on the ground floor of a mixed-use building must have a minimum floor-to-ceiling height of ten (10) feet, except where the furnished floor levels rise from the street level because of sloping topography. 
b.  All commercial floor space provided on the ground floor of a mixed-use building must contain the following minimum floor area for each building: 
i.  At least eight hundred (800) square feet or twenty-five (25) percent of the lot area (whichever is greater) on lots with street frontage of less that fifty (50) feet. 
ii.  At least eight hundred (800) square feet or twenty (20) percent of the lot area on lots with fifty (50) feet or more of street frontage. 
c.  Lot area per unit (density). The minimum lot area per unit shall be one thousand (1,000) square feet for mixed-use buildings and one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet for all other buildings. 
 Setbacks. Front setbacks for all new construction (infill) shall be in harmony with the adjacent buildings and the DBOD district. No side or rear setbacks are required. 
 Building height. The maximum heights of new construction (infill) shall be three (3) stories. 
 Orientation of buildings. Buildings must have a front entrance that faces the street r-o-w. Buildings with the rear facing a public parking lot shall have an enhanced façade and entry way that is as presentable for public view as the front entrance. 
B.  Signage. 
 Wall signs. Dimensions: One (1) square foot of linear building frontage per establishment. 
 Free standing signs. Dimensions: One (1) square foot per linear foot of lot frontage up to a maximum of one hundred twenty (120) square feet Placement: Five (5) feet from property line. 
 Prohibited signs. 
a.  Off premise signs are prohibited. 
b.  Portable signs of any kind are prohibited except sandwich board signs. 
c.  Roof top signs are prohibited unless historic in nature. 
 Sidewalk signs. Sandwich board signs shall be allowed in the district but shall not be an impediment to pedestrian traffic. Dimensions: Shall not exceed size and area of four (4) x eight (8) feet. 
C.  Parking requirements. 
 Parking ratio. No off-street parking is required for residential uses or non-residential uses. 
 Loading bays. Any commercial use shall be within two hundred (200) feet of loading bay. Loading area shall be striped and paved in the field. 
 Paving. All parking shall be paved. 
D.  Landscaping. All off street parking spaces shall be within sixty (60) feet of a large tree. Species must be approved by HPC if planting is located in the local historic district. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-10, § 2, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 1507. - Subdivision of land. 
    Individual subdivision of buildings shall be permitted. All subdivision shall comply with the LDC and NC State building code regulations. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-10, § 2, 2-9-09) 
Sec. 1508. - Site plan and re-zoning application. 
    Any approval of development will be based upon a site plan and submitted to the department of development services office for scheduling on the planning board's agenda. 
(Ord. No. O-2009-10, § 2, 2-9-09; Ord. No. O-2018-78, § 2, 8-13-18) 
CHAPTER 16. - REDEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICTS (RDOD) 
    The redevelopment overlay districts (RDOD), described on the following pages, focuses on the preservation and rehabilitation of existing neighborhoods. The goal of new construction in the RDOD'S is to ensure compatibility with existing and new infill development. 

Sec. 1601. - Allowed land uses. 
    All applicable land uses shall comply with the underlying zoning district. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, § 2, 1-11-17) 
Sec. 1602. - Setbacks. 
    All properties located within a RDOD district shall have a minimum front yard of ten (10) feet and any relief given to side and rear yard setbacks must be approved by the planning board with the submission of a plat. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, § 2, 1-11-17) 
Sec. 1603. - Exceptions. 
    Steps, fire escapes, stairways, external closets, balconies and chimneys may only project into a minimum yard not more than four (4) feet and an unenclosed porch or deck may project into the required front or rear yard not more than ten (10) feet. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, § 2, 1-11-17) 
Sec. 1604. - Applicability. 
    The extent and limits of the redevelopment overlay districts (RDOD) are described as follows: 
A.  Beal Street. The Beal Street redevelopment area is part of the Happy Hill neighborhood. The Beal Street redevelopment area is a ten-block area bounded by West Thomas Street, North Harris Street, Sunset Avenue, and Middle Street. This neighborhood area is comprised of 166 parcels totaling 30.54 acres in size. 
B.  Holly Street. Beginning at a stake at the intersection of the southern property line of Holly Street with the eastern property line of Myrtle Avenue; thence along the southern property line of Holly Street S. 67° E. 150 feet to a stake; thence S. 23° W. 100 feet to a stake; thence N. 67° W. 150 feet to a stake in the eastern property line of Myrtle Avenue; thence along the eastern property line of Myrtle Avenue N. 23° E. 100 feet to the point of beginning. It being Lots 25, 25 1/2 and 27, Block L, as shown on map of Shore and Huffines property recorded in Book 150, Page 9, Edgecombe Registry. 
C.  Ravenwood Crossing. 
1.  Tract 1. Beginning at an existing iron pipe located at the common property corner between the Powell Properties of Edgecombe County, LLC (DB 2070, Pg 293) and The City of Rocky Mount (DB 2625, Pg 21), and being the northwest corner of the The City of Rocky Mount property and having NC State Plane Coordinates of N=793,329.9936 and E=2,349,387.6965 measured in US survey feet thence from said point S 6l° 03' 18" E-1.37 feet to a new iron pipe, said point being in the southern right of way of Western Raleigh Boulevard and being the point and place of BEGINNING. Thence along the southern line of the Powell Properties of Edgecombe County, LLC property S 61° 03' 18" E-1614.88 feet to a point; thence cornering and leaving the Powell Properties of Edgecombe County, LLC line S 28° 56' 42' W-112.42 feet to a point in the proposed northern right-of-way of Ravenwood Drive, said Ravenwood Drive (having a proposed right-of-way of 50 feet); thence cornering and along the proposed right-of-way of Ravenwood Drive N 61° 07' 57' W-639.39 feet to a point; thence continuing along the right-of-way of Ravenwood Drive a curve to the left with chord direction and distance of N 72° 25' 14" W-99.36 feet and a total arc length of 100.00 feet with radius of 253.69 feet to a point, a point of reverse curvature; thence continuing a curve to the right with chord direction and distance of N 72° 23'24'W-55.88 feet and a total arc length of 56.25 feet with radius of .30 feet to a point; thence N 61° 04' 00" W-769.18 feet to a point; thence a curve to the right with chord direction and distance of N 4go 47' 46" W-76.37 feet and a total arc length of 76.86 feet with radius of 195.37 feet to a point; thence cornering and continuing along the right-of-way of Ravenwood Drive a sight triangle N 13° 54' 53" E-64.95 feet to a point located in the eastern right-of-way of Western Raleigh Boulevard; thence coming and along the right-of-way of Western Raleigh Boulevard a curve to the left with chord direction and distance of N 58° 29' 39" E-76.29 feet and a total arc length of 76.29 feet with radius of 2014.44 feet to the point of BEGINNING. Containing 213,043.02 square feet or 4.89 acres and being a portion of the property owned by the City of Rocky Mount as recorded in Deed Book 2625, Page 21 of the Nash County Registry. 
This property also contains 1,301.18 square feet or 0.03 acres a portion of the existing Ravenwood right-of-way that is proposed to be abandoned by municipal approval. 
2.  Tract 2. Beginning at an existing iron pipe located at the common property corner between the Powell Properties of Edgecombe County, LLC (DB 2070, Pg 293) and the City of Rocky Mount (DB 2625,Pg 21), and being the northwest corner of the The City of Rocky Mount property and having NC State Plane Coordinates of N=793,329.9936 and E=2,349,387.6965 measured in US survey feet thence from said point S 61° 03' 18" E-1.37 feet to a new iron pipe; thence S 61° 03' 18" E-1614.88 feet to a point; thence S 28° 56' 42' W-112.42 feet to a point; thence S 85° 18' 10" 'W-90.44 to the feet to a point in the proposed southern right-of-way of Ravenwood Drive, (having a proposed right-of-way of 50 feet) to the point and place of BEGINNING. Thence cornering and along the right-of-way of Starling Way S 15° 59' 47" E-14.11 feet to a point in the right-of-way of Lark Lane; thence continuing along the right-of-way of Starling Way S 29° 08' 23" W-7 4.13 feet to a point; thence a curve to the right with chord direction and distance of S 30° 18' 24 W-22.54 feet and a total arc length of 22.54 feet with radius of 574.33 feet to apoint; thence cornering and leaving Starling Way N 61° 04' 32' W-143.21 feet to a point, said point being the eastern corner of Lot 29, Ravenwood, Section 5 (MB 11, Pg 31), thence continuing along the eastern line of Lot 29, N 61° 02' 57" 'W-110.00 feet to a point in the existing eastern right-of-way of Lark Lane, the northern corner of Lot 29; thence N 66° 00' 15" W-5.15 feet to a point in the proposed right-of-way of Lark Lane; thence cornering and continuing along the proposed right-of-way of Lark Lane N 28° 52' 03" E-96.81 feet to a point; thence N 73° 52' 03" 8-14.14 feet to a point located in the proposed southern right-of-way of Ravenwood Drive; thence cornering and continuing along the right-of-way of Ravenwood Drive S 61° 07' 57' E-239.29 feet to the point of BEGINNING. Containing 27,495.47 square feet or 0.63 acres and being a portion of the property owned by the City of Rocky Mount as recorded in Deed Book 2625, Page 21 of the Nash County Registry. 
3.  Tract 3. Beginning at an existing iron pipe located at the common property corner between the Powell Properties of Edgecombe County, LLC (DB 2070, Pg 293) and The City of Rocky Mount (DB 2625, Pg 21), and being the northwest corner of the City of Rocky Mount property and having NC State Plane Coordinates of N=793,329.9936 and B=2,349,387.6965 measured in US survey feet thence from said point S 61° 03' 18" E-1.37 feet to a new iron pipe; thence S 61° 03' 18" E-1614.880 feet to a point; thence S 28° 56' 42" W-112.42 feet to a point; thence S 85° 18' 10" W-90.44 to the feet to a point in the proposed southern right-of-way of Ravenwood Drive, (having a proposed right-of-way of 50 feet) to a point; thence S 15° 59' 47" E-14.11 feet to a point; thence S 29° 08'23" W-74.13 feet to a point; thence a curve to the right with chord direction and distance of S 30° 18' 24' W-22.54 feet and a total arc length of 22.54 feet with radius of 574.33 feet to a point, thence N 61° 04' 32" W-143.21 feet to a point; thence N 61° 02' 57" W-110.00 feet to a point; thence N 66° 00' 15" W-5.15 feet to a point; thence N 66° 00' 15" W-50.11 feet to a point located in the proposed eastern right-of-way of Lark Lane, the point and place of BEGINNING. Thence N 66° 00' 15" W-4.87 feet to a point in the existing right-of-way of Lark Lane, the point being the eastern corner of Lot 25, Ravenwood, Section 5 (MB 11, Pg 31), thence continuing along the northern line of Lot 25, N 60° 57'57" W-100.32 to a point; thence N 59° 09' 27" W-40.11 feet to a point, the common corner of Lot 25 and the eastern corner of Lot 1, Block B, Ravenwood, Section 2 (MB 9, Pg 110); thence along the northern line of Lot 1, N 59° 07' 00" W-116.18 feet to a point, the common comer of Lot 1 and Lot 2; thence continuing along the northern line of Lot 2, N 75° 51' 00" W-69.02 feet to a point; thence N 80° 40' 00" W-88.37 feet to a point in the line of Lot 19, Block B, Ravenwood, Section 1 (MB 9, Pg 65); thence cornering and along the line of Lot 19, N 26° 51' 00" E-117.00 feet to a point in the existing right-of-way of Ravenwood Drive; thence N 18° 59' 00" E-5.60 to a point in the proposed right-of-way of Ravenwood Drive; thence cornering and along the proposed right-of-way of Ravenwood Drive (having a proposed right-of-way of 50 feet); a curve to the left with chord direction and distance of S 72° 28' 19" E-74.97 feet and a total arc length of 75.46 feet with radius of 192.30 feet to a point, a point of reverse curvature; thence continuing a curve to the right with chord direction and distance of S 72° 25' 14' E-79.77 feet and a total arc length of 80.29 feet with radius of 203.69 feet to a point; thence S 61° 07' 57" E-254.81 feet to a point; S 16° 05' 24" E-14.05 feet to a point located in the proposed western right-of-way of Lark Lane; thence cornering and along the proposed right-of-way of Lark Lane S 28" 52' 03" W-101.12 feet to the point of BEGINNING. Containing 45,883.00 square feet or 1.05 acres and being a portion of the property owned by the City of Rocky Mount as recorded in Deed Book 2625, Page 21 of the Nash County Registry. 
4.  Tract 4. Beginning at an existing iron pipe located at the common property corner between the Powell Properties of Edgecombe County, LLC (DB 2070, Pg 293) and The City of Rocky Mount (DB 2625, Pg 21), and being the northwest corner of the The City of Rocky Mount property and having NC State Plane Coordinates of N=793,329.9936 and E=2,349,387.6965 measured in US survey feet thence from said point S 61° 03' 18" E-1.37 feet to a new iron pipe; thence a curve to the right with chord direction and distance of S 58° 29' 39" W-76.29 feet and a total arc length of 76.29 feet with radius of 2014.44 feet to a point; thence S 13° 54' 53" W-64.95 feet; thence a curve to the left with chord direction and distance of S 49° 47' 45' E-76.37 feet and a total arc length of 76.86 feet with radius of 195.37 feet to a point; thence S 61° 04' 00" E-517.86 feet to a point; thence S 57° 38' 00" W-57.00 feet to a point located in the proposed southern right-of-way of Ravenwood Drive, the point and place of BEGINNING. Thence S 57° 38' 00" W-195.64 feet along the western line of Block A, Section 1, Ravenwood (MB 9, Pg 65) to a point; thence cornering and leaving Ravenwood N 60° 20' 38" W-89.17 to a point; thence cornering N 28° 56' 42 E-170.48 feet to proposed southern right-of-way of Ravenwood Drive; thence cornering and along the proposed southern right-of-way of Ravenwood Drive, S 61° 04' 00" E-183.08 to a point the point of BEGINNING. Containing 23,308.89 square feet or 0.54 acres and being a portion of the property owned by the City of Rocky Mount as recorded in Deed Book 2625, Page 2l of the Nash County Registry. 
5.  Tract 5. Beginning at an existing iron pipe located at the common property comer between the Powell Properties of Edgecombe County, LLC (DB 2070, Pg 293) and The City of Rocky Mount (DB 2625, Pg 21), and being the northwest corner of the The City of Rocky Mount property and having NC State Plane Coordinates of N=793,329.9936 and E=2,349,387.6965 measured in US survey feet thence from said point S 61° 03' 18" E-1.37 feet to a new iron pipe; thence a curve to the right with chord direction and distance of S 58° 29' 39" W-76.29 feet and a total arc length of 76.29 feet with radius of 2014.44 feet to a point; thence S 13° 54' 53" W-64.95 feet; thence a curve to the left with chord direction and distance of S 49° 47' 45" E-76.37 feet and a total arc length of 76.86 feet with radius of 195.37 feet to a point; thence S 61° 04' 00" E-517.86 feet to a point; thence S 57° 38' 00" W-57.00 feet to a point; N 6l° 04' 00" W-183.08 to a point; thence N 61° 04' 00" V/-50.00 to a point located in the proposed southern right-of-way of Ravenwood Drive, the point and place of BEGINNING. Thence cornering and leaving the proposed southern right-of-way of Ravenwood Drive, S 28° 56' 42' W-169.85 feet to a point; N 60° 20' 38" W-104.02 to a point, and being the eastern corner of the Saleh Hizam Abdullah property (DB 2605, Pg 189); thence along with the line of Abdullah N 60° 20' 38" W-93.81 feet to a point; thence cornering and leaving the line of Abdullah, N 28° 56' 42" E-167.35 feet to a point located in the proposed southern right-of-way of Ravenwood Drive; thence along the proposed southern right-of-way of Ravenwood Drive S 61° 04' 00" E-197.82 feet to a point the point of BEGINNING. Containing 33,352.01 square feet or 0.77 acres and being a portion of the property owned by the City of Rocky Mount as recorded in Deed Book 2625, Page 21 of the Nash County Registry. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, § 2, 1-11-17) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1967 CODE 
 This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1967 Code, as updated through July 13, 1987 which are included herein. Sections of the 1967 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto. See the table immediately following this table. 
1967 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-3 1-1-1-3 1-4-1-6 1-10 1-7, 1-8 2-27, 2-28 1-9 1-12 1-10 1-14 1-11 1-13 1-12 2-29 2-1, 2-2 2-1 2-3, 2-4 2-186, 2-187 2-5, 2-6 2-189, 2-190 2-7 2-188 2-10 2-26 2-13-2-17 16-26-16-30 2-19-2-22 16-46-16-49 2-25-2-33 16-66-16-74 2-35-2-37 16-75-16-77 2-37.1 16-78 2-38-2-40 16-79-16-81 2-40.1 16-82 2-41 16-83 2-41.1-2-41.3 16-84-16-86 2-42-2-52 16-101-16-111 2-56-2-68 16-126-16-138 2-70-2-74 16-139-16-143 2-78-2-81 16-156-16-159 2-136-2-141 2-56-2-61 2-144-2-148 2-96-2-100 2-151-2-154 2-151-2-154 2-166-2-169 2-131-2-134 2-175-2-178 2-166-2-169 2-181-2-183 2-76-2-78 3-1 10-151 3-2 19-2 3-3, 3-4 14-1, 14-2 3-5, 3-6 10-51 3-7, 3-8 20-3 6-4-6-6 20-161-20-163 7-1-7-3 6-1-6-3 7-5-7-12 6-4-6-11 7-15 6-14 7-17-7-31 6-15-6-29 71/2-11 12-26 71/2-12, 71/2-13 12-27 71/2-14, 71/2-15 12-29, 12-30 8-2, 8-3 8-1, 8-2 8-13, 8-14 8-26, 8-27 8-17, 8-18 8-28, 8-29 8-20-8-23 8-30-8-33 9-1, 9-2 10-71, 10-72 9-3 10-74 9-4, 9-5 10-76 9-6 10-75 9-17, 9-18 18-1, 18-2 9-20 18-7 18-9 18-12 10-1 21-9 10-6 21-9 10-7 21-11 10-10 21-10 10-22-10-27 10-26-10-31 10-39 10-1 10-50, 10-51 10-71, 10-72 10-52 10-74 11-1-11-22 13-26-13-47 12-2 19-1 12-4, 12-5 14-3, 14-4 12-10 8-34 12-13.1, 12-13.2 10-152, 10-153 12-16.1 13-206 13-218 12-16.1(a) 13-207 12-16.1(c)(1) 13-208 12-16.1(c)(2)-(5) 13-209 12-16.1(c)(5) 13-214 12-16.1(d) 13-215 12-16.1(e) 13-217 12-21 10-152 12-25 14-5 12-32(A) 3-2 12-32(B) 3-1 12-32(C), 12-32(D) 3-3, 3-4 12-32(D)(1)- 
12-32(D)(4) 3-5-3-8 12-32(E)-(G) 3-9 12-42 19-81 12-43(a) 19-85 19-90 12-43(c), 12-43(d) 19-86, 19-87 12-43(f) 19-88 12-45 19-89 13-1 15-2 13-2 15-1 13-3 15-29 13-4-13-6 15-26-15-28 14-12 13-111 14-13 13-112 15-30 14-14-14-18 13-113-13-117 14-30 13-66 14-31-14-41 13-86-13-96 15-7 13-136 15-38-15-42 13-151-13-155 16-1-16-5 20-201-20-205 16-8, 16-9 20-206, 20-207 161/2-1 17-1 161/2-2 17-3 161/2-3 17-2 161/2-4 17-4 161/2-5(a)-161/2-5(c) 17-5-17-7 161/2-6-161/2-21 17-8-17-23 17-1 19-11 17-2, 17-3 19-36, 19-37 17-4 19-61 17-5 19-11 17-6, 17-7 19-3, 19-4 17-8-17-10 19-38-19-40 17-11 19-5 17-12 19-62 17-13, 17-14 19-6, 19-7 17-16 19-63 17-17 19-10 17-18 19-8 17-19 5-5 17-20 19-41 17-21 19-64 17-33-17-37 19-42 171/2-1-171/2-4 15-51-15-54 171/2-6-171/2-12 15-55-15-61 18-1 22-26 18-2 22-63 22-65 22-67 18-3 22-70 18-4-18-8 22-28-22-32 18-9 22-1 18-10-18-18 22-33-22-41 18-19 22-27 18-30, 18-31 22-61, 22-62 18-32 22-66 18-33 22-68 18-34 22-64 18-35 22-69 18-46-18-53 22-86-22-93 19-1, 19-2 20-1, 20-2 19-14 19-65 19-16 19-9 19-27, 19-28 20-26, 20-27 19-61 20-46 19-65, 19-66 20-47, 20-48 19-77-19-80 20-76-20-79 19-91 20-51 19-92, 19-93 20-49, 20-50 19-94 20-181 19-105-19-108 20-96-20-99 19-123-19-125 20-121-20-123 19-128-19-134 20-124-20-130 19-137 20-131 19-140-19-144 20-132-20-136 19-174-19-177 20-137-20-140 20-1, 20-2 21-1, 21-2 20-2.1 21-3 20-3-20-6 21-4-21-7 20-7 21-3 20-8 21-8 21-1 5-2 22-1 5-1 22-2-22-9 5-106-5-113 22-10-22-16 5-26-5-32 22-17, 22-18 5-66, 5-67 22-19-22-27 5-81-5-89 22-42, 22-43 5-3, 5-4 22-43.1-22-43.11 5-131-5-141 22-44-22-47 2-116-2-119 22-60 21-27 22-61 21-26 22-62-22-64 21-28-21-30 22-66-22-77 21-32-21-43 22-80 21-44 24-1-24-5 9-1-9-5 24-7 9-6 24-12-24-34 9-7-9-29 24-38-24-47 9-30-9-39 25-1 11-27 25-2 11-26 25-3-25-10 11-71-11-78 25-11 11-28 25-12-25-20 11-47-11-55 25-21 11-46 25-22, 25-23 11-29, 11-30 27-1-27-8 7-1-7-8  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
 This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1967 Code, as updated through July 13, 1987, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1967 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede July 13, 1987, but which were never included in the 1967 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 10-19-67 3 1-8 1976-32b  5-10-76 1 App. B, § VIII.B 2, 3 App. B, § VII.A 4, 5 App. B, § IV 1976-77 11- 8-76 2 App. B, § VII.A (notes) 3-5 App. B, § VII.A 1977-14  2-14-77 5 App. B, § VII.B 6 App. B, § VII.A 7 App. B, § VII.A, App. B, § VII.B 1977-63  7-11-77 1, 2 App. B, § VII.B 1977-67  7-25-77 1 App. B, § IV 2 App. B, § VII.A 3 App. B, § VIII.B 1977-69  8- 8-77 1 App. B, § VII.B 2 App. B, § VII.C.1 1977-76  9-12-77 1 App. B, § VII.B 2 App. B, § VIII.B 1977-77  9-12-77 1 App. A, § 3.3 1977-88 10-24-77 1 App. B, § XIII.C 1977-97 11-28-77 1 App. B, § VII.A 2 App. B, § VII.A (notes) 1978-3  1- 8-79 3, 4 App. B, § XIV 1978-10  2-13-78 1 App. A, § 2.9 2 App. A, § 3.3 3 App. A, § 3.6 1978-11  2-13-78 1 App. B, § IV 2 App. B, § VII.C.5 1978-29  4-24-78 1 App. B, § VII.E 1978-38  6-12-78 1 App. B, § VII.B 2 App. B, § IX.C 1978-51  7-10-78 1 App. B, § IX.B 1978-52  7-10-78 1 App. A, § 3.3 1978-57  8-14-78 1 App. B, § IX.C 1978-59  8-14-78 1 App. B, § XIV 1978-60  8-14-78 1 App. B, § VII.E 1978-69  9-11-78 1 App. B, § VII.C.5 1978-83 10- 9-78 1 App. B, § VII.B 2 App. B, § VIII.B 3 App. B, § VII.A 5 App. B, § IX.C 6 App. B, § IX.A 1978-98 11-13-78 1 App. B, § VI.C 1979-3  1- 8-79 1, 2 App. B, § XIII.E, App. B, § XIII.F 1979-18  3-12-79 1 App. A, § 3.9 1979-28  5-14-79 1, 2 App. B, § VII.C.1, App. B, § VII.C.2 3 App. B, § VII.C.4 4 App. B, § VII.A 5 App. B, § IV 6(a), 6(b) App. B, § IV 6(c) App. B, § V.C 6(d), 6(e) App. B, § VII.A, App. B, § VII.B 6(f), 6(g) App. B, § VIII.B 6(h) App. B, § X.K 6(i) App. B, § XI.A 1979-29  5-14-79 1 App. A, § 3.6 1979-41  7- 9-79 1 App. B, § VII.B 1979-71 11-12-79 3 App. B, § VII.F 1980-?? 11-12-79 1, 2 App. B, § IV 1980-2  1-14-80 1 App. B, § XIII.D 1980-14  2-11-80 1 App. B, § VII.E 1980-22  4-28-80 1-3 App. B, § VIII.B 1980-53  8-11-80 1 App. B, § VII.C.4 1980-62  9- 8-80 1 App. B, § VII.A (notes) 1980-70 10-27-80 1, 2 App. B, § VII.A 1980-77 11-10-80 1 App. B, § XIII.C 1980-79 11-10-80 1 App. B, § VII.A (notes) 1981-3  1-12-81 1 App. B, § VII.A 2 App. B, § VII.A (notes) 3 App. B, § VIII.B 1981-9  2- 9-81 1 App. B, § IV 1981-12  3- 9-81 1 App. B, § IV 2 App. B, § VII.B 3 App. B, § X.I(e)(5) 4 App. B, § X.J 1981-19  4-13-81 1 App. B, § VII.B 1981-28  5-11-81 1 App. B, § VII.B 1981-38  6- 8-81 1 App. B, § V.C 1981-46  7-27-81 1 App. B, § VIII.B 2 App. B, § VII.A (notes) 3 App. B, § IV 4 App. B, § VII.B 5 App. B, § VII.C.5 1981-64  9-14-81 1 App. B, § VII.A 2 App. B, § VII.A (notes) 3 App. B, § VII.A 4 App. B, § VIII.B 1981-71 10-21-81 1 App. B, § VII.A 1981-78 11-16-81 1 App. B, § IV 2 App. B, § VII.A 3 App. B, § VII.G 4 App. B, § VII.C.2 1981-79 11-16-81 1 App. A, § 1.5 2 App. A, § 2.4, App. A, § 2.5 App. A, § 2.7 3-5 App. A, § 2.5-App. A, § 2.7 6, 7 App. A, § 2.9, App. A, § 2.10 8-11 App. A, § 3.1-App. A, § 3.4 12 App. A, § 3.9 1981-87 12-14-81 1-7 App. B, § VII.E 1982-11  3- 8-82 1 App. B, § VII.C.1 1982-12  3- 8-82 1 App. B, § XIV 1982-40  7-12-82 1 App. B, § IV 2 App. B, § VII.A 3 App. B, § IX.C 1982-61 10-11-82 1 App. B, § VII.A 1982-70 11- 8-82 1 App. B, § IX.C 1983-2  1-10-83 1 App. B, § IV 2, 3 App. B, § VII.A 1983-6  2-14-83 1, 2 App. B, § VII.A 3, 4 App. B, § VIII.B 1983-10  3-14-83 1, 2 App. B, § VII.A (notes) 3 App. B, § VII.G 1983-31  7-11-83 1 App. B, § VI.C 2 App. B, § VII.A 3 App. B, § VII.A (notes) 4 App. B, § VII.B 5, 6 App. B, § VII.C.1 7 App. B, § VII.C.2 8 App. B, § IX.A 1983-32  7-11-83 1 App. A, § 2.7 1983-36  7-11-83 1 App. B, § IV 2 App. B, § VII.A (notes) 3 App. B, § VII.B 4 App. B, § VIII.B 5 App. B, § X.K 1983-42  9-12-83 1 App. B, § VII.A 2 App. B, § VII.A (notes) 3 App. B, § VII.C.4 1983-55 12-12-83 1, 2 App. B, § IV 3, 4 App. B, § VII.A 5, 6 App. B, § VIII.B 1984-16  4- 9-84 1 App. B, § XIII.D 1984-17  4- 9-84 2 App. A, § 2.9 1984-23  5-14-84 1 App. B, § VII.C 1984-39  7- 9-84 1 App. B, § VII.B 1984-51  9-10-84 1 App. A, § 2.1 2 App. A, § 7.1-App. A, § 7.4 1984-65 12- 3-84 1 App. B, § IV 2-4 App. B, § X.K 5 App. B, § X.L 1984-68 12- 3-84 1 App. B, § VII.A 1985-9  2-11-85 2 App. B, § VII.C 1985-10  2-11-85 1 App. A, § 2.7 2 App. A, § 2.10 3 App. A, § 3.2 1985-17  4- 1-85 1 App. B, § IV 2 App. B, § VII.C.4 1985-22  4- 1-85 1 App. B, § VII.A 2 App. B, § VII.A(notes) 3 App. B, § VII.B 4, 5 App. B, § VII.C.4 6 App. B, § VIII.B 1985-46  7- 8-85 1 App. B, § XIV 1985-50  8-12-85 1 App. B, § IV 1985-58  9- 9-85 1 App. B, § IV 2 App. B, § VII.A (notes) 3 App. B, § VIII.B 1985-70 10-14-85 1 App. B, § VII.B 1986-8  2-24-86 1 App. B, § IV 2 App. B, § VII.A 3 App. B, § VII.A (notes) 1986-33  4-14-86 1 App. B, § XIII.A 2, 3 App. B, § XIII.C 1986-48  6- 9-86 1 App. B, § VII.C 1986-54  7-14-86 1 App. B, § IV 2 App. B, § VII.A 3 App. B, § VIII.B 1986-75  9- 8-86 1, 2 App. B, § VII.A, App. B, § VII.B 1986-81 10-13-86 1 App. B, § VII.A 2 App. B, § VII.A (notes) 3 App. B, § VII.B 1987-3  1-12-87 1 App. B, § IV 2 App. B, § VII.A 3 App. B, § VII.A (notes) 5 App. B, § VIII.B 1987-18  2- 9-87 1 App. B, § VIII.A 1987-21  3- 9-87 1 App. A, § 3.4 1987-23  3-30-87 1 App. B, § VII.A (notes) 2 App. B, § VIII.B 1987-34  6- 8-87 1 App. B, § VIII.B 2 App. B, § VII.B 1987-43  7-13-87 1 App. A, § 2.6 2 App. A, § 3.9 1987-87  5-11-87 1 App. B, § VIII.B 0-87-52  9-14-87 1, 2 App. B, § IV 0-87-60 10-12-87 1, 2 App. B, § VII.A 3 App. B, § VII.A (notes) 0-87-65 11- 9-87 1 App. B, § VII.C.4 2 App. B, § XIII.D 0-87-72 12- 7-87 1 App. B, § VII.A 2-5 App. B, § VII.C.1-App. B, § VII.C.4 6 App. B, § X.I 0-87-73 12- 7-87 1 App. A, § 3.6 0-88-4  1-11-88 1 16-132 0-88-8  2- 8-88 1 App. B, § IX.C 0-88-24  3-14-88 1 App. B, § VII.A 0-88-25  3-14-88 1 6-13 0-88-26  3-14-88 1 10-107 0-88-57  6-13-88 1 App. B, § VII.E 0-88-58  6-13-88 1 App. A, § 3.1 2, 3 App. A, § 3.4, App. A, § 3.5 0-88-73  9-12-88 1 App. B, § IV 2 App. B, § VII.A 3 App. B, § VIII.B 0-88-74  9-12-88 1 App. B, § IX.C 0-88-75  9-12-88 1, 2 App. B, § V.A 0-88-77  9-12-88 1(2-166)-1(2-169) 2-131-2-134 0-88-81  9-26-88 1 18-12 0-88-91 11-14-88 1 App. B, § VII.B(note 5) 0-88-98 12-12-88 1 App. B, § V.A 0-89-2  1- 9-89 1 App. B, § X.A 2(a)       Rnbd App. B. § X.I       as App. B, § X.N       Amnd App. B, § X.A  (b)       Rnbd App. B. § X.J       as App. B, § X.O  (c)       Rnbd App. B. § X.L       as App. B, § X.P       Amnd App. B, § X.F  (d)       Rnbd App. B. § X.M       as App. B, § X.Q       Amnd App. B, § X.E  (e)       Rnbd App. B. § X.N       as App. B, § X.R 3       Added App. B, §§ X.I, X.J, X.L, X.M 4 App. B, § X.N(b), (f) 5 App. B, § X.E(1) 6 App. B, § XI.B.2 7 App. B, § XI.B.6 0-89-14  2-13-89 1, 2 App. B, § IV 3 App. B, § VII.A 4 App. B. § VII.C.6 5 App. B, § VIII.B 0-89-16  2-13-89 1(22-100-22-119) 5-161-5-179 0-89-18  2-17-89 1 22-33 0-89-22  3- 6-89 1 App. B, § IV 2 App. B, § VI.C 3 App. B, § VII.A 4 App. B, § VIII.B 5 App. B, § VII.C.1 6 App. B, § VII.C.2 7 App. B, § VII.C.3 8 App. B, § VII.C.4 9 App. B, § VII.C.6 0-89-23  3- 6-89 1 App. A, § 2.3(6) 2 App. A, § 2.6(5)(c) 3 App. A, § 2.6(6) 4(a) App. A, § 2.9(2)(d)  (b) App. A, § 2.9(2)(e)  (c) App. A, § 2.9(2)(g) 0-89-24  3- 6-89 1 App. B, § IV 2 App. B. § VII.G 0-89-25  3- 6-89 1 App. A, § 1.5 2 App. A, § 2.2 3 App. A. § 3.93 0-89-27  3-20-89 1 20-141 0-89-42  6-26-89 1 22-89 0-89-43  6-26-89 1 15-59 0-89-45  6-26-89 1 20-121(a), (b) 2 20-139 0-89-50  6-26-89 1, 2 21-26 3 21-28(a)(27) 4 21-41(a) 0-89-52  6-26-89 1 16-86(b) 0-89-53  6-26-89 2 18-20 0-89-59  7-10-89 1 App. B, § XII.B 2 App. B, § XII.C 3 App. B, § XIV(b) 0-89-62  7-10-89 1 App. B, § IV 2 App. B, § VII.A 3 App. B, § VII.A(note 7) 3A App. B, § VIII.B 0-89-74  8-28-89 1(18-1-18-20) 22-1-22-20  (18-30-18-37) 22-41-22-48  (18-46-18-53) 22-61-22-68 0-89-78  9-11-89 1 App. B, § X.O 0-89-82  9-25-89 1(12-34, 12-35) 14-8 0-89-88 10-9-89 1 App. A, § 2.6(4)(g) 2 App. A, § 2.9 3 App. A, § 2.10 0-89-91 11-13-89 1(12-36) 14-9 0-89-97 12- 4-89 1 App. B, § XII.D(b) 2 App. B. § X.L(2) 0-89-98 12-18-89 1 22-4 2 22-10(c) 3 22-18 4 22-20(c) 0-90-2  1- 8-90 1, 2 App. B, § VIII.B 0-90-13  2-26-90 Adopting Ordinance, 
p. vii 0-90-14  2-26-90 1 22-94-22-96 0-90-21  3-12-90 1 16-87.2 0-90-28  5-14-90 1 App. B, § VII.B(note 5) 0-90-30  6- 4-90 1 App. A, § 3.2(d)(2) 0-90-31  6- 4-90 1 App. B, § VIII.B 0-90-33  6- 4-90 1(a) 3-5(c)  (b) 3-9(a), (c) 0-90-34  6- 4-90 1(a) 5-67  (b) 5-133(3)  (c) 5-135(a) 0-90-35  6- 4-90 1(a) 13-43  (b) 13-47(a)  (c) 13-89  (d) 13-112(a)  (e) 13-209(d)  (f) 13-210(a)  (g) 13-212(d), (e)  (h) 13-213(a) 0-90-36  6- 4-90 1 15-30(f) 0-90-37  6- 4-90 1 20-26 0-90-38  6- 4-90 1 22-64 0-90-55  7- 9-90 1 App. B, § VII.A(note 9) 0-90-56  8-13-90 1 App. B, § VII.C.2 0-90-57  8-13-90 1 15-56 2       Rpld 15-54(e), 15-58(h) 0-90-65  9-10-90 1 App. B, § VIII.B 2 App. B, § X.K 0-90-66  9-24-90 1 18-1 2 18-8 0-90-67  9-24-90 1 20-121(b) 2 20-121(d) 0-90-68 10- 8-90 1 App. B, § IV 2 App. B, § VII.B 3(a) App. B, §§ VII.C.1-VII.C.3  (b) App. B, § VII.C.4  (c) App. B, § VII.C.5  (d) App. B, § VII.C.6 4       Added App. B, § XI 5       Rnbd App. B, § XI(XI.A, XI.B)       as App. B, § XII(XII.A, XII.B)       Rnbd App. B, § XII(XII.A-XII.D)       as App. B, § XIII(XIII.A-XIII.D)       Rnbd App. B, § XIII(XIII.A-XIII.F)       as App. B, § XIV 
(XIV.A-XIV.F)       Rnbd App. B, § XIV       as App. B, § XV       Rnbd App. B, § XV(XV.A-XV.D)       as App. B, § XVI 
(XVI.A-XVI.D) 0-90-75 10- 8-90 1(a) 22-10(c)  (b) 22-10(d)  (c) 22-10(e) 2 22-18 0-90-84 10-29-90 1 3-9(e) 0-90-87 11-12-90 1 App. B, § XII.B 0-91-4  1-14-91 1 4-1 2 4-4(a) 3 4-35-4-38 0-91-6  1-28-91 1 App. A, § 3.3(c)(1), (5)-(7) 0-91-8  2-11-91 1 16-133 0-91-17  3-25-91 1       Rpld 10-176-10-195       Added 10-176-10-192 0-91-21  4- 8-91 1 App B, § VI.A 2 App. B, § VII.A 3 App. B, § VII.C 4 App. B, § VIII.B 5 App. B, § IX.C 0-91-22  4- 8-91 1 App. A, § 2.10 0-91-37  6-10-91 1 App. A, § 3.3 0-91-40  6-24-91 1 18-12 0-91-45  7- 8-91 1 16-26-16-30, 16-46-16-49, 16-66-16-87, 
16-88.2, 16-101-16-111, 16-126-16-143, 16-156-16-159 0-91-56  9-23-91 1       Added App. B, § XVI 2       Rnbd App. B, § XVI       as App. B, § XVII 0-92-2  1-13-92 1 App. A, § 3.2(d)(5) 0-92-3  1-13-92 1 App. B, § IV 2, 3 App. B, § X.K 0-92-8  1-13-92 1 15-27 0-92-11  2-24-92 1 Art. VI, 
§§ 13-240-13-268 0-92-23  4-13-92 1(a) 16-72(c) (b) 16-133 (c) 16-142 0-92-42  6- 1-92 1 20-136 0-92-48  6-22-92 1 App. B, § V(V.A) 0-92-50  6-22-92 1 22-1 2       Rnbd 22-41-22-46       as 22-2 3       Rnbd 22-47       as 22-3 4 22-4 5 22-10 6 22-11 7 22-15 8 22-18 9 22-19 10(a)       Rnbd 22-48       as 22-21 (b) 22-21(6) 0-92-60  7-13-92 1 App. B, § VIII.B 0-92-63  8-10-92 1       Rpld App. A, §§ 2.2-2.5       Added App. A, §§ 2.2-2.4 0-92-64  8-10-92 1       Added App. B, § XV (d) 0-92-67  8-24-92 1 10-151(d) 2 10-152(b)(6) 0-92-68  8-24-92 1 15-76 0-92-71  9-14-92 1 22-4 2 22-10(a) 0-92-73  9-28-92 1a App. B, § IV  b, c App. B, § VII.A 0-92-74  9-28-92 1a 18-8(f)  b 18-12 0-92-80 11- 9-92 1 22-10(a) 0-92-83 11-23-92 1 19-12 0-92-86 12-14-92 1 6-12 0-92-87 12-14-92 1 4-4-4-14 0-93-5  1-11-93       Rpld 17-1-17-23       Added 17-1-17-22 0-93-8  1-25-93 1 6-12 0-93-15  3-22-93 1       Rpld 10-151-10-153       Added 10-151-10-154 0-93-34  6-28-93 1A       Added App. B, Art. XII(XII.A-XII.K)  B       Rnbd App. B, Art. XII(XII.A, XII.B), Art. XIII(XIII.A-XIII.D) Art. XIV(XIV.A-XIV.F) Art. XV Art. XVI(XVI.A-XVI.K) Art. XVII(XVII.A-XVII.D)       as App. B, Art. XIII(XIII.A, XIII.B), Art. XIV(XIV.A-XIV.D) Art. XV(XV.A-XV.F) Art. XVI Art. XVII(XVII.A-XVII.K) Art. XVIII(XVIII.A-XVIII.D)  C App. B, § XIV.D  D App. B, § XV.D(b)  E       Added App. B, § XV.D(c)  F       Added App. B, Art. XVI(d) 0-93-35  6-28-93 1A App. A, § 1.5  B       Added App. A, § 2.6(7)  C       Added App. A, § 3.4(e)       Rnbd App. A, § 3.4(e)       as App. A, § 3.4(f) D       Added App. A, § 4(4.1-4.4) E       Rnbd App. A, §§ 4(4.1-4.3), 5, 6, 7(7.1-7.4)       as App. A, §§ 5(5.1-5.3), 6, 7, 8(8.1-8.4) F App. A, § 8.1 G       Rnbd App. A, § 8       as App. A, § 9 H App. A, § 10 0-93-47  8- 9-93 1 App. B, § IX.A 0-93-49  9-23-93 1 8-35 0-93-54  9-27-93 1 App. B, § IV 2 App. B, § VII.A 0-93-58  9-27-93 1 14-10 0-93-74 12-13-93 1 5-87 0-93-75 12-13-93 1 13-160-13-163 0-94-8  3-10-94 1a App. B, § XII.B  b App. B, § XII.E(a)(2)(a), 
(b)(2)(a)  c App. B, § XII.K  d App. B, § XV.D(c) 0-94-9  3-10-94 1 App. A, § 1.5 2 App. A, § 3.3 0-94-10  3-10-94 1       Rpld App. A, § 4.4       Added App. A, § 4.4-4.10 0-94-14  4-11-94 1a 10-151  b 10-152(1), (2)  c 10-154(c)(2), (3)  d 10-154(d) 0-94-29  6-13-94 1 App. B, § VII.B Note 4(6)-(14) 2 App. B, § VII.G 0-94-36  7-11-94 1, 2 App. B, § VII.E(C), (D) 3 VII.E(L) 4 VIII.B 0-94-38  7-25-94 1 2-30 0-94-41  8- 8-94 1 App. B, § VII.A 2, 3 App. B, § VIII.B 0-94-42  8- 8-94 1 3-1, 3-2, 3-4, 3-5(d) 3-6, 3-7, 3-9(b), (c), (e) 0-94-49  9-12-94 1 App. B, § IV 2 App. B, § VII.A, Note 15 3 App. B, § VIII.B 0-94-61 11-14-94 1 App. B, § X.A 0-94-63 11-14-94 1       Rpld 21-26-21-44 2       Added 21-26-21-28.4, 21-30-21-30.6, 21-31-21-31.3, 21-33-21-33.4, 21-35-21-35.4, 21-36-21-36.9, 21-38-21-38.4, 21-40-21-40.5, 21-41-21-41.3 0-94-66 11-28-94 1 16-26 2 16-81 3       Added 16-129(e)       Rltd 16-129(e), (f)       as 16-129(f), (g) 4 16-130(h) 0-94-69 12-12-94 1 20-52 0-95-9  2-13-95 1 22-10(a)(2) 0-95-20  5- 8-95 1 App. B, § VII Note 3(d) 2 App. B, § XV.D(c)(1) 0-95-21  5- 8-95 1 19-1(c) 0-95-37  7-10-95 1 14-3 0-95-39  7-24-95 1 21-28.3 0-95-41  8-14-95 1a.-h.       Rnbd App. B, §§ X.K-X.R       as App. B, §§ X.L-X.S 2       Rpld App. B, § X.O(f) 3       Added App. B, § X.K 0-95-42  8-14-95 1 22-94 0-95-51 11-13-95 1 App. B, § VII.A Note 15 2, 3 App. B, § VIII.B 0-95-53 10-23-95 1 14-11 0-95-54 11-13-95 1 App. B, § VII.G.3 2       Added App. B, § X.N 3       Rltd App. B, §§ X.N-X.S       as App. B, §§ X.O-X.T 0-95-62 11-13-95 1 19-1 0-95-65 12-11-95 1 4-1 2, 3 4-15, 4-16 4 4-35(a)(1), (2) 5 4-39 0-95-66 12-11-95 1 14-3 0-96-2  1- 8-96 1 16-109(d)(20) 0-96-6  2-12-96 1 Tpp. B, § VIII.B 0-96-14  3-11-96 1 App. B, § VII.A 2 App. B, § VII.A (note 2) 0-96-15  4- 8-96 1 App. B, § VII.A 2 App. B, § VII.A (note 16) 0-96-20  4-22-96 1       Added 2-170 0-96-29  6-10-96 1 20-121(b), (d) 0-96-40  6-24-96 1 22-2(f) 2 22-3(c) 3 22-21(7) 0-96-44  7- 8-96 1 21-27(a), 21-27(b) 2 21-28.3 3 21-30.1(a) 4 21-30.1(b)(2) 5 21-30.3 0-96-54  9-23-96 1 16-128(d), 16-128(e) 0-97-2  1-13-97 1 App. B, § X.L 0-97-11  2-10-97 1 App. B, § VII.E(K) 2 App. B, § VII.E(L)(6)(e) 0-97-14  3-24-97 1 14-12 0-97-20  4-28-97 1 App. B, § VII.A 2 App. B, § VIII.B 0-97-21  4-28-97 1 18-8(a) 2 18-8(i) 0-97-27  5-12-97 1       Added App. B, § XIII.B.2       Rnbd App. B, § XIII.B.2       as App. B, § XIII.B.3 0-97-29  5-12-97 1 2-171-2-184 0-97-52  8-11-97 1 App. B, § XII.E 0-97-59  9- 8-97 1 App. A, § 11 (11.1-11.6) 0-97-67 10-27-97 1 App. B, § X.C 2 App. B, § X.L 0-97-72 12- 1-97 1 22-10(a)(1) 0-97-74 12-15-97 1 App. B, § VIII.B. 0-97-75 12-15-97 19-94.1-19-112 0-98-19  3- 9-98 1 App. B, § VIII.B. 0-98-20  3- 9-98 1 11-1-11-5, 11-7, 11-9-11-11, 11-13, 11-14, 11-16-11-19, 11-21 0-98-21  3- 9-98 1 8-26-8-32 2 8-53-8-60, 8-71-8-74 0-98-23  3-23-98 1 5-2 0-98-26  4-13-98 1 App. B, § X.L. 0-98-27  4-13-98 1 11-17(e) 2 11-17(i) 0-98-54  8-10-98 1 App. B, §§ VII.C.1(11) VII.C.2(11) VII.C.4(11) VII.C.5(6) VII.C.6(11) 0-98-62  9-14-98 1 App. A, § 5.1(2) 2 App. A, § 4.6(b)(3) 0-98-63  9-14-98 1 App. B, § XI.C(d) 0-98-64  9-14-98 1 App. A, § 4.5 0-98-65  9-14-98 1 App. B, § XII.K(1)(a), (b) 0-98-69  9-14-98 1 2-96-2-100 0-98-77 10-26-98 1 App. B, § IV 2 App. B, § VII.A 3 App. B, § VII.A 4 App. B, § VII.B 5 App. B, § VII.C.3 6 App. B, § VIII.B 7 App. B, § XI.H 0-98-78 10-12-98 1a. 21-26 1b. 21-27(a) 1c. 21-27(a) 1d. 21-35.1 0-98-90 12-14-98 1 16-86(a)(2) 0-98-89 12-14-98 1 13-151 2 13-155 0-99-2  1-11-99 1 App. B, § XII.H 0-99-14  2- 8-99 1 App. B, § VII.C.2 0-99-15  2- 8-99 1 App. A, § 3.2(d)(2) 0-99-22  5-10-99 1 App. B, § VII.A 0-99-25  3-22-99 1       Dlt 2-166-2-170 2-166-2-169 0-99-36  5-10-99 1 App. A, § 2.9(2) 2 App. A, § 2.10(5) 0-99-38  5-10-99 1 17-16(b) 0-99-58  8- 9-99 1 App. B, § IV 2 App. B, § VII.A 3 App. B, § VII.A (note 20) 4 App. B, § VII.B 5 App. B, § VIII.B 6 App. B, § XIII.A 0-99-59  8- 9-99 1       Added 10-200-10-206 0-99-63  9-13-99 1 App. B, § VII.A 2 App. B, § VII.A (note 21) 3 App. B, § VII.C 0-99-66  9-13-99 1 App. B, § VII.A 2 App. B, § VIII.B 0-00-1  1-10-00 1 App. B, § V.C. 2 App. B, § VII.H. 0-00-10  2-14-00 1       Added 2-195-2-201 0-00-11  2-14-00 1 App. B, § VIII.B 2 App. B, § VII.C.6.(2) 0-00-28  4-10-00 1, 2 App. B, § VII.A. 0-00-31  4-24-00 1 App. B, § VII.A 0-00-35  5- 8-00 1       Added 13-270-13-286 0-00-36  5- 8-00 1 App. B, § IV 2 App. B, § VII.A 3 App. B, § VII.A(note 23) 4 App. B, § XIII.A       Added App. B, § XIII.C 5       Added App. B, § XV.D.(d) 0-00-56  7-10-00 1 App. B, § VII.B(note 3(d)) 0-00-67  8-14-00 1       Added App. A, § 2.1(c) 0-00-68  8-14-00 1 App. B, § VII.C 0-00-69  8-14-00 1 16-105 0-00-98 12-11-00 1 App. B, § VII.E. 0-01-3  1- 8-01 1 22-10(a)(1)-(3) 0-01-33  6-11-01 1 App. B, § VII.A 2       Added App. B, § VII.A(note 24) 0-01-53  7- 9-01 1 App. B, § VII.A 2.a., 2.b. App. B, § VIII. B 2.c. App. B, § VIII.B(5) 0-01-57  7-23-01 1 11-1-11-5, 11-7, 11-9-11-11, 11-13, 11-14, 11-16-11-19, 11-21 0-01-66  8-27-01 1 5-83 0-01-82 11-12-01 1 App. B, § VII.A 0-01-83 11-12-01 1       Added 21-42-21-45 0-02-2  1-14-02 1       Added App. B, § VII.E.G.2.i.3 0-02-5  1-28-02 1 16-160 0-02-6  1-28-02 1 14-13 0-02-20  2-11-02 1 App. B, § X.N 0-02-25  3-11-02 1A App. B, § IV 1B, C App. B, § VII.C.4 1D App. B, § VII.C.5 1E App. B, § VII.G.3(d) 0-02-26  3-25-02 1 App. B, § IV 2 App. B, § VII.A 3 App. B, § VII.I 4 App. B, § VIII.B 0-02-34  4- 8-02 1 App. B, § VII.E.G.2.c.1, d.1 0-02-35  4- 8-02 1 21-40.3(a) 0-02-44  6- 3-02 1 App. B, § X.N 0-02-56  6-24-02 1       Added 20-250-20-254 0-02-57  6-24-02 1       Added 13-48-13-60 2       Added Ch. 13, Art. II, div. 1(tit.) 0-02-59  7- 8-02 1a App. B, § VII.A 1b App. B, § VII.A(note 2) 0-02-62  7- 8-02 1 2-200(1) 2-201 0-02-66  7-22-02 1a 16-86(a)(4) 1b       Added 16-88 0-02-68  8-12-02 1 2-200(4) 0-02-82  9- 9-02 1a 6-2 1b 6-6 1c 6-9 1d 6-10 1e 6-11 1f 6-13(a) 1g 6-14 1h       Rpld 6-15(b)       Rnbd 6-15(c), (d)       as 6-15(b), (c) 1i 6-20(a) 1j 6-22(a) 1k       Added 6-30 1l       Added 6-31 0-02-83  9-23-02 1 19-7 2       Added 19-13-19-18 0-02-85  9-23-02 1 4-1-4-6 4-13-4-31 4-36-4-54 4-61-4-74 0-02-104 11-11-02 1a 9-7 1b 9-18 0-02-115 12- 9-02 1 App. B, § VII.C.4 0-02-116 12- 9-02 1a 16-57(a)(1) 1b       Added 16-157(a)(5) 1c 16-157(b)(1), (2), (4), (8) 1d 16-157(b)(3) 1e 16-157(b)(5) 1f       Added 16-157(b)(10)       Rnbd 16-157(b)(10)       as 16-157(b)(11) 2       Added 16-158 3a       Rnbd 16-158       as 16-159 3b       Rnbd 16-159       as 16-160       Rnbd 16-160       as 16-161 0-03-6  1-13-03 1 16-157(a)(1), (5) 0-03-23  2-24-03 1 16-130(f) 0-03-25  2-24-03 1 4-2 2       Added 4-74(a) 3       Rnbd 4-74(a)-(e)       as 4-74(b)-(f) 0-03-36  5-12-03 1 App. B, § VII.E 0-03-51  6- 9-03 1 21-43 2       Added 21-46-21-50 0-03-61  7-14-03 1 App. B, § IV 2 App. B, § VII.A 0-03-72  8-25-03 1       Added 14-14 0-03-90 11-24-03 1 20-250-20-254 0-03-94 12-15-03 1 App. B, § V(tit.) 2       Added App. B, § V.D 3 App. B, § XV.A 0-04-18  2- 9-04 1 App. B, § VII.A 2 App. B, § VIII.B 0-04-19  2- 9-04 1 App. B, § IV 0-04-26  2-23-04 1 2-195-2-205 0-04-57  7-12-04 1a       Rpld Ch. 2, art. III, div. 9, §§ 2-171-2-184 1b       Rpld 14-12 1c       Rpld 17-1-17-22 1d       Rpld App. A, §§ 1.1-1.5, 2.1-2.10, 3.1-3.9, 3.91-3.93, 4.1-4.10, 5.1-5.3, 6, 7, 8.1-8.4, 9. 10, 11.1-11.6 1e       Rpld App. B, §§ I-XVIII 2       Added App. A, §§ 101, 102, 201-210, 301-311, 401-408, 501-512, 601-605, 701-716, 801-805, 901-909, 1001-1007, 1101-1108, 1201-1208, 1301-1310, 1401-1406 0-04-65  8- 9-04 1       Rpld App. A, §§ 801-805 2       Added App. A, §§ 801-805 0-04-67  8- 9-04 1       Added Ch. 10, art. V(tit.), 10-209-10-216 0-04-75  9-13-04 1 16-86(a)(4) 0-04-83 10-11-04 1a App. A, § 904A., B. 1b App. A, § 906A.1 App. A, § 906A.2 App. A, § 906A.3 1c App. A, § 907C. App. A, § 907C.8. App. A, § 907D., E. 1d App. A, § 908. App. A, § 908A. App. A, § 908A.4., 7. App. A, § 908B.1.c. App. A, § 908B.2. App. A, § 908B.2. App. A, § 908B.3.a., c. App. A, § 908B.4.a. App. A, § 908B.6.a. App. A, § 908B.6.b. App. A, § 908B.6(Table 9-1) App. A, § 908B.7.a., d. App. A, § 908B.8.a. App. A, § 908B.8.b. App. A, § 908B.8.b.1.       Added App. A, § 908B.8.b.3. 1e App. A, § 909E.1.c. 0-04-85 10-11-04 1 16-139 0-04-87 11- 8-04 1 App. A, § 102 2       Added App. A, § 907C.7.c. 0-05-2  1-10-05 1 App. A, § 503(Table 5-2) 0-05-26  4-11-05 1 20-131 0-05-30  4-25-05 1a App. A, § 503(Table 5-2) 1b App. A, § 503(Table 5-2) 1c App. A, § 503(Table 5-2)(note 10) 0-05-34A  5- 9-05 1a-1c App. A, § 102 2 App. A,. § 801 0-05-34B  5- 9-05 1(Att. A) App. A, § 102 App. A, § 207 App. A, § 209F.(Table 2-1) App. A, § 302A., B. App. A, § 307A., D. App. A, § 308A., B., D., E. App. A, § 308E.1.-7. App. A, § 308N.(Table 3-2) App. A, § 401(Table 4-1)       Rpld App. A, § 405G. App. A, § 408A. App. A, § 408(Table 5-1) App. A, § 408(Table 5-2)       Rpld App. A, § 408C.5.a. App. A, § 506E.1. App. A, § 506E.1. App. A, § 506I.1.a. App. A, § 506I.1.a.3) App. A, § 506I.1.f.2) App. A, § 506I.1.f.2)a) App. A, § 506I.2.a. App. A, § 506I.2.b.1) App. A, § 506I.2.k. App. A, § 506I.2.l.2) App. A, § 506I.2.l.2)a)       Added App. A, § 506I.3.       Rnbd App. A, § 506I.3.       as App. A, § 506I.4 App. A, § 506I.4       Added App. A, § 506I.6., 7.       Rnbd App. A, § 506I.5.       as App. A, § 506I.8.       Rnbd App. A, § 506I.6.       as App. A, § 506I.9. App. A, § 506I.9.a. App. A, § 506I.9.b.1) App. A, § 506I.9.k. App. A, § 506I.9.l.4) App. A, § 506I.9.l.4)a)       Rnbd App. A, § 506I.7       as App. A, § 506I.10 App. A, § 506I.10.a., b. App. A, § 506I.10.f.3) App. A, § 506I.10.g.4)       Added App. A, § 506I.11.       Rnbd App. A, § 506I.8.       as App. A, § 506I.12.       Rpld App. A, § 506I.13.       Added App. A, § 506I.13.-15.       Rnbd App. A, § 506I.10.-12.       as App. A, § 506I.16.-18. App. A, § 506I.18.c.5)       Added App. A, § 506I.19.       Rnbd App. A, § 506I.13.       as App. A, § 506I.20.       Added App. A, § 506I.21.       Rnbd App. A, § 506I.14.       as App. A, § 506I.22       Added App. A, § 506I.23.-25.       Rnbd App. A, § 506I.15.       as App. A, § 506I.26. App. A, § 506I.26.c.       Added App. A, § 506I.27.       Rnbd App. A, § 506I.16.       as App. A, § 506I.28       Added App. A, § 506I.29.       Rnbd App. A, § 506I.17.       as App. A, § 506I.30.       Rnbd App. A, § 506I.18.       as App. A, § 506I.31.       Added App. A, § 506I.32.       Rnbd App. A, § 506I.19.       as App. A, § 506I.33. App. A, § 506I.33.3)       Rnbd App. A, § 506I.20., 21.       as App. A, § 506I.34., 35.       Added App. A, § 506I.36.-38.       Rnbd App. A, § 506I.22.       as App. A, § 506I.39.       Rnbd App. A, § 506I.23., 24.       as App. A, § 506I.40., 41. App. A, § 506I.40.a. App. A, § 506I.41.e.3)       Rpld App. A, § 506I.41.f. App. A, § 507B.1.       Rpld App. A, § 507B.3. App. A, § 507B.4.       Added App. A, § 507C.       Rnbd App. A, § 507C.       as App. A, § 507D. App. A, § 507D.3.       Rpld App. A, § 507D.10. App. A, § 507 (Table 5-3) App. A, § 508A., F., G. App. A, § 508G.2. App. A, § 508H.1.a. App. A, § 508H.2.a. App. A, § 508H.2.c. App. A, § 508I.3., 8., 9. App. A, § 508I.9.c., d.       Rpld App. A, § 508J.1. App. A, § 508K. App. A, § 509H.4. App. A, § 509J. App. A, § 601 (Table 6-1) App. A, § 602 App. A, § 603F., I. App. A, § 603M. App. A, § 603M.1., 9., 13.       Added App. A, § 603M.14., 15. App. A, § 702B.3., 4. App. A, § 702C. App. A, § 704F.2. App. A, § 704J.7.       Rpld App. A, § 704L., M., R., S. App. A, § 708C.4. App. A, § 708D. (Table 7-4)       Rpld App. A, § 708I.3. App. A, § 709B.2., 3, App. A, § 709C.2.b. App. A, § 709C.3. App. A, § 709D.2. App. A, § 709E.7., 8.       Added App. A, § 709E.9., 10. App. A, § 709F.1. App. A, § 709G.1. App. A, § 709G.5.a. App. A, § 709K.2. App. A, § 709O.1. App. A, § 709P.6. App. A, § 709V. App. A, § 709Y (Table 7-6) App. A, § 711C. App. A, § 712B.2.-4. App. A, § 712B.5.b.       Rpld App. A, § 712D.1.c.12. App. A, § 712D.2.a.3) App. A, § 712D.3.b.3), 5) App. A, § 712D.3.b.26)e. App. A, § 712D.3.b.29) App. A, § 712D.3.b.32. App. A, § 712D.3.b.32.a)       Rpld App. A, § 712D.3.b.32.b) App. A, § 712B.2.-4. App. A, § 712B.2.-4. App. A, § 712D.4.c. App. A, § 712D.4.d.       Rpld App. A, § 712D.4.d.5), 10), 13)-15) App. A, § 712D.4.d.17)       Rpld App. A, § 712D.4.e. App. A, § 712D.4.f.2), 13), 14) App. A, § 712D.5. App. A, § 712D.5.1)b) App. A, § 712D.5.2) (Table 7-9) App. A, § 712D.5.3)d. App. A, § 712D.5.5)       Rpld App. A, § 715E.1.e. App. A, § 715E.1.n. App. A, § 715E.3.(c), (d) App. A, § 803H.5. App. A, § 909B. App. A, § 909B.1. App. A, § 1107B. App. A, § 1201 App. A, § 1202A., B.       Added App. A, § 1205A.       Rnbd App. A, § 1205A.-D.       as App. A, § 1205B.-E. App. A, § 1205E.       Added App. A, § 1205F., G.       Rpld App. A, § 1205E.-G.       Added App. A, § 1205J. App. A, § 1207B. App. A, § 1208L. App. A, § 1401E.1., 2. App. A, § 1402A.1., 3.       Rpld App. A, § 1402B.4.f. App. A, § 1403 App. A, § 1404A. App. A, § 1404A.2. App. A, § 1404A.2.k. App. A, § 1404B. App. A, § 1404B.4.a.       Added App. A, § 1405       Rnbd App. A, § 1405       as App. A, § 1406 App. A, § 1406A. App. A, § 1406B.3.e. 0-05-82  9-12-05 1 App. A, § 503(Table 5-2) 2       Rpld App. A, § 506I.16. 0-05-85  9-12-05 1 22-10(a)(2) 0-05-88 10-10-05 1 App. A, § 503 (Table 5-2) 0-05-101 10-24-05 1       Added 16-130(i) 2 16-139 0-05-103 11-14-05 1 App. A, § 908 B.6. 0-05-104 11-14-05 1a 22-95 1b 22-96(c), (d) 0-05-108 12-12-05 1 App. A, § 307 0-05-109 12-12-05 1 App. A, § 308 0-06-1  1- 9-06 1 App. A, § 102 2a App. A, § 310B 2b App. A, § 310C.5 3 App. A, § 503 
(Table 5-1) 4 App. A, § 503 
(Table 5-2) 5 App. A, § 506 6       Added App. A, § 506I.42 7 App. A, § 708D. 
(Table 7-4) 0-06-2  1- 9-06 1 App. A, § 102 2 App. A, § 1401C 3       Added App. A, § 702A.3. 4a       Rpld App. A. § 512A.3       Rnbd App. A, § 512A.4.-7.       as App. A, § 512A.3.-6. 0-06-18  2-13-06 2 App. A, § 503C 0-06-19  3-13-06 2a-2c App. A, § 601 
(Table 6-1) 3a, 3b App. A, § 601 
(Table 6-1) 4       Rpld App. A, § 605 0-06-20  3-27-06       Added ch. 2, art. III, div. 9(tit.), 2-171-2-174 0-06-24  3-13-06 1(Exh. 1) 5-3, 5-4       Rpld 5-5 5-26, 5-27 5-29 5-30(a)(2), (3) 5-30(b)(1), (2) 5-30(d)(1)-(3) 5-31, 5-32 5-66, 5-67 5-81(a)(1), (2) 5-81(b), (c)       Added 5-81(e) 5-82, 5-83 5-64(b), (e) 5-85, 5-86 5-88, 5-89 5-106-5-110 5-112(a)-(e)       Rpld ch. 5, art. V(tit.), 5-131-5-141       Rpld ch. 5, art. VI(tit.), 5-161-5-179 0-06-27  4-10-06 2a App. A, § 708D 
(Table 7-4) 0-06-28  4-24-06 2 App. A, § 102 3a App. A, § 312G 3b App. A, § 312K 3c App. A, § 312N 4a App. A, § 503B 4b App. A, § 503(Table 5-1) 4c App. A, § 503(Table 5-2) 4d App. A, § 506A-C 4e App. A, § 506I.9., 10., 12., 18., 39 0-06-30  5- 8-06 2 App. A, § 709R 0-06-39  6-12-06 2a App. A, § 802 2b App. A, § 802B.1., 2. 2c App. A, § 802B 2d App. A, § 802D 2e App. A, § 802E 2f       Added App. A, § 802E.1.a.4) 2g App. A, § 802E.3.b.8 App. A, § 802E.3.c 2h App. A, § 802F.3 2i App. A, § 802G 2j App. A, § 802I 0-06-41  6-12-06 1 11-17(b)(1) 0-06-68  7-10-06 2 App. A, § 804C.2.b. 0-06-70  7-10-06 1 11-10(8) 0-06-88 11-27-06 1       Added 14-15 0-06-99 12-11-06 1a 8-26, 8-27(b), 8-29-8-32, 8-53-8-57, 8-59 8-74(a) 1b Ch. 8, Art. II(tit.), 8-26, 8-27(a), 8-28-8-31, 8-54 1c 8-27(b), 8-71, 8-74 1d 8-74(c)(2) 0-07-13  3-12-07 2a, 2b App. A, § 503, Table 5-2 0-07-30  5-14-07 2       Added App. A, 908 A.14. 0-07-35  6-11-07 2 App. A, 712 D.5.2) Table 7-9 0-07-55  6-11-07 1.a. 20-121(a) 1.b. 20-121(b) O-07-107 10- 8-07 2 App. A, § 102 3 App. A, § 503, Table 5-1 4 App. A, § 503 O-07-108 10- 8-07 1       Added Ch. 3, Art. I(title) 3       Added Ch. 3, Art. II, §§ 3-20-3-25 O-07-111 10-22-07 1a. 15-51 1b.       Added 15-58(k), (l) 1c.       Added 15-62 1d. 15-52 O-07-117 11-12-07 1       Added 21-12 O-07-122 11-26-07 1a. 2-204 1b.       Rnbd 2-205       as 2-215 1c.       Added 2-205-2-214 O-07-124 11-26-07 1a. 15-51 1b.-d. 15-56 1e. 15-59 O-07-125 11-26-07 1       Rpld Ch. 21, Art. II (Exh. A)       Added Ch. 21, Art. II O-08-1  1-14-08 2 App. A, § 503, Table 5-2 O-08-2  1-14-08 1A. 2-215 O-08-17  3-10-08 1 14-10 O-08-24  3-24-08 1 2-173 2 2-174(d) O-08-28  4-14-08 2 App. A, § 503, Table 5-1 3 App. A, § 503, Table 5-2 4 App. A, § 503, Notes 26, 27 5 App. A, § 506, I.(5), (13), (23), (26)       Rpld App. A, § 506, I.(27) O-08-32  4-28-08 1       Rpld 3-1-3-9 3-20-3-25       Added 3-1-3-14 O-08-49  5-12-08 2 App. A, § 709.2 O-08-106  7-28-08 1 22-10 O-08-108  8-11-08 2 App. A, § 503, Table 5-1, 5-2 3 App. A, § 506 (I)(8) 4 App. A, § 709 (V) O-08-117  9-22-08 1 6-9 O-08-118  9-22-08 1       Rpld 3-1-3-14       Added 3-1-3-13 O-08-124 10- 6-08 2 App. A, § 708, Table 7-4 3 App. A, § 709 (Z) 3       Added App. A, § 709, Table 7-6, Note 2 3       Added App. A, § 709, Table 7-7, Note 3 O-08-125 10- 6-08 1       Added 19-120-19-127 O-2009-2  1-12-09 2 App. A, § 406 3 App. A, § 503, Table 5-2 4 App. A, § 601, Table 6-1 5 App. A, § 709, Table 7-7       Added App. A, § 712D.35) O-2009-3  1-12-09 1 21-27 2 21-29 21-29.1-21-29.8 3 21.30.1(14) O-2009-4  1-12-09 1 2-198 2 2-201 3 2-100(1)a 4       Dltd 2-203(2)       Rnbd 2-203(3)-(6)       as 2-203(2)-(5)       Dltd 2-206(2)       Rnbd 2-206(3)-(11)       as 2-206(2)-(10)       Dltd 2-209(3)       Rnbd 2-209(4)-(8)       as 2-209(3)-(7) O-2009-7  1-26-09 1 4-67(b) O-2009-10  2- 9-09 1       Added App. A, § 408E 2       Added App. A, §§ 1501-1508 O-2009-14  2-23-09 1 11-17(a)(1) O-2009-30  3-23-09 1 10-216(b)(4) O-2009-31  4-13-09 1       Rpld 10-71-10-76, 10-91-10-100, 10-126-10-129       Added 10-71-10-79, 10-91-10-99 2       Rnbd Ch. 10, Art. III, Divs. 5, 6       as Ch. 10, Art. III, Divs. 4, 5 O-2009-34  4-27-09 1 11-10(c)(1) O-2009-36  5-11-09 1 11-18(b) O-2009-56  6- 8-09 2       Rpld Ch. 10, Art. III, 
Divs. 2, 3       Added Ch. 10, Art. III, 
Divs. 2, 3 O-2009-60  6-22-09 1 3-7(b) O-2009-101  9-14-09 1 App. A, § 712D.4.e.13)a) 2 App. A, § 508.H.2.b O-2009-107 10-12-09 1 App. A, § 102 2 App. A, § 503, Table 3 App. A, § 509H.1.d 4       Added App. A, § 602F 5       Added App. A, § 603N 6       Added App. A, § 708J 7 App. A, § 1505 Table O-2009-126 12-14-09 1       Added 5-131-5-142 O-2010-18  3- 8-10 1 2-26, 2-29 O-2010-20  3-22-10 2 App. A, § 102 3       Added App. A, § 503C.28 O-2010-46  6-14-10 2       Added App. A, § 709AA. 3 App. A, § 709, Table 7-6 O-2010-50  6-14-10 1 Ch. 13, Art. III, Divs. 1-3 2       Added Ch. 13, Art. III, Div. 4 O-2010-68  7-12-10 1 19-96 O-2010-72  8- 9-10 1 Ch. 12, Art. II O-2010-79  9-13-10 2 App. § 503, Table 5-2, Note 13 O-2010-84 10-11-10 1.A. 8-2 1.B. 8-26-8-32 1.C. 8-53-8-57 1.D. 8-71, 8-74 O-2010-111 12-13-10 1 13-136 O-2011-21  3-14-11       Added 13-300-13-312 O-2011-25  3-14-11 2, 3 App. A, § 102 4       Added App. A, § 709G.6. 5       Added App. A, § 709, 
Table 7-6 6, 7 App. A, § 709, 
Table 7-7 8       Added App. A, § 709BB. O-2011-29  3-28-11 2 App. A, § 503, 
Table 5-2 3       Added App. A, § 503C., Note 29. O-2011-32  4-11-11 2 App. A, § 801C.3.a. 3 App. A, § 801D.2., 4. O-2011-37  5- 9-11 2 App. A, § 706C. 3 App. A, § 712D.3.b. 4 App. A, § 1301, 
Table 13-1 5 App. A, § 1301B. 6 App. A, § 1304E. 7 App. A, § 1309, 
Tables 13-4, 13-5 O-2011-70  7-11-11 1 16-87(b), (d), (e) O-2011-85  9-12-11 1A 4-2 1B 4-18 1C 4-74 2A 10-73 2B 10-94 2C 10-95 2D 10-97 2E 10-182 2F 10-192 3 11-18(b) 4 16-161 O-2011-92 10-31-11 1 6-9 O-2011-103 11-14-11 1 4-20(d) O-2011-111 11-28-11 1A 7-1-7-3 1B 7-4-7-6 (titles) 1C 7-4 7-6-7-8 O-2011-117 12-12-11 1 App. A, § 102 2 App. A, § 503 App. A, § 506 3 App. A, § 708.H O-2012-18  4- 9-12 1 App. A, § 312.E O-2012-61  6-25-12 1 13-88 O-2012-71  7-23-12 1(Att.) 6-1-6-5 6-7, 6-8 6-9(2) 6-13 6-15 6-21(a) 6-22(a) 6-23(b) 6-26 6-31 O-2012-85  8-27-12 1 13-136 O-2012-100 11-12-12 2 App. A, § 708.D O-2012-104 11-26-12 1 19-1(e) O-2013-28  5-28-13 1       Rpld App. A, §§ 901-909 1       Added App. A, §§ 901-909 O-2013-71  6-24-13 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 21-26-21-41.3       Added 21-26-21-41.3 O-2013-89  9-23-13 2, 3 App. A, § 503 O-2014-8  2-10-14 2 App. A, § 714 O-2014-13  3-24-14 1(Exh. A)       Dltd 4-1-4-68       Added 4-1-4-74 O-2014-14  3-24-14 1(Exh. A) 5-2 O-2014-40  6- 9-14 1       Added 19-130-19-138 O-2014-58  6-23-14 1 19-130-19-138 O-2014-61  7-14-14 2, 3 App. A, § 503, 
Tbl. 5-2 O-2014-73  9-22-14 1 App. A, § 708, 
Tbl. 7-4 O-2015-4  1-12-15 1       Added 19-139-19-146 O-2015-21  4-13-15 1       Added 13-191 O-2015-86  8-24-15 1 3-1(a) O-2016-32  5- 9-16 2 App. A, § 102 3 App. A, § 503, Tbl. 5-2 4 App. A, § 506 O-2016-60  7-25-16 2 102 3, 4 App. A, § 503, Tbl. 5-1, Tbl. 5-2 5 App. A, § 503 O-2016-62  8- 8-16 2 App. A., § 102 3 App. A, § 503, Tbl. 5-2 4 App. A, § 503 O-2016-63  8- 8-16 2 App. A., § 506 O-2016-95 12-12-16 2, 3 App. A., § 102 4       Rpld Tables 7-1, 7-2 App. A., § 709 5 App. A., § 1104 O-2017-4  1-11-17 1 App. A., § 408 2       Added App. A., §§ 1601-1604 O-2017-13  2-27-17 1 8-29 O-2017-79  8-28-17 1       Added 1-15 O-2017-95 11-13-17 2 App. A, § 308.F.5 3, 4 App. A, § 312.G-I., K. 5 App. A, § 704.C.6 6-8 App. A, § 709.E.4.b.3), F., G. O-2017-96 11-13-17 2, 3 App. A, § 704.J. O-2018-2  1- 8-18 2 App. A, § 506.18.a., c.5) O-2018-54  6-11-18 1       Rpld 16-81 O-2018-71  7- 9-18 2 App. A, § 102 3 App. A, § 503 (table 5-2) 4       Added App. A, § 506.I.44. 5 App. A, § 507.F. O-2018-78  8-13-18 2 App. A, § 102 App. A, § 201 App. A, § 205.B. App. A, § 305.B. App. A, § 306.B.1. App. A, § 307.G.1. App. A, § 312.B. App. A, § 511.B. App. A, § 704.C.1. App. A, § 708.H. App. A, § 712.D.2.a. App. A, § 715.C.5., C.10.b.4., C.10.c., C.11.a., E.1.a., E.3.d. App. A, § 804.C.6., C.6.a., C.7. App. A, § 1205.F.3. App. A, § 1307 App. A, § 1309.2 App. A, § 1404.A.4.a., B.4.a. App. A, § 1508 3 App. A, § 102 App. A, § 301 App. A, § 311.C. App. A, § 503.25.b. App. A, § 506.E.1., I.26.c., I.41.e.3 App. A, § 508.A., F., G., H.2.a., I.3., I.8, I.9, K. App. A, § 509.H.1.d., H.4., J. App. A, § 603.N. App. A, § 702.B.3., B.4., C. App. A, § 704.E.2. App. A, § 709.B.2., B.3., C.2., C.3., D.1.-3., E.4.b., F.2., F.3.c., F.4.b., G.3.b., N.2. App. A, § 712.D.3.a.18), D.3.b.3), D.3.b.23), D.4.d.12) App. A, § 714.C.1. App. A, § 715.C.8. App. A, § 716.D. App. A, § 803.H., H.5. App. A, § 909.A.1. App. A, § 1201 App. A, § 1202.A., B. App. A, § 1205.A., F.1. App. A, § 1206.A.1., A.2., B. App. A, § 1208.L. App. A, § 1402.A.1. App. A, § 1403.B.4.f. App. A, § 1404.A.4.a., B.4.a. App. A, § 1405.3.e. App. A, § 1406.A., B.3.e. O-2018-79  8-13-18 1 4-2 5-3 19-131 19-140 2 5-67(a) 5-134 19-96 19-131-19-134  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - SESSION LAWS 
 This table shows the location within this Code of references to Session Laws as included herein. 
Year Chapter Section  Section 
this Code 1955  499 2-56(7) 2-59(1) 1977  703 5-131 5-141  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
 This table shows the location within this Code, either in the test or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
G.S. 
Section Section  
this Code 1A-1 App. A, § 802 1-539 Ch. 10 1-594 App. A, § 512 12-3 1-2 Ch. 14 Ch. 14 Ch. 14, art. 54 14-11 14-4 1-14 3-12 8-74(c)(1) 10-78 10-97 10-192 10-194 11-30(b) 11-55 13-284 13-310 Ch. 14 
14-9(e) 14-10 14-13 19-1 19-83(a) 19-127 20-121(e) App. A, § 909 14-145 14-1, 14-2 14-151 ch. 9 14-225 3-12 14-234 16-157(b)(10) 14-269 14-3 14-277.2 19-84 14-286 Ch. 8 14-288.12 Ch. 2, Art. IV 14-315, 14-316 14-3 14-360 et seq. Ch. 4 14-360-14-363 4-14 14-399 Ch. 10 14-402 14-3 14-415.11(c) 14-11 Ch. 15, Art. 4A 11-16(b)(1) 15-27.2 Ch. 5 5-136 18B-300(c) 19-1 18B-1000 13-160 13-271 App. A, § 102 18B-1000(8), (9) 13-160 18B-1001 1-15 19A-1 et seq. Ch. 4 Ch. 20 Ch. 20 Ch. 20, § 77 20-140(c) 20-16(c) 20-253 20-37.6(e)(1)-(3) 20-121(b), (d) 20-114(c) 10-190(c) 10-190(e)(1) 20-129 Ch. 20, Art. VII 20-141 Ch. 20, Art. V 20-141(e) Ch. 20 20-141(f) 20-97 20-158 20-251 20-152 20-162(b) 8-33(a) 20-162.1 8-33(f) 20-169 Ch. 20 Ch. 20, Art. IV 20-219.11 10-185 20-219.11(c)-(f) 15-62 20-219.12 15-62 20-219.13 15-62 20-219.14 15-62 20-280 Ch. 22, Art. II Ch. 39 App. A, § 201 40A-1 Char. Ch. VII 
Art. I, § 360(a) 41A-1 et seq. Ch. 12 42-43 11-13 Ch. 44A, Art. 1 10-187 44A-4(b)-(g) 15-62 44A-5 15-62 Ch. 47 App. A, § 201 47-30 App. A, § 1403 App. A, § 1405 App. A, § 1406 Ch. 47C App. A, § 712 Ch. 53, Art. 22 14-13 Ch. 55A 2-58 2-61(1) 58-36.65 20-253 58-79.1 Ch. 8 58-79.20 Ch. 5 58-80.1 et seq. Ch. 8 58-81.5 et seq. Ch. 8 62-238.1 Ch. 20, Art. IX Ch. 66 Ch. 13 66-10 Ch. 13 66-163 et seq. Ch. 13 Ch. 13, Art. V, Div. 3 66-165(a)-66-165(c) 13-210-13-212 66-166 13-213 66-169-66-171 13-216-13-218 66-173 13-219 Ch. 74, Art. 7 App. A, § 801 74-46 et seq. 17-10 74D-1 et seq. Ch. 3 Ch. 75B Ch. 13 85B-1 et seq. Ch. 13 Ch. 87 Ch. 5 Ch. 89 App. A, § 1403 Ch. 89A App. A, § 804 89C-3(7) App. A, § 804 Ch. 90, Art. 5 14-9(b) Ch. 91 13-205 91-1 13-205 Ch. 91A 13-206 91A-1 et seq. Ch. 13, Art. V 91A-3 13-206 Ch. 93B Ch. 13 95-126 et seq. Ch. 13 103-4 16-132 104E-1 et seq. Ch. 18 Ch. 105 13-57 Ch. 105, Art. 3 13-49 Ch. 105, Art. 9 13-55 13-56 105-33 et seq. Ch. 13 105-33(b) 13-41 105-33(c) 13-32 105-33(d) 13-40 105-103 13-30 105-105 13-41 105-109 13-30 105-109(e) 13-33 105-164.16 13-53 105-275(17) 13-301 105-275(18) 13-301 105-275(19) 13-301 105-385 18-12 106-364(2) 4-2 106-700 4-51 113A-1 et seq. 17-17 App. A, § 801 113A-50 et seq. 17-3 113A-52 17-3 113A-56(a) 17-4 App. A, § 801 113A-57(3) App. A, § 801 113A-61(c) 17-3 17-20 App. A, § 801 113A-64 App. A, § 801 113A-64(b) 17-19 App. A, § 801 118-6 Subpt. B, Ch. 434, § 5 118-7 Subpt. B, Ch. 434, § 1 122-58.2(1)b. App. A, § 102 Ch. 130A Ch. 10 Ch. 130A, Art. 9 App. A, § 102 130A-290 et seq. Ch. 18 130A-294 18-15 130A-346 Ch. 10, Art. II Ch. 132 12-36 12-42 132-6 13-215(c) 136-18.3 Ch. 18 136-91 Ch. 18 136-141 et seq. 10-190, 
Ch. 13 136-143 10-190 Ch. 139 17-3 Ch. 143, Art. 21, Pt. 6 App. A, § 902 Ch. 143, Art. 33C 12-36 12-42 143-128 et seq. Ch. 5 143-136 et seq. Ch. 5 Ch. 5, Art. IV 143-138(d) 5-1(b) 143-138(i) Ch. 5 143-143.8 et seq. Ch. 5 143-143.15 App. A, § 908 143-151.26 et seq. Ch. 5 Ch. 5, Art. V 143-213(18) 21-27 143-214.5 App. A, § 803 143-215.1 21-27 21-33.2 143-215.1(b), (g) 21-33.2 143-215.3(a)(14) 21-27 143-215.6B 21-40.4 143-215.6B(f)-(i) 21-40.4 143-318.9 et seq. 2-177(f) 12-36 144-7 App. A, § 709 150B-14(c) App. A, § 102 150B-18 et seq. 17-3 150B-52 12-40 153A-344.1 App. A, § 1208 Ch. 157 2-76 157-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 3 157-4 2-76 157-5 2-77, 2-78 157-9 2-76 Ch. 158 2-57 159-28.1 Subpt. B, Ch. 434, § 4 160-184(2) Subpt. B, Ch. 433, § 1 Ch. 160A Ch. 2 App. A, § 201 Ch. 160A, Art. 8 App. A, § 902 Ch. 160A, Art. 10 5-141 11-53 11-17(c)(4) 11-17(i) Ch. 160A, Art. 19 11-2 App. A, § 307 App. A, § 308 App. A, § 803 Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Pt. 6 11-27(b) 160A-31 App. A, § 1208 160A-39 App. A, § 201 160A-47 App. A, § 201 160A-58.1 App. A, § 1208 160A-76 Ch. 5 160A-162 et seq. Ch. 16 160A-174 13-270 13-300 160A-174(6) Ch. 14 160A-175 13-285 13-311 App. A, § 1208 App. A, § 1310 160A-178 Ch. 13, Art. III 160A-181 Ch. 13 Ch. 13, Art. IV Ch. 13, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 13-300 160A-181.1 13-270 13-271 13-278 160A-183 Ch. 7 Ch. 8 160A-191 Ch. 13 160A-193 Ch. 10 Ch. 10, Art. III 160A-194 Ch. 5 Ch. 13 13-29 13-270 13-300 160A-195 Ch. 20, Art. IX 160A-209(c)(24) Ch. 15 160A-211 Ch. 13 13-31 13-210 160A-213 Ch. 20, Art. II 160A-240.1 Char. Ch. VII 
Art. I, § 360(a) 160A-296 Ch. 19, Art. II Ch. 20 160A-296 et seq. Ch. 20 160A-298 Ch. 20, Art. IX 160A-300 Ch. 20 160A-303 Ch. 10 160A-303.1 Ch. 18 160A-303.2 Ch. 10 160A-304 Ch. 22 160A-311 et seq. Ch. 18 Ch. 21 160A-312 21-26 160A-341 et seq. Ch. 6 160A-350 et seq. Ch. 15 160A-381 App. A, § 201 160A-385.1. App. A, § 102 App. A, § 1208 160A-400.14(a) 11-17(b)(4) 160A-411 et seq. Ch. 5 Ch. 11 Ch. 5, Art. II 160A-412 Ch. 5, Art. II 160A-417 11-16(b)(2) App. A, 702A.3 160A-417, 160A-418 5-81 160A-418 App. A, § 1208 160A-422 App. A, § 1208 160A-424 8-30(a)(1) 160A-435 5-2 160A-435 et seq. Ch. 5 160A-436 5-2 160A-441 11-27(a) 160A-441 et seq. Ch. 5 160A-443 11-50(d) 160A-444 11-27(b) 160A-446(f) 11-50(e)(1) 11-50(f) 160A-458 Ch. 17 160A-492 2-100(2) Ch. 12 160A-500 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 7 160A-503(2) 2-151(1) 160A-504 2-152 160A-512 2-153 Ch. 163 Subpt. B, Ch. 1051, § 1 Ch. 74C 3-6(3)  
