Town
of
Spindale
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 154
Town Code of Ordinances
Adopted February 20, 2012
Page | 1
Amended March 17, 2014
Page | 2
Table of Contents
PART A: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1. Authority and Application ………………………………………………………
1
Section 1. Short Title……………………………………………………………………..
1
Section 2. Authority……………………………………………………………………...
1
Section 3. Jurisdiction…………………………………………………………………..
1
section 4. Establishment of Zoning Map……………………………………….. 1
Section 5. Effective Date………………………………………………………………..
2
Section 6. Relationship to Existing Ordinances……………………………… 2
Section 7. Relationship to Land Use/Development Plan………………… 2
Section 8. General Conformity Required………………………………………..
2
Section 9. Fees……………………………………………………………………………..
2
Section 10. Severability …………………………………………………………………
2
Article II. Interpretations and Conflict …………………………………………………..
3
Section 1. General Standards for Interpretation…………………………….. 3
Section 2. Interpretation of District Boundaries…………………………….. 3
Section 3. Bona-Fide Farm Exemption…………………………………………...
4
PART B: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
Article I. General Use Districts …………………………………………………………………….
5
Section 1. R-20 Residential District……………………………………………………..
5
Section 2. R-10 Residential District…………………………………………………….
5
Page | 3
Section 3. R-6 Residential District………………………………………………………
5
Section 4. NB Neighborhood Business District……………………………………
5
Section 5. CC Central Commercial District………………………………………….
5
Section 6. GC General Commercial District…………………………………………
5
Section 7. HC-I Heavy Commercial/Industrial District……………………….
5
Article II. Conditional Districts ………………………………………………………………….
6
Section 1. Purpose and Intent…………………………………………………………..
6
Section 2. Districts Established…………………………………………………………
6
Section 3. Uses Permitted…………………………………………………………………
6
Section 4. Types of Conditions Permitted………………………………………….
6
PART C: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Article I. Nonconformities …………………………………………………………………………..
7
Section 1. Permitted if Certain Standards Met…………………………
7
Section 2. Types of Nonconforming Uses………………………………..
8
Section 3. Erection of Dwellings on Lots of Record…………………
8
Section 4. Existing Structures…………………………………………………
8
Section 5. Repairs…………………………………………………………………
9
Page | 4
Article II. General Requirements ……………………………………………………………….
10
Section 1. Principal Residential Buildings………………………………
10
Section 2. Height Limitations…………………………………………………
10
Section 3. Front Yard Setbacks………………………………………………
10
Section 4. Rear Yard Setbacks……………………………..…………………
10
Section 5. Side Yard Setbacks……………………………..………………….
10
Section 6. Side Yard Setbacks on Corner Lots…..…….……………….
10
Section 7. Visibility at Intersections………………….……………………
11
Section 8. Prohibited Uses, Special Uses…………………………………
11
Section 9. Mobile Homes……………..…………………………………………
11
Article III. Dimensional Requirements & Buffering ………………………………….
12
Section 1. Standard Dimensional Requirements by District and Use…… 12
Section 2. Buffering Requirements…………………………………………
13
Article IV. Table of Permitted Uses ……………………………………………………………. (9-7 to
9-18)
Article V. Development Standards (DS’s) for Certain Permitted Uses ……… 14
DS 1 Home Occupations…………………………………………………………….
14
DS 2 Tattoo Parlors, Body Piercing…………………………………………….
14
DS 3 Yard Sales…………………………………………………………………………
15
DS 4 Child Daycares………………………………………………………………….
16
Page | 5
DS 5 Planned Unit Development……………………………………………….
16
DS 6 Manufactured Home Park………………………………………………..
18
DS 7 Family Care Home……………………………………………………………
26
DS 8 Sexually Oriented Business………………………………………………
26
DS 9 Automobile Storage; Automobile Towing & Storage;
Automobile Wrecking or Junk Yards; Salvage Yards,
Scrap Processing, Recycling……………………………………………….
28
DS 10 Fencing Required Around Public Utilities…………………………..
28
DS 11 RV Park Campground………………………………………………………..
28
DS 12 Outdoor Theater……………………………………………………………….
28
DS 13 Communication Tower Over 60’ in Height…………………………
28
DS 14 Kennels…………………………………………………………………………….
28
DS 15 Accessory Structures…………………………………………………………
28
Article VI. Special Use Permit Findings ……………………………………………………….
29
Section 1. General Findings……………………………………………………
29
Section 2. Additional Findings for Certain Special Uses…………. 29
Article VII. Parking Regulations ……………………………………………………………………
30
Section 1. Parking Spaces Required……………………………………….
30
Section 2. Loading and Unloading Spaces………………………………
32
Article VIII. Sign Regulations …………………………………………………………………………
33
Page | 6
Section 1. Purpose…………………………………………………………………
33
Section 2. Definitions…………………………………………………………….
33
Section 3. Signs Exempt…………………………………………………………
34
Section 4. Signs Prohibited……………………………………………………
35
Section 5. Signs, General……………………………………………………….
35
Section 6. Standards for Temporary and Portable Signs………… 36
PART D: PROCESS AND PROCEDURES
Article I. Zoning Administrator ………………………………………………………………..
39
Article II. Planning Board …………………………………………………………………………..
39
Section 1. Legislative Authority and Membership………………… 39
Section 2. Rules……………………………………………………………………
40
Section 3. Specific Authority and Duties……………………………….
40
Article III. Board of Adjustment & Appeals ................................................................ 41
Section 1. Legislative Authority and General Requirements
for Quasi-judicial Hearings and Decisions……………….
41
Section 2. Membership, Voting Requirements and Rules……. 42
Section 3. Specific Authority and Duties…………………………….. 44
a . Appeals…………………………… .......................................... 44
b . Issuance of Special Use Permits ……………………….. 46
c. Variances ………………………………………………………...
46
Article IV. Application & Approval Procedures ……………………………………….
47
Section 1. Zoning Permits, General………………………………………
47
Page | 7
Section 2. Demolition Permits……………………………………………..
48
Section 3. Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance and Map….. 50
Section 4. Protest Petitions………………………………………………….
52
Article V. Enforcement & Penalties ………………….………………………………………
54
Section 1. Officials………….…………………………………………………….
54
Section 2. Remedies………………………..…………………………………….
54
Section 3. Penalties………………………..……………………………………..
54
PART E: DEFINITIONS
Page | 8
PART A: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE I. Authority and Application
Section 1. Short Title
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Spindale Zoning Ordinance”.
Section 2. Authority
(a) This ordinance is adopted pursuant to Article 19 Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General
Statutes.
(b) Whenever any provision of this ordinance refers to or cites a section of the North Carolina
General Statutes and that section is later amended or superseded, the ordinance shall be deemed
amended to refer to the amended section or the section that most nearly corresponds to the
superseded section.
Section 3. Jurisdiction
(a) This ordinance shall be effective throughout the Town’s planning jurisdiction and any duly
established extraterritorial jurisdiction. Such planning jurisdiction may be modified from time to
time in accordance with this Chapter and the North Carolina General Statutes.
(b) In addition to other locations required by law, a copy of a map showing the Town’s planning
jurisdiction shall be available for public inspection in the planning department.
Section 4. Establishment of Zoning Map
There shall be a map known and designated as the Official Zoning Map, which shall show the
boundaries of all zoning districts within the Town’s planning jurisdiction. This map shall be dated,
shall be kept up to date regarding changes, and shall be kept in the planning department.
The official zoning map dated April 1, 2011 is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a
part of this Ordinance. Amendments to this map shall be made and posted in accordance with the
requirements of this zoning ordinance. The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the following
certification: “ This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map of the Town of Spindale, North
Carolina, as established in Part A, Article I of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Spindale, North
Carolina, adopted February 20 , 2012.”
___________________________
Town Board of Commissioners
Town of Spindale (Mayor)
Page | 9
Section 5. Effective Date
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage by the Board of
Commissioners of the Town of Spindale on February 20, 2012, along with any changes and
amendments as approved by the Board of Commissioners.
Section 6. Relationship to Existing Ordinances
To the extent that the provisions of this ordinance are the same in substance as the previously
adopted provisions that they replace in the Town’s ordinances, they shall be considered as
continuations thereof and not as new enactments unless otherwise specifically provided. In
particular, a situation that did not constitute a lawful, nonconforming situation under the
previously adopted zoning ordinance does not achieve lawful nonconforming status under this
ordinance merely by the repeal of the zoning ordinance. When any provision of this Ordinance
conflicts with a pre-existing provision of the Town Code not necessarily repealed by this Ordinance,
this Ordinance will prevail.
Section 7. Relationship to Land Use/Development Plan
It is the intention of the Town Board of Commissioners that this Ordinance implement the planning
policies adopted by the Town Board, as reflected in the land use/development plan and other
planning documents. While the Town Board reaffirms its commitment that this ordinance and any
amendment to it be in conformity with adopted planning policies, the Town Council hereby
expresses its intent that neither this Ordinance nor any amendment to it may be challenged on the
basis of an alleged nonconformity with any planning document.
Section 8. General Conformity Required
(a) Subject to the section entitled Nonconformities in Part C, Article I of this Ordinance, no person
may use, occupy, lease or sell any land or buildings or authorize or permit the use, occupancy, lease
or sale of land or buildings under his or her control except in accordance with all of the applicable
provisions of this ordinance.
(b) For purposes of this section, the “use” or “occupancy” of a building or land relates to anything
and everything that is done to, on, or in that building or land.
Section 9. Fees
Reasonable fees sufficient to cover the cost of administration, inspection, publication of notice and
similar matters may be charged to applicants for zoning permits, sign permits conditional-use
permits, special-use permits, zoning map and text amendments, variances and other administrative
relief. All fees shall be collected before any of the above-stated actions shall be taken. The amount
Page | 10
of the fees charged shall be as set forth in the Town’s annual Fee Schedule or as established by
resolution of the Town Board, filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
Section 10. Severability
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Town Board of Commissioners that the sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Ordinance are severable, and if any such section,
paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any
court of competent jurisdiction in a valid judgment or decree, such unconstitutionality or invalidity
shall not affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this
Ordinance since the same would have been enacted without the incorporation into this Ordinance
of such unconstitutional or invalid section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase
ARTICLE II. Interpretations and Conflict
Section 1. General Standards for Interpretation
A. Uses not designated as permitted uses shall be prohibited.
B. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public safety, health, and general welfare. If the requirements set forth
in this Ordinance are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted
rules, regulations, or ordinances, the more restrictive or higher standards shall govern.
C. No building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied, and no building or structure or
part thereof shall be erected, changed, constructed, moved, or structurally altered
unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which
it is located.
D. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall be reduced in
dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots
created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet at least the minimum
requirements established by this Ordinance.
Section 2. Interpretation of District Boundaries
A. District boundary lines are generally intended to be along or parallel to property lines,
lot lines, the center-line of streets, alleys, railroads, easements, other rights-of-way, and
creeks, streams, or other water channels.
Page | 11
B. In the absence of specified distances on the map, dimensions of districts shall be
determined by scaling the distance on the Official Zoning Map. When the street or
property layout existing on the ground is at variance with that shown on the Official
Zoning Map, the Board of Adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries of this
Ordinance.
C. Where any street or alley is hereafter officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations
applicable to each parcel of abutting property shall apply to that portion of the street or
alley added thereto by virtue of the vacation or abandonment.
D. In case any further uncertainty exists, the Board of Adjustment shall interpret the intent
of the map as to the location of such boundaries.
E. Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of
passage of this Ordinance, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot
not exceeding fifty (50) feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot
shall be permitted.
Section 3. Bona Fide Farm Exemption
A. This Ordinance shall in no way regulate, restrict, prohibit, or otherwise deter any
Bona-Fide Farm. However, any use of such property for non-farm purposes shall be
subject to the regulations of this Ordinance.
B. In no case, however, shall Bona-Fide Farms be interpreted to include rendering
operations, commercial high-density swine operations, and/or poultry operations due
to noise and odor. These operations are defined as an open or enclosed area where
large numbers of livestock and poultry (particularly swine and chickens) are raised for
commercial sale and consumer consumption.
C. For purposes of this section, any of the following shall constitute sufficient evidence that
property is being used for Bona Fide Farm purposes:
(1) A farm sales tax exemption certificate issued by the Department of Revenue;
(2) A copy of the property tax listing showing that the property is eligible for
participation in the present use value program pursuant to N.C.G.S. 105-277.3;
(3) A copy of the farm owner or operator’s Schedule F from the owner or operator’s
most recent federal income tax return;
(4) A forest management plan;
Page | 12
(5) A Farm Identification Number issued by the United States Department of
Agriculture Farm Service Agency.
PART B: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
ARTICLE I. General Use Districts
The following districts are hereby established:
Section 1. R-20 Residential . The R-20 Residential District is established as a district in which
the principal use of land is for residential purposes. This district is primarily for areas that do not
have water or wastewater services, and the parcels have to be larger for wells and/or septic
systems. Other rural uses may also be permitted.
Section 2. R-10 Residential . The R-10 Residential District is established as a district in which
the principal use of land is for single family residential purposes only. This district is established
for lower density purposes.
Section 3. R-6 Residential . The R-6 Residential District is established as a district in which the
principal use of land is residential, and also encourages higher density development.
Section 4. NB Neighborhood Business . The NB Neighborhood Business District is hereby
established as a transitional, mixed-use district to provide for the orderly expansion of selected
businesses which serve a limited area or segment of the community while maintaining to the
highest degree possible the quality of the existing neighborhood.
Section 5. CC Central Commercial . The CC Central Commercial District is hereby established
with the intent to protect and improve the downtown shopping area of Spindale and to discourage
Page | 13
uses which do not require a central location and which are not compatible with the downtown
shopping and office area.
Section 6. GC General Commercial . The GC General Commercial District is hereby established
as a district in which the principal use of land is for retail sales and services to the motoring public
and other uses not requiring a centralized location, but which do require thoroughfare frontage,
larger lots, outdoor sales, or open storage areas.
Section 7. HC-I Heavy Commercial / Industrial . The HCI Heavy Commercial / Industrial
District is hereby established as a district in which the principal use of land is for warehousing,
wholesaling, industrial and commercial uses requiring large areas, and generating high volumes of
traffic. It is the intention of this district to discourage uses which would encroach upon the
commercial and industrial nature of this district, but would also establish safeguards to the public
interest.
ARTICLE II. CONDITIONAL DISTRICTS
Section 1. Purpose and Intent
It is recognized that certain types of General-Use Zoning Districts would be inappropriate at certain
locations in the absence of special conditions. Where the applicant for rezoning desires property to
be rezoned to such a district in such situations, the Conditional Zoning District is a means by which
these types of special conditions can be imposed in furtherance of the purposes of this Ordinance.
The Conditional Zoning District classification will be considered for rezoning only upon request of a
property owner or authorized agent.
Section 2. Districts Established
The following Conditional Zoning Districts (bearing the designation “CD”) are hereby established to
correspond with each of the General Use Districts described in Article I above. The Conditional
Districts are therefore as follows: R-20-CD; R-10-CD; R-6-CD; NB-CD; CC-CD; GC-CD; and HCI-CD.
Section 3. Uses Permitted
The uses permitted in a Conditional District are identical to those permitted in its corresponding
General Use District, as well as any additional requirements stated in the conditions unless
Page | 14
specifically prohibited in the conditions. The uses permitted in a Conditional District are also
subject to all other requirements of that district.
Section 4. Types of Conditions Permitted
Conditions imposed upon a Conditional District must be mutually agreed-upon by the applicant and
Board of Commissioners and are limited to those that: a) address the conformance of the
development and use of the site to Town ordinances and officially adopted plans, and b) address
impacts reasonably expected to be generated from the development or use of the site.
PART C: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
ARTICLE I. Nonconformities
Section 1. Permitted if Certain Standards Met
A. If within the districts established by this chapter (or amendments that may be adopted
later) there exist lots, structures, and uses of land and structures which were lawful
before this chapter was passed or amended, but which are prohibited under the terms
of this chapter, such uses shall be termed “nonconforming uses”. Such uses are declared
by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved.
However, it is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue
until they are removed, but not to be altered nor used as grounds for adding other
structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
B. After passage of this section, a nonconforming use or a nonconforming use of a structure
shall not be extended or enlarged. The addition of other uses, if such additions are of a
Page | 15
nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved, shall also be
prohibited. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require
a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual
construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this chapter and upon which actual building construction has bee diligently carried on.
“Actual construction” is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials
in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner, and demolition,
elimination, and removal of an existing structure in connection with such construction;
provided actual construction work is diligently carried on until the completion of the
building involved.
C. Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter,a lawful use of
land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this section as enacted
or amended, such use may be continued, subject to the following provisions:
1. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged nor extended to occupy a greater
area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment
in this chapter.
2. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other
portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this chapter.
3. No nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use.
4. Where any nonconforming land, structure, or use in part or in whole is made to
conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located, the part or
whole which has been made to conform may not thereafter be changed in such a
manner as would be nonconforming.
5. If a nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for any period of time, that
property may not again be used for a nonconforming use. The property shall
conform to its district regulations from that time hence.
Section 2. Types of Nonconforming Uses .
A. When a lot, structure, or use legally exists prior to the adoption of this Chapter but does
not meet the requirements of this Chapter, it is permitted to continue within the limits
set forth in this subsection. Under such circumstances it is said to have
“nonconforming” status.
B. There are three types of nonconforming status:
1. Nonconforming land. The lot or acreage is smaller than the minimum permitted
in the district in which it is located.
Page | 16
2. Nonconforming structure . The structure comes closer to the lot lines, is taller
than, or otherwise violates the minimum or maximum space requirements.
3. Nonconforming use . The use to which land or structures is being put is not a
principal, accessory, or special use permitted in the district in which it is located.
Uses in existence at the time of the adoption of this chapter which fall within the
category of special use in the district in which they are located are automatically a
special use and have the same status as if they had been approved by the Planning
Board.
Section 3. Erection of Dwelling on Lots of Record.
The erection of a single-family dwelling shall be permitted on any lot of record which contains an
area or width less than that required for a single-family dwelling in the district in which such a lot is
located. The lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in
the same ownership on the effective date of this section. Variance of any district regulations
besides area or width shall be obtained only through the action of the Board of Adjustment.
Section 4. Existing Structures.
A. After the effective date of this chapter, pre-existing land or structures, or uses of land or
structures which would be prohibited under the regulations for the district in which it is
located, shall be considered as nonconforming.
B. Nonconforming structures or uses may be continued, provided they conform to
the following provisions:
(1) No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases
its nonconformity.
(2) Should an industrial or commercial structure be destroyed by any
means to an extent of more than 50% of its value prior to destruction,
it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter. However, should a residential structure be destroyed
by any means the homeowner shall be allowed to rebuild as long as
building setbacks are maintained, the reconstructed dwelling occupies
the same building footprint as the destroyed dwelling, the
reconstructed dwelling has the same square footage (plus or minus
10%) as the destroyed dwelling, and the reconstructed dwelling has
been completed within a period of one year from the time it was
destroyed. If any of these residential requirements cannot be met, the
Page | 17
dwelling shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
(3) Should the structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district
in which it is located after it is moved.
(4) In the case of a nonconforming use of a structure, if active operations
are discontinued for a continuous period of six (6) months, the
nonconforming structure shall thereafter be occupied and used for
only a conforming use.
Section 5. Repairs.
A. On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, repairs and
modernization are permitted provided the cubical content of the building, as it existed
at the time that it became nonconforming due to adoption of or amendment to this
chapter, is not increased.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or Restoring to a
safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any public official
charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of that official.
ARTICLE II. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Section 1. Principal Residential Buildings.
No more than one principal, detached single-family residence may be located on the same
residential lot. This shall not be interpreted to prohibit an Accessory Dwelling Unit as permitted
under Part C, Article IV “Table of Permitted Uses.”
Section 2. Height Limitations
Page | 18
The height limitations of this chapter appear in Article III of this Part, Table 1.1 “Dimensional
Standards for All Zoning Districts”. Height limitations shall not apply to church spires, belfries,
cupolas, and domes not intended for human occupancy; nor to monuments, water towers,
observation towers, transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, flag poles, radio
towers, television towers, aerials, and similar structures
Section 3. Front Yard Setbacks
The front yard setbacks for each zoning district appear in Article III of this Part, Table 1.1
“Dimensional Standards for All Zoning Districts.” However, the front yard setback requirements for
dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average setback of existing buildings located wholly
or partially within 100 feet on either side of the proposed dwelling, on the same side of the same
block and use district, and fronting on the same street as such lot, is less than the minimum
required front yard depth. In such case, the setback on such lots may be less than the required
setback but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the aforementioned lots, or a
distance of ten feet from the street right-of-way line, whichever is greater.
Section 4. Rear Yard Setbacks
The rear yard setbacks for each zoning district appear in Article III of this Part, Table 1.1
“Dimensional Standards for All Zoning Districts.”
Section 5. Side Yard Setbacks
The side yard setbacks for each zoning district appear in Article III of this Part, Table 1.1
“Dimensional Standards for All Zoning Districts.”
Section 6. Side Yard Requirements for Corner Lots
The side yard setbacks for corner lots in each zoning district appear in Article III of this Part, Table
1.1 “Dimensional Standards for All Zoning Districts.” Accessory buildings shall comply with this
setback requirement.
Section 7. Visibility at Intersections
On a corner lot in any Residential district, no planting, structure, fence, wall, or obstruction to vision
more than three feet in height shall be placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by
the intersecting street right-of-way lines and a straight line connecting points on such street lines
each of which is 25 feet distant from the point of intersection.
Section 8. Prohibited Uses, Special Uses
Uses not designated as permitted by right or subject to additional conditions in a district shall be
prohibited from that district (not listed means not permitted). Special Uses are permitted
Page | 19
according to additional regulations imposed. Special Uses may be approved by the Board of
Adjustment following proper application under Part D of this Ordinance. Additional Special Uses
may be added to this Ordinance by amendment.
Section 9. Mobile Homes
With the exception of permitted Manufactured Home Parks, mobile homes shall be prohibited as
permanent principal and accessory buildings in all zoning districts. This prohibition shall not apply
to schools, construction site office facilities, and storage of unoccupied mobile homes in their
appropriate respective zoning districts.
Page | 20
Article III. Dimensional Requirements
Section 1. Standard Dimensional Requirements by District and Use
Table 1.1 - Dimensional Standards for All Zoning Districts
Minimum Building Setbacks*
Zoning District Use Min Lot Size (1st Dwelling Unit) Min for Each Add'l Dwelling Unit Min Lot Width Min Lot Depth Front Side Street-Side (Corner lot) Rear Max Ht
R-20 Detached 20,000 n/a 100 140 35 15 25 30 35
Duplex 20,000 5,000 100 140 35 15 25 30 35
MultiFam 20,000 5,000 100 140 35 15 25 30 35
Other 20,000 n/a 100 140 35 15 25 30 35
R-10 Detached 10,000 n/a 80 100 30 10 20 30 35
Other 10,000 n/a 80 100 30 10 20 30 35
R-6 Detached 6,000 n/a 60 90 25 8 18 20 35
Duplex 6,000 2,000 60 90 25 8 18 20 35
MultiFam 6,000 2,000 60 90 25 8 18 20 35
MHP, each space 6,000 n/a 60 90 35 15 25 20 35
NB All Allowable Uses 6,000 2,000 60 90 25 8 18 20 35
CC All Allowable Uses n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a except 8' when abutting Residential n/a n/a except 15' when abutting Residential 50
GC All Allowable Uses 10,000 n/a 100 80 40 10 10 10 35
HC-I All Allowable Uses 10,000 n/a 100 100 30 7.5 7.5 7.5 40 
* Covered porches (whether enclosed or not), and detached garages with breezeways shall be considered part of the main building and therefore subject to all setback requirements. 
* Accessory Structures shall be governed by DS-15 under Part C, Article V.
* The following are NOT subject to setback requirements: 
A) Patios, driveways, walkways, fences, walls; and
B) The outermost three (3) feet of any uncovered deck or porch, including stairs thereto; and
C) The outermost three (3) feet of an eaves, gutters, and similar fixtures. 
Page | 21
Section 2. Buffering Requirements
Buffer strips shall be required of all industrial and commercial district uses where they abut land
which is zoned Residential. Buffer strips shall consist of natural or man-made materials which
obstruct the view between parcels at a 90% or greater opaque level. Buffers shall not be less than
six (6) feet in height. The buffering requirement may be waived in isolated areas or in situations
where there exists common ownership of the abutting parcels subject to this Section.
ARTICLE IV. Table of Permitted Uses
Within the districts indicated on the Official Zoning Map, no building or land shall be used, and no
building shall be erected or altered which is intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for
any use other than those listed as permitted for that district in this section. Uses may be permitted
by right, Special Use Permit, or Conditional Use Permit. The land-use, its respective permit-type,
and any specific development standards shall be set forth and referenced in the following Table and
notes thereto ( supplemental pages 9-7 through 9-18 ).
Page | 22
ARTICLE V. Development Standards for Certain Permitted Uses
This Article sets forth specific development criteria for certain land-uses within the Town of
Spindale’s planning jurisdiction. These noted standards, as well as the required type of Permit, are
cross-referenced in Article IV of this Part. To obtain the proper permit, all land-uses noted
hereafter must adhere to all of their respective Development Standards (referred to as “DS”) listed
in this Article, as well as any other pertinent requirements in this Ordinance:
DS-1. Home Occupations
A. Carried on by a member of a family residing on the premises;
B. The business, occupation, or enterprise may employ no one other than a resident of that
home;
C. No merchandise or commodity may be sold on the premises;
D. No more than 25% of the total actual floor area of the home may be used for the Home
Occupation;
E. The home occupation shall be confined to the main building on the lot or premises and
no structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, or altered to permit the extension of
the home occupation outside the main building.
F. The “main building” shall be defined to include the primary living quarters of a
residence, excluding porches, decks, garages, or other connecting structures to a
residence not essential to the main living quarters.
G. Tattoo Parlors and/or Body Piercing shall not be permitted as a Home Occupation.
DS-2. Tattoo Parlors, Body Piercing
A. No such business of either classification shall be located within seven hundred feet
(700) of any other such business of either classification, as measured in a straight line
from property line to property line.
B. No such business of wither classification shall be located within seven hundred feet
(700) of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, child day care or
nursery school, public park, residentially zoned or residentially used property, or any
establishment with an on premises ABC license, as measured in a straight line from
property line to property line.
C. Ear piercing as a principal or accessory use shall not be subject to this classification and
these provisions.
Page | 23
D. Tattoo and/or body piercing operations shall not be considered as customary home
occupations .
DS-3. Yard Sale
A. Consignment sales prohibited – No one shall accept or take in for sale, any goods from
any commercial business or enterprise on a consignment basis for sale in a “yard sale.”
B. Signs – offsite directional signs may be permitted but only during the hours the sale is
actively being conducted. No sign may be posted or affixed to a public utility pole.
Offsite signs must be removed at the close of the sale activities, or by the end of daylight,
whichever first occurs, each day of the sale.
C. Number limited – Not more than two such sales per year shall be held at the premises if
occupied by the same family or any member of such family. Any sale lasting for any
number of hours on any given day shall constitute a sale under this ordinance.
D. Hours – “Yard sales” and/or “garage sales” may be conducted during daylight hours
only.
E. Unowned Premises – No yard sale or garage sale shall be permitted on premises not
owned or controlled by the person(s) holding the sale. Any violation of this subsection
shall be referred to the Code Enforcement Officer for investigation of possible violation
of the Zoning Ordinance and to the Town Clerk for possible violation of the Business
License Taxation Ordinance.
F. Traffic congestion – No person and/or vehicle shall impede the normal movement of
traffic on the public highways or street (NC Motor Vehicle Law 20-174).
G. Rules for Commercial Districts – Yard sales will be allowed in the Neighborhood
Business, Central Commercial, General Commercial, and Heavy Commercial/Industrial
zones at the rate of two per year. Only the business owner may hold a yard sale, and
that business owner may sell personal as well as business items during the yard sale.
H. Coverage – The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to or affect persons selling
goods pursuant to an order of a Court of competent jurisdiction or persons acting in
accordance with their powers and duties as public officials.
I. Permit Required – All persons wishing to have a yard sale must first get a yard-sale
permit from Spindale Town Hall and display that permit during the time of the
yard-sale. Permits will be available at Spindale Town Hall during normal business
hours. Any yard sale without a permit shall be considered in violation of this ordinance.
J. Penalties – Violation of any provision of this ordinance shall subject the offender to a
civil penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) to be recovered by the Town.
Violators shall be issued a written citation which must be paid within seventy-two (72)
Page | 24
hours. Each day’s continuation violation of this ordinance shall be a separate and
distinct offense.
DS-4. Child Daycares
A. A minimum of 200 square feet of usable outdoor play area is required for each child.
B. Aggregate play space must be surrounded by a sturdy fence at least four (4) feet in
height.
DS-5. Planned Unit Development
(A) The following types of planned developments are established:
(1) Planned business development.
a) Minimum site size - five acres.
b) This unit development will be permitted only in commercial districts.
c) Uses permitted in the form of commercial development will be limited to convenience
stores (drugs, food, personal services), professional offices, laundromats, and retail stores.
All auto-related services except service stations and recreational activities are prohibited.
d) Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of three square feet of parking space for each
one square foot of enclosed floor space. Service and loading areas shall be provided on the
ratio of one space for each 10,000 square feet of enclosed floor area.
e) The site plan shall include, in addition to those requirements in division (C), the following:
a. All buildings and structures within 300 feet of the development area's property lines
and their uses.
b. Proposed schedule of development, including stages likely to be followed.
c. Proposed provision for storm and sanitary sewerage (approved by the Building
Inspector), proposed treatment of ground cover, slopes, banks, and ditches.
d. Any signs erected shall be in a uniform plan throughout the development.
e. Site location for this type of development, if located on a major thoroughfare, shall
have access at least 150 feet from highway intersections to minimize traffic hazards,
inconvenience, and congestion.
f. Points of access and egress shall consist of driveways at least 20 feet in width.
g. Parking areas shall be paved with spaces and traffic lanes clearly marked.
Page | 25
h. No more than 25% of the total area shall be in buildings.
i. Screening and other forms of separation shall be required so that surrounding
residential properties are protected.
(2) Planned housing development.
a) Minimum site size - two acres.
b) The planned housing development area refers to land used for apartment complexes, public
housing projects, townhouses, patio houses, duplexes, cluster housing, and similar
residential developments. Detached single-family units are not included.
c) This use is permitted only in the Residential-6 districts.
d) Off-street parking shall be provided on a ratio of 1-1/2 spaces per dwelling unit.
e) Specific open space for recreation purposes shall be permanently assigned for that purpose.
Such areas shall be fenced off from streets and driveways by the developer.
f) No more than four units shall be attached to one another in a straight line without in
indentation in the front wall of the next two units or continuation of the complex in another
separate building.
g) Buildings in the planned housing development shall maintain 30-foot side yards between
buildings and open areas of 80 feet between the back walls of two opposite dwelling units.
h) Planned housing developments will also adhere to requirements presented in Article 7.
Landscaping and other forms of screening or fencing shall be included, when deemed necessary by
the Planning Board, to buffer the planned development from surrounding residential areas.
The land in a planned unit development shall be under single ownership or management or proper
assurances shall be provided that the project can be successfully completed. Owners of all property
involved should apply as required.
Prior to any construction, the preliminary site plan for a planned unit development shall be
submitted to the Planning Board for review by owners of all the property involved. The Planning
Board may approve or reject the proposal or make reasonable additional requirements including,
but not limited to utilities, drainage, landscaping and maintenance thereof, lighting, signs and
advertising devices, screening, accessways, curb cuts, traffic control, and setback of buildings to
protect adjoining residential lots or uses. Approval will be given only after holding a public hearing.
The applicant must resubmit the plan for final approval if changes in the plan were so directed. If
the plan is rejected, the applicant will not receive consideration of the same plan nor of the same
location for a period of 12 months.
Page | 26
After receiving approval of the plan with all modifications incorporated, the applicant shall submit a
final site plan in the form of a final plat. The final plat is necessary prior to issuance of a zoning
permit.
The preliminary site plan, along with written approval and conditions of the Planning Board, shall
show the following:
a) The proposed title of the project and the name of the engineer, architect, landscape architect
or designer, and developer.
b) North arrow, scale, date, existing zoning district boundaries, property lines, streets and
surrounding existing buildings, proposed streets and buildings in the development area,
existing easements, and contours at no greater than two-foot intervals.
c) General location, height, dimensions and use of proposed buildings, access, and egress;
location and height of screens, planting, fences, walls, and plantings; and location and total
spaces in off-street parking areas. Identification of surface treatments shall also be shown.
d) A tabulation of the total number of acres in the project and the percentage thereof proposed
to be devoted to different dwelling types, commercial uses, off-street parking, streets, play
areas, open space, and other uses.
e) A tabulation of the total number of dwelling units of various types in the project.
DS-6. Manufactured Home Park
A. Purpose
The purpose of the regulations expressed herein is to guide and regulate the development of
manufactured home parks within the Town of Spindale in order to preserve the public health,
safety and welfare and to require preparation and approval of a plan every time a manufactured
home park is created or expanded. Specifically, these regulations are designed to provide for an
adequately planned street system to avoid overcrowding of the land and extreme concentration of
population; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide for adequate water and
sewerage systems; to insure against erosion, water and flood damage; to facilitate an orderly
system for the design, layout and use of land. In order to achieve these goals the Town of Spindale
shall not approve any manufactured home park where it has been determined through a proper
investigation that such development will include or cause excessive flooding, poor drainage, soil
slippage, inadequate soil conditions or other potentially dangerous, unhealthy conditions.
B. Enforcement and Penalties
1. The Zoning Administrator may revoke any and all building permits issued for a
manufactured home park, should the developer not comply with the
manufactured home park standards set forth in this ordinance under an
Page | 27
approved manufactured home park plan. The Zoning Administrator may revoke
building permits in the manufactured home park until such time when the
developer has brought the park into compliance with this ordinance.
2. Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a Class 3
misdemeanor, as provided in G.S. 14-4, and shall be subject to a fine of five
hundred (500) dollars.
3. In lieu or in addition to criminal penalties outlined above, a developer of a
manufactured home park or other person violating this ordinance may be
subject to a civil penalty, under N.C.G.S. 160A-175(c), of $100.00. No penalty
shall be assessed prior to notice to the manufactured home park developer. For
every day a developer is in violation of this ordinance, it may be considered a
separate offense. If the violator does not pay such a penalty within 30 days of
notification of its assessment by written citation, it may be recovered by the
Town in a civil action in the nature of a debt. The developer may contest said
penalty in the court of appropriate jurisdiction.
4. Should a manufactured home park approved under the provisions of this
ordinance be found in violation of the provision set forth in this ordinance, the
owner or operator shall be notified in writing by the Zoning Administrator. The
written notification shall state the specific violations and set forth time limits in
which the violations shall be corrected. Should the owner or operator not
correct the violations in the specified time limit, the Zoning Administrator shall
notify the owner or operator by certified mail that a hearing is scheduled before
the Zoning Administrator to consider whether the operating permit for the park
should be revoked. The Zoning Administrator will render a written decision
within five days of the hearing and will notify the operator by certified mail.
5. Should the owner or operator of a manufactured home park in violation of this
ordinance correct said violations before the loss of the operating permit, the
owner or operator shall request that the Zoning Administrator conduct an
inspection of the park. Should said inspection indicate that the violations have
been corrected; the Zoning Administrator shall notify the owner or operator
that the operating permit will continue. If the violations have not been
corrected, then the operating permit shall be revoked as stated in the
notification.
6. In cases where the operating permit for a manufactured home park has been
revoked the following shall occur:
Page | 28
a. The owner or operator shall not rent or lease any vacant spaces until
violations have been corrected and the operating permit is reinstated.
b. For spaces which are leased or rented and will be occupied by a
manufactured home, the owner or operator shall cease to lease or rent
these spaces at the end of the contract period shall not exceed one (1)
year from the date of the loss of the operating permit.
c. The owner or operator shall notify each lessee of a space within the
park, within ten (10) days after receipt of written notification, that the
operating permit has been revoked and that their lease shall be
terminated at the end of the specific contract period. The owner or
operator shall provide a signed statement by each lessee that notice
from the owner or operator of the leased termination has been made.
7. The owner or operator of a manufactured home park, which has lost its
operating permit, may make application to the Zoning Administrator for
reinstatement of the operating permit. The Zoning Administrator shall reinstate
the operating permit, when the manufactured home park is in compliance with
the regulations for which the operating permit was revoked, and the approved
manufactured home park development plan approved by the Town.
8. A copy of this ordinance shall be on display at the manufactured home park
office and be readily available for occupants of the manufactured home park.
C. Administration
Manufactured home parks which are in existence at the effective date of this ordinance will become
nonconforming uses, however, any addition, expansion, or downsizing to an existing manufactured
home park, or major improvement or change in an existing park; such as change in location, in size
of spaces, or number of spaces; relocation of streets; relocation or addition of major utilities or
other major changes shall be regulated under the provisions of this ordinance. In the event that
expansion, addition, or downsizing occurs to an existing manufactured home park, the developer
shall provide to the Zoning Administrator a layout of the existing manufactured home park
including street patterns and space layouts to be used for informational purposes.
D. Severability
Should any section of these regulations be for any reason held void or invalid by a court of law, it
shall not affect the validity of any other section or provision herein which is not itself void or
invalid, and to this end, the provisions of this ordinance are hereby to be severable. Wherever the
Page | 29
provisions of any other law, ordinance or regulation impose higher standards that are required by
the provisions of this ordinance, the provisions of such law ordinance or regulation shall govern.
E. Conflict
Insofar as the provisions of this ordinance are inconsistent with the provisions of any other law
except a provision of state or federal law, the provisions of this ordinance shall control.
F. Permits and Procedures
No person may construct, maintain, occupy or operate a manufactured home park, unless a
preliminary site plan for such a park has been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Board and
approved by the Town Board of Commissioners. Upon approval by the Town Board of
Commissioners, a Zoning Permit may be issued by the Zoning Administrator, and construction of
the park begins. No space may be leased or manufactured home in the park be occupied until a final
plan of the manufactured home park has been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Board and
approved by the Town Board of Commissioners. Upon approval of the final plan, an operating
permit may then be issued for the park.
Page | 30
G. Contents of Preliminary and Final Site Plan.
Application to construct, develop, operate, alter or maintain a manufactured home park shall be
made to the Zoning Administrator. The application shall consist of preliminary site plans and then
the site final plans, which each include at least the following:
1. Name of manufactured home park, name and address of owner, name and
address of the registered engineer or land surveyor responsible for preparation
of the site plan.
2. A manufactured home park design drawn onto a site plan at a scale of one inch
equals 50 feet.
3. Date, north arrow and scale.
4. Boundaries of manufactured home park property to include intersections and
adjacent property with the boundary of the manufactured home park property
and the names and addresses of all adjoining property owners.
5. The plans for proposed utility layouts, including sanitary sewers, storm sewers,
water distribution lines, natural gas, telephone and electric service, illustrating
connections to existing systems. Plans for water supply and/or sewage disposal
must be accompanied by letters of preliminary approval by appropriate town,
county and state authorities. The final plan must contain "as-built" drawings.
6. Proposed streets, existing and platted streets on adjoining properties and in the
proposed manufactured home park, right-of-way, pavement widths,
approximate grades, design engineering data for all corners and curves, and
typical street cross sections. If any street is proposed to intersect with a state
maintained road, the plat shall be accompanied by an application for driveway
approval as required by the North Carolina Department of Transportation,
Division of Highway's Manual on Driveway Regulations. The plan must contain
"as-built" drawings.
7. Outline of all existing and proposed buildings within the manufactured home
park property with appropriate setbacks.
8. Location of parking bays, patios, walkways, service and accessory buildings,
utilities easements, utility poles, and buffer screening areas.
9. The locations of outlets for utilities connection to manufactured home.
Page | 31
10. Indication of how future expansion will be made, if applicable.
11. Location and quantity of refuse containers.
12. Method and plan of sewage disposal in accordance with existing town, county
and state regulations.
13. Plan of water supply in accordance with existing town, county and state
regulations.
14. Plan of electric lighting.
15. In the case of land with irregular topographic features, show finished contours,
and (by separate map or otherwise) existing contours.
H. Development Standards
1. Any site, tract of land, or lot to be developed as a manufactured home park shall
not be less than fifteen (15) acres in area, excluding street right-of-way, but
including utility easements, have at least five (5) manufactured homes, and shall
be located on property that is zoned R-6.
2. Two-way access streets within the site proposed shall have a pavement width of
at least 20 feet. One-way access streets shall have a pavement width of no less
than 18 feet. The construction and paving of these streets will be the developer's
expense. Permanent or dead-end streets or cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 750 feet
in length unless necessitated by topography and shall be provided with a
turnaround of at least 80 feet in diameter. Streets shall intersect as nearly as
possible at right angles, and no street shall intersect at less than 60 degrees.
Where a street intersects a highway, the design standards of the North Carolina
Department of Transportation shall apply. Street jogs of less than 150 feet shall
not be allowed. All streets shall have curbing and guttering for storm water
drainage purposes. All manufactured home spaces shall have access to a street
and there shall be no less than two off-street parking spaces per manufactured
home site.
3. Each manufactured home park shall conform to the following for park
entrances.
Page | 32
a. Fewer than fifty (50) spaces shall have a minimum of one entrance;
b. Fifty (50) to one hundred (100) spaces shall have a minimum of two
entrances;
c. Over one hundred (100) spaces an additional entrance shall be provided
for each fifty (50) spaces.
4. All manufactured homes shall be properly set up in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations, in conjunction with the North Carolina
Regulations for manufactured homes and the North Carolina Uniform
Residential Building Code. In addition, all manufactured homes shall have a
masonry skirting. Each manufactured home will be required to obtain the
proper building permits prior to locating in the park.
5. The manufactured home park shall be divided into spaces, the limits of which
shall be clearly marked on the ground by permanent flush stakes or markers. No
manufactured home space shall be occupied by any structure, park driveway, or
common area or facility, other than:
a. The manufactured home;
b. Its related automobile parking spaces; and
c. Utility storage.
6. Every manufactured home park shall be located on ground that is above any
probable flooding from any natural watercourse and shall be graded so as to
prevent the accumulation or ponding of water on the premises.
7. The minimum area of a manufactured home space shall be 6,000 square feet,
and shall not have a width of less than 60 feet or a length of less than 90 feet at
the narrowest point of the width or length. The setbacks for each manufactured
home space shall be: Front yard - 35 feet, Rear yard - 20 feet, and Side yard -15
feet.
8. No manufactured home or other structures within a manufactured home park
shall be closer to each other than 30 feet, except that storage or other auxiliary
structures for the exclusive use of the manufactured home may be closer to the
manufactured home than 30 feet.
9. No manufactured home or other structure shall be located closer than 20 feet to
an exterior boundary of the park or a bounding street right-of-way.
Page | 33
10. All manufactured home spaces shall abut upon a paved street.
11. At least 10% of the gross land area of the manufactured home park shall be
designed and developed as a recreation area. Recreation areas shall be located
so as to be free of traffic hazards and easily accessible to the park residents.
12. A densely planted buffer strip consisting of trees, shrubs, other planting or
screen fence at least ten (10) feet in height shall be provided along the rear and
side lines of the manufactured home park, or park property. No such buffer
shall, however, be upon or extend into a street right-of-way. Trees shrubs or
other plants to be used for a buffer shall be approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
13. The site proposed will provide street lighting in accordance with town policies.
14. In every manufactured home park and related buildings all installations of
plumbing, electrical wiring, and all gas and oil appliances shall comply with the
provisions of the state building code and any other applicable regulation of the
Town. In addition the following must be met:
a. Each manufactured home space shall be provided with plumbing and
electrical connections.
b. The water supply for each manufactured home shall be obtained only
from
faucets located inside each manufactured home. Outside faucets will be
allowed to be used for washing vehicles, watering plants and other
traditional outside uses.
15. A manufactured home park shall have direct access to a dedicated street or road.
16. No individual manufactured home space parking shall be located with direct
access to a public street or road.
17. The site proposed shall have an office either as a separate structure or in
connection with the dwelling quarters of the owner or operator.
18. The water system shall be in conformance with applicable state, county and
town regulations.
Page | 34
19. Sewage disposal shall be in conformance with applicable state, county and town
regulations. Individual septic tanks shall not be allowed.
20. Any tests deemed necessary by the Planning and Zoning Board must be
completed, and the results must be presented to the Planning and Zoning Board,
prior to obtaining an operating permit.
I. Manufactured Home Design Criteria
In order for a manufactured home to locate in a manufactured home park it must meet or exceed
the following criteria:
1. Width and Length - A minimum size of 26 feet wide by 40 feet in length. (Hitch
shall not be included in these dimensions.)
2. Roof Design - The roof shall have a design of at least a 3/12 pitch with fiberglass
shingles of Class C or better materials.
3. Foundation Wall - A continuous foundation wall of brick or stucco shall be
constructed and shall be unpierced except for ventilation and access to the crawl
space.
4. Porches - A porch is required at the front and rear doors that must be
constructed of wood or brick and must be at least 48 square feet in size.
5. All apparatus such as hitch, wheels, axle, and transport light shall be removed.
J. Operating Permits
1. When the developer has completed the construction of the entire park or any
phase he shall make application to the Zoning Administrator for an operating
permit. The Zoning Administrator shall make an on-site inspection to verify the
proper installation of the improvements.
a. If the construction conforms to the approved park plan, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue the developer an operating permit.
b. If the construction does not conform to the approved plan, the Zoning
Administrator shall delay issuance of the operating permit until it comes
into conformity. The Zoning Administrator shall inform the developer, in
Page | 35
writing, of deficiencies in the construction and advise as to actions
needed to be in compliance with the approved plan.
2. The operating permit issued to the developer shall constitute authority to lease
or rent spaces in the manufactured home park.
3. When a manufactured home park is to be developed in stages, the proposed
park plan may be submitted for the entire development, and application for
operating permits may be made for each stage of development upon completion.
There shall be no more than three stages of development.
4. It is the responsibility of the manufactured home park operator to operate the
park in compliance with this ordinance, and the operator shall provide adequate
supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and
in a clean sanitary condition.
Page | 36
K. Manufactured Home Park Names, Road Names and Addresses
1. The names of manufactured home parks and roads within such shall not
duplicate or be phonetically similar to the names of existing manufactured
home parks or road names in the Town of Spindale or Rutherford County.
2. Where proposed streets are continuations of existing streets, the existing road
names shall be used.
3. Property address numbers shall conform to Rutherford County’s addressing
system and shall be assigned by the Rutherford County Addressing Department.
L. Restrictions
Individual manufactured home spaces within a manufactured home park, as defined under this
ordinance, shall not be sold. A number of manufactured home spaces or blocks of manufactured
home spaces may be sold to a single owner, corporation, group or other as long as the spaces
remain rental spaces for occupancy by manufactured homes. Upon ownership changes of a
manufactured home park or any part thereof the owner shall notify the Zoning Administrator of the
new owner and other pertinent information.
DS-7. Family Care Home
A. Family Care Homes are defined in NC General Statute 168-21 and PART E of this Ordinance.
B. A Family Care Home must be at least one-half (1/2) mile from any such existing home.
C. Certification of Residents – The owner or operator must provide to the Town certification from a
licensed health care provider of each resident’s handicap; the diagnosis of such health care
provider must rise to the level of a physical, emotional, or mental handicap; further, the owner or
operator of such home must provide certification from the placing agency that such resident is
not dangerous to others.
D. Violation - The failure of the owner or operator to provide the certifications required or by
allowing a non-qualified person to reside at said home shall be considered just cause for
revocation of the business license and Zoning Permit to operate the Family Care Home.
DS-8. Sexually Oriented Business
Page | 37
A. The owner/operator of the sexually oriented business must have a current, valid permit to
operate according to the Town of Spindale Code of Ordinances.
B. No portion of the premises on which the business is located shall be situated within 600 feet of
any of the following zoning districts:
a. Residential districts R-6, R-10, R-20, NB and C-C Central Commercial.
C. No portion of the premises on which the sexually oriented business is located shall be situated
within 600 feet of a lot line of an established church as defined by the Spindale Code of
Ordinances.
D. No portion of the premises on which the sexually oriented business is located shall be within 600
feet of a public park.
E. No portion of the premises on which the sexually oriented business is located shall be situated
within 600 feet of a lot line of another sexually oriented business.
F. There shall be no more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or
portion thereof. No other principal or accessory use may occupy the same building, structure,
property, or portion thereof with any sexually oriented business.
G. The structure in which the sexually oriented business is located shall contain no sleeping
quarters.
H. If dancers are employed as a feature of the sexually oriented business, the performing areas for
such dancers shall be separated from patrons by at least ten feet.
I. If viewing booths are provided, such are designed as to allow the person or occupants to be
completely visible from a portion of the premises open and available to the public.
J. The applicant shall propose and implement a site lighting plan adequate to ensure public safety.
K. No printed material, video, photograph, written text, live show, or other visual presentation
format shall be visible from outside the walls of the establishment, nor shall any live or recorded
voices, music, or sounds be heard from outside the walls of the establishment.
L. No off site signs advertising a sexually oriented business shall be allowed within 1000 feet of a
church, school, or residence.
Page | 38
M. The Board of Adjustment may impose additional restrictions as deemed fair and necessary, such
as additional restrictions on location, signage, buffering, hours of operation, etc.
Page | 39
DS-9. Automobile Storage; Automobile Towing & Storage; Automobile
Wrecking or Junk Yards; Salvage Yards, Scrap Processing, Recycling
A. Outdoor storage shall be completely screened by a screening device at least eight (8) feet in
height and ninety percent (90%) opaque.
B. Automobile wrecking or junk yards, salvage and scrap processing uses shall require a minimum
of three (3) acres. Any area covered by six hundred (600) square feet or more of scrap material
or seven (7) or more more junk vehicles shall qualify as a use of this category.
C. Uses subject to this note shall be separated in such a manner as to prevent dust and tracking of
mud and debris onto adjoining streets.
DS-10. Fencing Required Around Public Utilities.
All land utilized for utility storage, treatment plants, and electrical distribution shall be surrounded
by a fence no less than six (6) feet in height for safety purposes.
DS-11. RV Park Campground
DS-12. Outdoor Theater
DS-13. Communication Tower Over 60’ in Height
DS-14. Kennels
DS-15. Accessory Structures
Page | 40
A. No accessory structure shall be located in front of the Front Building Line of the main building on
a parcel.
B. On corner lots, Accessory Structures shall conform to the side setback requirements for
street-side property lines.
ARTICLE VI. Special Use Permit Findings
Section 1. General Findings
The following findings, based on evidence and testimony received at a public hearing in accordance
with procedures specified in Part D Article III of this Ordinance, must be made by the Board of
Adjustment or Town Board in order to approve any Special Use Permit:
A. The use does not materially endanger the public health or safety;
B. The use would not substantially injure the value of adjoining property, or that the
use is a public necessity;
C. The location and character of the use, if developed according to the plan submitted
and approved, will be in harmony with the area in which it is to be located and in
general conformity with the plan of development of the Town;
D. The use meets all required conditions and specifications.
Section 2. Additional Findings for Certain Special Uses
The Board of Adjustment or Town Board may impose additional restrictions as deemed fair and
necessary, such as additional restrictions on location, signage, buffering, setbacks, parking, hours of
operation, and number of employees.
Page | 41
ARTICLE VII. Parking Regulations
Section 1. Parking Spaces Required
There shall be provided at the time of the erection of any building; at the time any principal building
is enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, seats, or floor area; or
before conversion from one type of use or occupancy to another, permanent off-street parking
space in the amount specified by this section. Such parking space may be provided in a parking
garage or properly graded open space and shall be indicated on all site plans submitted under this
chapter. No public right-of-way shall be used in determining or providing required off-street
parking. The required number of off-street parking spaces are specified below for each use (if the
use is not listed, the Zoning Administrator may determine if the use is similar to any other uses
listed in the table and determine the number of spaces accordingly):
Land Use Required Parking Space ______
Auto Sales and Repair One space for each two employees during shift of
maximum employment, plus two spaces for each 300
square feet of repair or maintenance space.
Bowling Alleys Two spaces for each lane, plus one additional space
for each two employees.
Churches and Funeral Homes One parking space for every four seats in the
sanctuary.
Clinics Three spaces for every doctor, plus two spaces for
each three employees.
Medical Offices in a Residence Three parking spaces per doctor in addition to
Page | 42
Or Separate Building residential requirements where applicable.
Drive-In Restaurants Space equivalent to five times floor space in main
building.
Dwellings (all single and multi) One and one-half for each dwelling unit.
Elementary and Junior High Schools One space for each classroom and administrative
office and one space for each school bus serving the
school.
Florist One space for every 150 square feet of sales area.
Golf Courses and Swimming Pools One space for every three families on membership, or
minimum of 25 spaces.
Hospitals One space for every three beds, plus one space for
each three employees on maximum shift, plus one
space for each visiting doctor.
Industries and Warehouses One space for every two employees during shift of
maximum employment, and one space for every
truck to be stored.
Kindergartens and Day Care One space for each ten children that attend, plus one
space for each employed adult.
Library One parking space for every four seats provided for
patron use.
Miniature Golf or Driving Range One space for each two employees, plus not less than
three additional spaces for customers.
Mobile Home Sales Two spaces per employee.
Motels and Hotels One space per unit.
Government Buildings One space per employee, plus one space for each five
seats in the largest assembly.
Nursing Homes One parking space for each five beds intended for
patient use, plus one parking space for each
employee on the largest shift.
Offices One space for every 300 square feet of office floor
Page | 43
area.
Plant Nurseries and Greenhouses One space per employee, plus five customer spaces.
Retail Business and Consumer Services None required in Central Commercial District.
Elsewhere, one space for every 200 square feet of
gross floor area.
Senior High School One space for each 20 students, plus one space for
each classroom and administrative office, plus one
space for each school bus serving the School.
Service Stations Four spaces for each bay, plus two additional spaces
for employees.
Social Halls, Community Centers, One space for each four fixed seats provided.
Page | 44
Private Clubs, Lodges, Pool Rooms for patron use, plus one space for each 100 square
And Dance Clubs feet of floor or ground area used for amusement
of assembly but not including fixed seats.
Stadiums One parking space for each eight spectator seats.
Taverns Three times the inside floor space.
Tourist Homes or Boarding Houses One space per rental unit.
*There is no off-street parking requirement within the CC Central Commercial Zone.
Section 2. Loading and Unloading Spaces
Every building or structure used or business, trade, or industry hereafter erected shall provide
space as indicated herein for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley.
Such space shall have access to an alley or, if there is no alley, to a street. For the purposes of this
section, an off-street loading space shall have a minimum dimension of 12 feet by 40 feet and an
overhead clearance of 14 feet in height above the alley or street grade.
Retail operations: One loading space for each 20,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction
thereof.
Industrial and wholesale operations: One loading space for each 50,000 square feet of gross floor
area or fraction thereof.
Page | 45
ARTICLE VIII. Sign Regulations
Section 1. Purpose
The purpose of this article is to regulate and control signs and their placement throughout the
Town of Spindale. The sign regulations contained herein are designed to enhance the health, safety,
and visual communication of the residents within the area in addition to preserving the natural
beauty of the surrounding environment.
Section 2. Definitions
Sign. Any display (including structural supports and framing) of letters, words, numbers, figures,
emblems, pictures, or any parts or combination thereof, which are made visible for the purpose of
directing attention to any realty, product, service, place, activity , person, institution, performance,
commodity, firm business or solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated
merchandise or any emblem, painting, banner, poster, pennant, plaque, placard or temporary sign
designed to identify or convey information including the following:
1. Banner sign. A signed designed with paper, cloth, plastic, or other similar lightweight
flexible material that can be attached to structures with rope, chains, string or similar
device.
2. Canopy sign. A projecting sign attached to, painted on, or hung from a canopy, awning or
marquee.
3. Easel sign. A temporary sign made of materials such as wood, plastic, graphite, etc. designed
to be placed on a separate stand.
4. On premise sign. A sign which directs attention to a business, profession, industry or a
group of businesses, firms or corporations, which are located on the same lot as the sign.
Such signs are erected independently of any building wall and are securely or permanently
anchored into the ground using footings or other structural foundation approved by the
building code.
5. Inflatable sign. A temporary sign designed to be filled with air or other gases, which can be
suspended in mid air.
6. Informational sign . Parking signs, legal notices or signs of similar nature which are
necessary for the welfare of the citizens and do not advertise any product, service, business
or entertainment and contain no logos or advertisements.
7. Off-premises advertising signs. A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, product, activity, place or entertainment, conducted, sold or offered at any location
other than the lot on which the sign is located. A billboard.
8. Portable sign. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent
structure, or a sign designed to be transported.
Page | 46
9. Roof sign. A sign erected, constructed or maintained above the roof of any structure,
including any sign attached to a wall that projects above the roofline or the top of a parapet
wall.
10. Temporary sign. A sign placed on property in a non-permanent manner which is designed of
materials that make it easy to move from one place to another. A temporary sign is
normally used for purposes of advertising short-term events such as grand openings, sales,
business specials or special activities.
11. Wall sign. Any sign attached to a wall, which is parallel to the wall but projects no more
than 18 inches from the wall.
12. Freestanding sign. Any sign or support structure of sign that is standing by itself and is not
attached to any structure other than the ground. This includes: easel signs, on premises
signs, off premises advertising signs, and portable signs.
Section 3. Signs Exempt
Signs exempt from the regulations of this chapter, and which do not require a permit:
1. Signs erected or installed by a governmental agency under governmental
authority to identify public buildings, welcome or direct visitors, or to regulate,
control or direct traffic, including signs indicating bus stops and similar
transportation facilities. Such signs may be illuminated, flashing or moving as
required for public safety. Furthermore, signs erected by governmental agency,
which convey information regarding a public service or the location of a public
facility may be illuminated if deemed necessary.
2. Signs required by law, including but not limited to, building permits, exit signs, etc.
3. Signs which warn of hazard to life, limb, and property, such as high voltage
electrical equipment, explosives, etc.
4. “No Trespassing” signs equal to or containing less than four square feet of surface
area.
5. Trade names or product names and graphics, which are customarily painted on
newspaper stands, soft drink machines, gasoline pumps and automatic teller
machines.
6. Temporary display of decorations, when such are incidental to, and are
customarily and commonly associated with any national, local or religious holiday
or celebration.
7. Signs indicating finance or credit information such as VISA, MASTERCARD, etc.,
not to exceed one square foot per financial sign.
8. Off-premise church directional signs not to exceed four (4) square feet in copy
area. These signs may be located on private property with permission of the
owner, at the nearest intersection of the major thoroughfare and/or collector
street to the site of the church.
9. The display of the flag of the United States or North Carolina.
10. Private residential signs indicating the name, box, or house number of a particular
residence not to exceed two square feet.
Page | 47
11. Temporary signs or festival signs indicating town, civic club or school sponsored
events, which must be removed within three days after the event is held.
12. Signs which are located inside a particular establishment, and which are not
intended for external viewing.
13. Signs considered historically significant and/or landmark signs if so designated by
resolution of the Town Board of Commissioners.
14. Any sign not exceeding nine square feet in area.
15. “For Sale” and “For Rent” signs pertaining to realty, on the premises offered for
sale or for rent, not exceeding 6 square feet in area and not illuminated. Such a
sign may be placed not closer to the front property line than ten feet. The sign
shall be removed when the new tenant occupies the property, or when the
transfer of title to the new owner sells the property. Traffic signs and
governmental identification signs are permitted as necessary.
16. Signs identifying subdivisions are permitted only at entrances, provided they are
no larger than 32 square feet in area.
17. One easel sign per business that does not exceed five square feet and does not
block the public right -of-way or obstruct public sidewalks.
Section 4. Signs Prohibited
1. Any advertising sign erected, constructed or maintained so as it interferes with
vision clearance along any street, road, or highway or at any intersection or junction
of two or more traffic arteries.
2. Any sign, (except a governmental sign) located within a street right-of-way, or
projecting into a street right-of-way, unless the street right-of-way extends so close
to the business that a sign cannot be kept out of the right-of-way.
3. Any sign which obstructs or substantially interferes with any window, door, fire
escape, stairway, ladder, or opening intended to provide light, air, ingress or egress
for any building.
4. Any flashing device or sign displaying flashing or intermittent lights, or lights of
changing degrees of intensity, except a sign indicating time and/or temperature.
5. Any sign painted on a roadway, (except governmental signs), or any sign posted to
utility poles, trees or rocks.
6. Any sign which is a copy of or an imitation of an official governmental sign, or which
purports to have official status.
7. Signs painted or displayed on vehicles or trailers if the vehicle or trailer is parked in
a location for the primary purpose of displaying the sign, except for signs that are
painted on or attached to commercial vehicles, which are not parked for the primary
purpose of displaying the sign.
8. Roof signs.
9. Temporary and Portable signs used as permanent signage.
Section 5. Signs, General
1. Advertising signs shall be permitted in the Neighborhood Business, Central
Commercial, General Commercial, and Heavy Commercial/Industrial Zoning
Page | 48
Districts. Billboards, however, shall only be permitted in the GC and HC-I
Districts.
2. It is recognized that, as enumerated in Part C Article IV, “Table of Permitted
Uses,” certain non-residential uses may be permitted in Residential districts.
Signage for such uses shall also require a permit and be subject to the standards
and requirements of this Ordinance.
3. All signs, except those not requiring a permit, shall be approved by the Zoning
Administrator before a permit will be issued and shall comply with all
regulations in this Article.
4. The maximum permitted size for any advertising sign, a billboard, an
off-premise advertising sign, or an on-premise sign is 360 square feet.
5. Only two freestanding advertising signs per business will be permitted.
Property owners or lessees must show proof of legal ownership or leasing of
property where sign is to be located.
6. Up to four canopy or wall signs, or combination thereof, per business for each
street that the business is adjacent to.
7. All banner signs shall be mounted flush against and parallel to a solid wall or
building façade, and shall not project above the top edge of such wall. Two
banner signs shall be permitted for each business. The maximum size of any
banner shall not exceed 60 square feet.
8. All inflatable signs shall meet the following standards:
a) The sign shall not pose a threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the
public.
b) The sign shall not exceed 40 feet in height.
c) The sign shall not obstruct public parking areas.
8. Removal of signs upon discontinuation of use. Whenever the use of a building or
premises by a specified business or other establishment is discontinued by the
owner or occupant for a period of 90 successive days, all signs pertaining to that
business or establishment that were installed by the occupant shall be removed,
as well as all signs which do not conform to the standards of this section.
9. All signs including temporary, portable , and permanent free standing signs shall
be erected and maintained in a safe and attractive condition; the following
maintenance requirements shall apply to all signs visible from any public street
or right-of-way.
a) A sign shall have not more than 20 percent of its surface area covered
with the disfigured, cracked, ripped, or peeling paint, poster paper, or
other material for a period of more than 30 successive days.
b) A sign shall not stand with bent or broken sign facing, with broken
supports, with loose appendages or struts, or more than 15 degrees from
vertical for a period exceeding ten successive days.
Page | 49
c) A sign shall not have weeds, trees, vines, or other vegetation growing
upon it, or obscuring the view of the sign from the street or right-of-way
from which it is to be viewed, for a period exceeding 30 successive days.
d) An internally illuminated sign shall be allowed to stand with only partial
illumination for a period of no more than 30 consecutive days.
Section 6. Standards for Temporary and Portable Signs
All temporary and portable signs, erected to serve temporary purposes shall be removed within the
timeframes as enumerated in the respective subsections below. No temporary or portable sign
shall be allowed to serve as a permanent on- or off-premise advertising sign. Whenever unused for
advertising and/or messaging purposes, temporary and portable signs must be removed from the
property or stored indoors, out of sight of the general public. The following temporary and portable
signs shall be allowed in each zoning district, in accordance with the standards set forth in this
section.
1. Signs for political candidates, parties, or groups supporting the candidacy of any individual
for the office or concerning any public issues to be voted upon, provided that:
a) There shall be no more than one such sign per candidate or issue on any
one lot.
b) Such signs shall be placed no closer to the street or road than the edge of
the sidewalk farthest from the street or road or, if no sidewalk is in place,
no closer than eight feet from the back of the curb or edge of the street or
road, whichever applies.
c) Where not attached to a building or other structure, such signs shall be
self-supporting.
d) The candidate, or his or her representative, shall identify a person who the
Town may require to remove the signs after the election.
e) Such signs shall be removed no later than 10 days after the election date.
f) If by the 11 th day after the election the signs are not removed, the town
may remove the signs and bill the candidate for the cost of removal.
2. Signs for specific events, special church functions, or the opening of business, provided
that:
a) Such signs are located only on private property or on property with land
owner’s permission.
b) Such signs shall not exceed a total surface of 32 square feet.
c) Such signs shall be limited to duration of 30 days.
3. Yard Sale signs are permitted, provided that off-site directional signs may be permitted but
only during the hours the sale is actively being conducted. Off site signs must be removed at
the close of the sale activities, or by the end of daylight, whichever first occurs, each day of
the sale.
Page | 50
4. Accessory sales events shall be allowed one sign not to exceed sixteen square feet in size. A
temporary sales site located on a corner lot may use two signs not to exceed sixteen square
feet in size, one facing each road frontage. Sign colors shall be compatible with the
permanent signs for the principal use on the site. Pennants, streamers, non-governmental
flags and other attentions seeking devices are prohibited. Lights may be used for sales area
illumination only and shall not serve to attract the attention of the public from off the site.
5. Temporary and portable off-premise directional signs for civic, philanthropic, educational,
religious, and other not-for-profit events, provided that:
a) The special event occurs within Spindale’s corporate limits or ETJ;
b) Signs shall not exceed five square feet in surface area per side and ten
square feet total and shall not exceed forty-two inches in height;
c) There shall be no more than two signs per intersection and no more than
one sign per property;
d) Such signs shall be placed no closer to the street or road than the edge of
the sidewalk farthest from the street or road than the sidewalk is in place,
no closer than eight feet from the back of the curb or edge of the street or
road, whichever applies;
e) Such signs shall be self-supporting;
f) Signs shall be placed no sooner than 7 days prior to the event and shall
be removed no later than one day following the event.
6. All illuminated signs or structures shall be so placed as to prevent the light rays or
illumination there from being cast upon residential dwellings.
7. Electric signs that have internal wiring or lighting equipment, and external lighting
equipment that directs light on signs, shall not be erected or installed until and unless an
electrical permit has been obtained from the Building Inspector Department. All such signs
and equipment shall be UL approved. All wiring to electric signs or to permanent
freestanding equipment that lights a sign shall be installed underground, or in accordance
with the NEC.
8. The Zoning Administrator shall refuse a permit for the erection or construction of any
advertising sign or structure that does not meet the requirements of this section. The
Zoning Administrator shall order the removal of any signs that are not constructed or
maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section.
9. Upon adoption of this Ordinance, all temporary and portable signs thereby rendered
Non-Conforming shall be brought into compliance within twelve (12) months.
Page | 51
PART D: PROCESS AND PROCEDURES
ARTICLE I. Zoning Administrator
This Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by a Zoning Administrator or his representative
who may be, or is appointed by, the Town Manager and is hereby empowered to:
a) Issue a zoning permit when these regulations have been followed or to refuse to issue the
same in the event of noncompliance. Written notice of such refusal and reason therefore
shall be given to the applicant.
Page | 52
b) Collect the designated fees as set forth in this chapter for zoning permits, fees for specials
uses, variances, appeals, and conditional use permits, or any other fee that may be specified
within this ordinance.
c) Make and keep all records necessary and appropriate to the office, including records of the
issuance and denial of all zoning permits, receipt of complaints of violation of this
ordinance, and action taken on same.
d) Inspect any buildings or land to determine whether any violations of this ordinance have
been committed or exist.
e) Enforce this ordinance and take all necessary steps to remedy any condition found in
violation by ordering in writing the discontinuance of illegal uses or illegal work in
progress, and to institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action.
f) Keep the Planning Board/Zoning Board of Adjustment advised of all matters other than
routine duties pertaining to the enforcement of this chapter and transmit all applications
and records pertaining to permits, appeals, special uses, and variances as needed.
ARTICLE II. Planning Board
Section 1. Legislative Authority & Membership
The Spindale Planning Board shall be comprised of five members and two alternates appointed by
the Town Board of Commissioners, with all members and alternates being residents from within
the municipal boundaries of the Town of Spindale. General Statute 160 A-361 authorizes the
Planning Board to perform the following duties:
? Make studies of the area within its jurisdiction and surrounding areas;
? Determine objectives to be sought in the development of the study area;
? Prepare and adopt plans for achieving these objectives;
? Develop and recommend policies, ordinances, administrative procedures, and other means
for carrying out plans in a coordinated and efficient manner;
? Advise the Board of Commissioners concerning the use and amendment of means for
carrying out plans;
? Exercise any functions in the administration and enforcement of various means for carrying
out plans that the Council may direct; and
? Perform any other related duties that the Commissioners may direct.
The Spindale Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman from its members who
shall serve for one year, until re-elected, or until their successors are elected. The Planning Board
shall appoint a secretary, whom may be a municipal officer, an employee of the town, or a member
of the Board.
Section 2. Rules
Page | 53
The Planning Board shall adopt rules and by-laws in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and of GS 160A-361. Meetings of the Board shall be held either on the first Tuesday of each month,
or called when needed.
Section 3. Specific Authority and Duties
The Planning Board shall have the specific authority to make the following recommendations to the
Spindale Board of Commissioners regarding the Zoning Ordinance and Official Zoning Map:
? Recommend amendments to the zoning ordinance.
? Recommend amendments to the official zoning map.
? Make recommendations regarding Conditional Use Permits.
? Issue a statement upon each recommendation that the proposal is either consistent with, or
not consistent with any comprehensive plan that has been adopted and any other officially
adopted plan that is applicable.
? Any related duty that the Board of Commissioners deem necessary.
The Planning Board shall also be charged with the review and disposition of Preliminary
Subdivision Plats as described under Town Code of Ordinances Chapter 153, Subdivisions.
Advertising shall follow general statutes regarding amendments to the official zoning ordinance
and/or map. Before making their recommendation to the Board of Commissioners, the Planning
Board may review each application for no more than 30 days from receipt of same at the meeting
where the matter is introduced. If after 30 days the Planning Board has not rendered a
recommendation, the Board of Commissioners may proceed with consideration and/or action.
ARTICLE III. Board of Adjustment & Appeals
Section 1. Legislative Authority and General Requirements for Quasi-judicial Hearings and
Decisions
Page | 54
A. General Statute 160A, Article 19, Part 3 authorizes the Zoning Board of Adjustment to hear
and decide special use permits, requests for variances, and appeals of decisions of
administrative officials charged with enforcement of the Spindale Zoning Ordinance. As
used in this section, the term "decision" includes any final and binding order, requirement,
or determination. The Board of Adjustment shall follow quasi-judicial procedures when
deciding appeals and requests for variances and special use permits; similarly, the Town
Board of Commissioners shall use quasi-judicial procedures when rendering decisions on
Conditional Use Permits. The respective Board shall hear and decide all matters upon which
it is required to pass under any statute or ordinance that regulates land use or development.
B. A quasi-judicial decision is a process that involves the finding of facts regarding a specific
application of an ordinance and the exercise of discretion when applying the standards of
the ordinance. As a result the following standard procedures for conduct of quasi-judicial
hearings shall be incorporated as appropriate, regardless of which Board is involved in the
decision.
1. Contact with Decision-Making Board Members :
Contact with any members of a decision-making Board prior to the public hearing
by any individual regarding the matter is prohibited.
2. All Participants to be Sworn In :
All participants in the public hearing shall be duly sworn in prior to the submission
of any testimony. A participant may choose to affirm instead of being sworn.
3. Competent Evidence Required :
All decisions shall be based on competent evidence entered in as part of the record.
The term “competent evidence,” as used in this subsection, shall not preclude
reliance by the decision-making Board on evidence that would not be admissible
under the rules of evidence as applied in the trial division of the General Court of
Justice if (i) the evidence was admitted without objection, or (ii) the evidence
appears to be sufficiently trustworthy and was admitted under such circumstances
that it was reasonable for the decision-making Board to rely upon it. The term
“competent evidence,” as used in this subsection, shall not be deemed to include the
opinion testimony of lay witnesses as to any of the following:
a) The use of property in a particular way would affect the value of other property.
b) The increase in vehicular traffic resulting from a proposed development would
pose a danger to the public safety.
Page | 55
c) Matters about which only expert testimony would generally be admissible under
the rules of evidence.
4. Cross-Examination of Witnesses :
The cross-examination of witnesses submitting testimony shall be permitted upon
request.
Section 2. Membership, Voting Requirements and Rules
A. Membership :
The Zoning Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall be comprised of five members and two
alternates appointed by the Town Board of Commissioners, with all members and
alternates being residents from within the municipal boundaries of the Town of Spindale.
B. Voting Requirements :
The concurring vote of four-fifths of the Board shall be necessary to grant a variance. A
majority of the members shall be required to decide any other quasi-judicial matter or to
determine an appeal made in the nature of certiorari. For the purposes of this section,
vacant positions on the Board and members who are disqualified from voting on a
quasi-judicial matter shall not be considered members of the Board for calculation of the
requisite majority if there are no qualified alternates available to take the place of such
members.
C. Rules :
The Zoning Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall elect a Chair and a Vice-Chair from its
members who shall serve for one year, until re-elected, or until their successors are elected.
The Board shall appoint a clerk, who may be a municipal officer, an employee of the Town,
or a member of the Board.
1. The Board shall adopt by-laws in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and of
GS 160A-388.
2. Meetings of the Board shall be held either on the first Tuesday of each month, at the call
of the Chair, or at such times as the Board may determine. The Chair, or in his or her
absence, the Vice-Chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by
subpoena. All meetings of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each
fact; and the final disposition of appeals shall be by recorded resolution indicating the
reasons of the Board therefore, all of which shall be kept as public record.
3. An application to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to the terms of this Article must be
received by the Town Manager at least 30 days prior to the date of a Board of
Adjustment meeting in order to be scheduled for such meeting.
Page | 56
4. Notice of hearings conducted pursuant to this section shall be mailed to the person or
entity whose appeal, application, or request is the subject of the hearing; to the owner of
the property that is the subject of the hearing if the owner did not initiate the hearing; to
the owners of all parcels of land abutting the parcel of land that is the subject of the
hearing; and to any other persons entitled to receive notice as provided by the zoning or
unified development ordinance. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the city may
rely on the county tax listing to determine owners of property entitled to mailed notice.
For the purposes of this section, “abutting” property owners include those whose
property is located across a right-of-way. Such notice shall state the location of the
building or lot, the general nature of the question involved in the appeal, and the time
and place of the hearing. The notice must be deposited in the mail at least 10 days, but
not more than 25 days, prior to the date of the hearing. Within that same time period, the
Town shall also prominently post a notice of the hearing on the site that is the subject of
the hearing or on an adjacent street or highway right-of-way. (G.S. 160A-388 (a2))
5. A member of any Board exercising quasi-judicial functions shall not participate in or vote
on any quasi-judicial matter in a manner that would violate affected persons'
constitutional rights to an impartial decision maker. Impermissible violations of due
process include, but are not limited to, a member having a fixed opinion prior to hearing
the matter that is not susceptible to change, undisclosed ex parte communications, a
close familial, business, or other associational relationship with an affected person, or a
financial interest in the outcome of the matter. In such case, the Board member shall
advise the Chair in open session after call of the matter that he or she has a conflict of
interest and an alternate shall be called by the Chair to replace him or her. If no alternate
is available, the seat shall be declared vacant for the purposes of the vote of the particular
matter at issue. If an objection is raised to a member's participation and that member
does not recuse himself or herself, the remaining members shall by majority vote rule on
the objection.
6. Quasi-Judicial Decisions and Judicial Review
a) The Board shall determine contested facts and make its decision within a
reasonable time. Every quasi-judicial decision shall be based upon competent,
material, and substantial evidence in the record. Each quasi-judicial decision shall
be reduced to writing and reflect the Board's determination of contested facts
and their application to the applicable standards. The written decision shall be
signed by the Chair or other duly authorized member of the Board. A
quasi-judicial decision is effective upon filing the written decision with the clerk
to the Board or such other office or official as the ordinance specifies. The
decision of the Board shall be delivered by personal delivery, electronic mail, or
by first-class mail to the applicant, property owner, and to any person who has
submitted a written request for a copy, prior to the date the decision becomes
effective. The person required to provide notice shall certify that proper notice
has been made.
Page | 57
b) Every quasi-judicial decision shall be subject to review by the superior court by
proceedings in the nature of certiorari pursuant to G.S. 160A-393. A petition for
review shall be filed with the clerk of superior court by the later of 30 days after
the decision is effective or after a written copy thereof is given in accordance
with subdivision (1) of this subsection. When first-class mail is used to deliver
notice, three days shall be added to the time to file the petition.
7. Oaths: The Chair of the Board or any member acting as Chair and the clerk to the Board
are authorized to administer oaths to witnesses in any matter coming before the Board.
Any person who willfully swears falsely, while under oath during a proceeding before the
Board of Adjustment, is guilty of a Class 1 Misdemeanor.
8. Subpoenas: The Board of Adjustment through the Chair, or in the Chair's absence anyone
acting as Chair, may subpoena witnesses and compel the production of evidence. To
request issuance of a subpoena, persons with standing under G.S. 160A-393(d) may
make a written request to the Chair explaining why it is necessary for certain witnesses
or evidence to be compelled. The Chair shall issue requested subpoenas he or she
determines to be relevant, reasonable in nature and scope, and not oppressive. The Chair
shall rule on any motion to quash or modify a subpoena. Decisions regarding subpoenas
made by the Chair may be appealed to the full Board of Adjustment. If a person fails or
refuses to obey a subpoena issued pursuant to this subsection, the Board of Adjustment
or the party seeking the subpoena may apply to the General Court of Justice for an order
requiring that its subpoena be obeyed, and the court shall have jurisdiction to issue these
orders after notice to all proper parties.
9. Expiration of Permits: Unless otherwise specified, any order or decision of the Board
granting a special use permit or a variance shall expire if the applicant does not obtain a
building permit or certificate of occupancy for such use within six months from the date
of the decision.
Section 3. Specific Authority and Duties
A. Appeals : The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals on decisions of
administrative officials charged with enforcement of the Spindale Zoning Ordinance and
may hear appeals arising out of any other ordinance that regulates land use or development,
pursuant to all of the following:
1) Any person who has standing under G.S. 160A-393(d) or the Town may appeal a
decision to the Board of Adjustment. An appeal is taken by filing a notice of appeal
with the Town Clerk. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for the appeal.
2) The official who made the decision shall give written notice to the owner of the
property that is the subject of the decision and to the party who sought the decision,
Page | 58
if different from the owner. The written notice shall be delivered by personal
delivery, electronic mail, or by first-class mail.
3) The owner or other party shall have 30 days from receipt of the written notice within
which to file an appeal. Any other person with standing to appeal shall have 30 days
from receipt from any source of actual or constructive notice of the decision within
which to file an appeal.
4) It shall be conclusively presumed that all persons with standing to appeal have
constructive notice of the decision from the date a sign containing the words "Zoning
Decision" or "Subdivision Decision" in letters at least six inches high and identifying
the means to contact an official for information about the decision is prominently
posted on the property that is the subject of the decision, provided the sign remains
on the property for at least 10 days. Posting of signs is not the only form of
constructive notice. Any such posting shall be the responsibility of the landowner or
applicant. Verification of the posting shall be provided to the official who made the
decision. Absent an ordinance provision to the contrary, posting of signs shall not be
required.
5) The official who made the decision shall transmit to the Board all documents and
exhibits constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken. The
official shall also provide a copy of the record to the appellant and to the owner of the
property that is the subject of the appeal if the appellant is not the owner.
6) An appeal of a notice of violation or other enforcement order stays enforcement of
the action appealed from unless the official who made the decision certifies to the
Board of Adjustment after notice of appeal has been filed that because of the facts
stated in an affidavit, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property or
because the violation is transitory in nature, a stay would seriously interfere with
enforcement of the ordinance. In that case, enforcement proceedings shall not be
stayed except by a restraining order, which may be granted by a court. If
enforcement proceedings are not stayed, the appellant may file with the official a
request for an expedited hearing of the appeal, and the Board of Adjustment shall
meet to hear the appeal within 15 days after such a request is filed. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, appeals of decisions granting a permit or otherwise affirming that a
proposed use of property is consistent with the ordinance shall not stay the further
review of an application for permits or permissions to use such property; in these
situations the appellant may request and the Board may grant a stay of a final
decision of permit applications or building permits affected by the issue being
appealed.
7) Subject to the provisions of subdivision 6) of this subsection, the Board of Adjustment
shall hear and decide the appeal within a reasonable time.
Page | 59
8) The official who made the decision shall be present at the hearing as a witness. The
appellant shall not be limited at the hearing to matters stated in the notice of appeal.
If any party or the Town would be unduly prejudiced by the presentation of matters
not presented in the notice of appeal, the Board shall continue the hearing. The
Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the
decision appealed from and shall make any order, requirement, decision, or
determination that ought to be made. The Board shall have all the powers of the
official who made the decision.
9) When hearing an appeal pursuant to G.S. 160A-400.9(e) or any other appeal in the
nature of certiorari, the hearing shall be based on the record below and the scope of
review shall be as provided in G.S. 160A-393(k).
10) The parties to an appeal that has been made under this subsection may agree to
mediation or other forms of alternative dispute resolution. The ordinance may set
standards and procedures to facilitate and manage such voluntary alternative
dispute resolution.
B. Issuance of Special Use Permits : The Board of Adjustment may hear and decide Special
Use Permits in accordance with procedures specified in the ordinance. Reasonable and
appropriate conditions may be imposed upon these permits. When issuing Special Use
Permits, the Board shall require both a) the general findings set forth in Part C, Article VI (1)
that apply to any application for a Special Use Permit; and b) specific findings that apply
only to the specified use applied for. Notice of hearings on special or conditional use permit
applications shall be as provided in G.S. 160A-388(a2), or as in Article III, Section 2 C 4 of
this ordinance.
C. Variances : When unnecessary hardship would result from carrying out the strict letter
of a zoning ordinance, the Board of Adjustment shall vary any of the provisions of the
ordinance upon a showing of all of the following:
(1) Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of the ordinance. It
shall not be necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence of the variance, no
reasonable use can be made of the property.
(2) The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the property, such as
location, size, or topography. Hardships resulting from personal circumstances, as
well as hardships resulting from conditions that are common to the neighborhood
or the general public, may not be the basis for granting a variance.
(3) The hardship did not result from actions taken by the applicant or the property
owner. The act of purchasing property with knowledge that circumstances exist
that may justify the granting of a variance shall not be regarded as a self-created
hardship.
Page | 60
(4) The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose and intent of the
ordinance, such that public safety is secured, and substantial justice is achieved.
No change in permitted uses may be authorized by variance. Appropriate conditions may be
imposed on any variance, provided that the conditions are reasonably related to the variance. Any
other ordinance that regulates land use or development may provide for variances consistent with
the provisions of this subsection.
Page | 61
ARTICLE IV. Application & Approval Procedures
Section 1. Zoning Permits, General
A. No building, sign, or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, structurally altered,
demolished, or the use thereof changed until a zoning permit is issued by the administrative
official. No zoning permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter, except after written order from the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. Permits for individual dwellings and appurtenant projects may be issued without
submission of a site plan, provided the use is a use by right that may be permitted by
administrative staff. This shall in no way preclude the requirement for subdivision site-plan
approval under Town Code of Ordinances, Chapter 153 Subdivisions or Part C Article V, DS-6
Manufactured Home Parks .
C. To apply for a non-residential zoning permit, an applicant shall submit to the Zoning
Administrator a zoning permit application and a duplicate set of site plans drawn to scale
which indicate the following:
1) The shape and dimensions of the lot on which the proposed building or use is to be
erected or conducted;
2) The location of the lot with respect to adjacent rights-of-way, zoning, land uses, and
the like;
3) The shape, dimensions, and location of all buildings, existing and proposed on the
lot;
4) The nature of the proposed use of the building or land, including the extent and
location of the use on the lot;
5) The location and dimensions of off-street parking and loading space and the means
of ingress and egress to such space; and
6) Any other information which the administrative official may deem necessary for the
consideration in enforcing the provisions of this chapter. A careful record of such an
application and plats shall be kept in the office of the Zoning Administrator.
D. If the proposed building or use conforms to the provisions of this chapter, a zoning permit
shall be issued to the applicant by the administrative official, along with one set of site plans
on which shall be indicated the approval of the administrative official. The remaining set of
site plans and a copy of the zoning permit shall be filed in the office of the Zoning
Administrator. Subsequent building location and construction shall conform to the plans
approved at the time of the zoning permit issuance.
E. If the zoning permit is denied, the applicant may appeal the action of the Zoning
Administrator to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Page | 62
Section 2. Demolition Permits
A demolition permit shall be required for any structure 250 square feet or greater in size. All
applications for demolition permits shall be accompanied by a Demolition Plan containing the
signature of the property owner, who shall be ultimately responsible for compliance with this
ordinance and the approved demolition plan. Such plan shall be binding upon subsequent property
owners and shall require the following:
1. Proof of the applicant’s having obtained all the necessary permits from the North
Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources and/or the North Carolina
Department of Health and Human Services;
2. Removal of all mowing obstructions, construction debris and materials, and removal of
all structural foundations. Upon completion of demolition and with the exception of any
state and federal environmental regulations to the contrary, no demolition materials
may be left onsite prior to the redevelopment of the subject property. “Redevelopment”
shall not include storage, for business or non-business purposes, of demolition
materials generated on the subject property.
3. For single- and two-family residential projects, removal of such materials within
fourteen (14) days of the removal of the structure(s);
4. Upon demolition, sewer line must be satisfactorily capped off by the property owner
and/or contractor and inspected by the Town of Spindale Public Works Department;
5. Paved parking area may be retained on site, although the property owner is required to
maintain such areas so they do not detract from the overall appearance of the property;
6. Upon demolition, the lot where the demolition has occurred shall be sodded or
hydro-seeded with a silt fence installed to prevent and eliminate erosion. This silt fence
must be maintained in place until the lot has a vegetative cover of at least 70%. Any
resulting holes (e.g. from basement levels) must be filled and returned to normal grade.
7. Deadline for completion of the demolition;
8. A description of the applicant's plans for ongoing post-demolition maintenance of the
lot so that the condition of that lot does not rise to the level of a Public Nuisance as
defined in Chapter 98;
Page | 63
9. All applications for Demolition Permits shall be accompanied by payment of a secure
bond in the form of cash, certified check, cashier's check, or surety bond according to
the size of project as noted within the current Town of Spindale Schedule of Fees as
approved by the Board of Commissioners. Bonds shall be based upon square footages
identified on the official Tax Cards of Rutherford County. Any bond in the form of cash
or certified/cashier's check will be refunded within thirty (30) days upon satisfactory
completion and inspection of the subject property by the Zoning Administrator;
10. Failure on the part of the property owner or his contractor to completely demolish,
remove, and clear the premises as stipulated in the Demolition Plan after 30 days' notice
by the Zoning Administrator shall be cause for forfeiture of the bond.
11. Structures Greater than 10,000 Square Feet and Sectional Demolition. In the case of
individual structures greater than 10,000 square feet, subsections thereof may be
bonded and demolished individually provided that these sub-sections are bounded by
intact firewalls. A performance bond based upon square-footage unit cost shall be
posted for each subsection demolished, regardless of that sub-section's size. Bond
amount shall be determined by the cumulative square footage per story within the
structure. Each permitted section of demolition shall require a performance bond from
either:
a. Any bond company rated B+ or greater by A.M. Best; or
b. Cash or cashier's check to be deposited and held by the Town until the project is
completed. Outlying and unattached structures less than 10,001 square feet
located on the same parcel may be bonded according to the applicable
per-structure rates within the Town of Spindale Fee Schedule as approved
annually by the Board of Commissioners. All bond amount schedules shall be
specified in the Town of Spindale Fee Schedule.
12. Administration of Sub-Sectional Demolition. Bond shall not be released until all material
generated by that section's demolition has been removed from the property. Bond for
the final section on a parcel shall be held until the entire parcel is graded, sodded, and
finished according to the terms of this Ordinance. While complete foundation removal is
required as noted under Section2(2) above, the entire foundation may be scheduled up
front in the approved Demolition Plan as the one single, final section in cases where
complete removal at once is most practical for the developer. In such case, the Town
shall retain one-third of every previous section's bond amount to serve as bond on the
final section.
13. In addition to posting bond according to the terms of this Ordinance, the applicant shall
pay Inspection Fees to the Town as set forth in the Town of Spindale's annual Fee
Schedule. The Zoning Administrator or his or her designee shall conduct random
inspections and have the authority to issue an immediate Stop-Work Order if the terms
of this Ordinance and the project's Demolition Plan are not met.
Page | 64
14. Demolition activity shall be prohibited from sunset to sunrise. Eastern Standard Time,
and all day on Sundays.
15. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall subject the violator to
penalties, enforcement, and abatement as provided in Section 10.99 of the Town of
Spindale Code of Ordinances.
Section 3. Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance and Map
The Board of Commissioners may amend the text regulations and map district lines according to
the following procedures:
A. Applicant :
1. Initiation of amendments. Proposed changes or amendments may be initiated
by the Board of Commissioners, Planning Board, Board of Adjustment, or by one
or more owners of property within the area proposed to be changed or affected.
2. Application. An application for any amendment shall contain a description or
statement of the present and proposed zoning regulation or district boundary to
be applied, the names and addresses of the owner or owners of the adjacent
property to the lot in question, and the use of each adjacent property. The
application shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator not later than ten days
prior to the Board’s meeting at which the application is to be considered. The
Board of Commissioners will not reconsider a similar case for a period of 12
months.
3. Fee. A fee shall be paid to the town for each application foran amendment, to
cover the costs of advertising and other administrative expenses involved.
B. Planning Board Review & Recommendation:
The Planning Board shall consider and make recommendations to the Board of
Commissioners concerning each proposed zoning amendment. The Planning Board
may hold separate public hearings or may sit concurrently with the public hearing held
by the Board of Commissioners. The Planning Board’s procedure for advertising public
hearings will follow those used by the Board of Commissioners enumerated in division
(C).
Page | 65
1. Planning Board Reviews. Subsequent to initial adoption of a zoning ordinance,
all proposed amendments to the zoning ordinance or zoning map shall be
submitted to the Planning Board for review and comment. If no written report
is received from the Planning Board within 30 days of referral of the
amendment to that Board, the Board of Commissioners may proceed in its
consideration of the amendment without the Planning Board report. The Board
of Commissioners is not bound by the recommendations, if any, of the Planning
Board.
2. Planning Board Conflict of Interest. Members of appointed boards providing
advice to the Board of Commissioners shall not vote on recommendations
regarding any zoning map or text amendment where the outcome of the matter
being considered is reasonable likely to have a direct, substantial, and readily
identifiable financial impact on the member.
3. Statement of Consistency. The Planning Board shall advise and comment on
whether the proposed amendment is consistent with any comprehensive plan
that has been adopted and any other officially adopted plan that is applicable.
The Planning Board shall provide a written recommendation to the Board of
Commissioners that addresses plan consistency and other matters as deemed
appropriate by the Planning Board, but a comment by the Planning Board that a
proposed amendment is inconsistent with the comprehensive plan shall not
preclude consideration or approval of the proposed amendment by the Board of
Commissioners.
C. Board of Commissioners:
Before taking such lawful action as it may deem advisable, the Board of Commissioners
shall consider the Planning Board’s recommendations on each proposed zoning map or
text amendment. As stated in Part D Article II (3), if no written statement or report of
the map or text amendment is forwarded from the Planning Board within 30 days of
referral, the Board of Commissioners may take action.
1. Notice of Public Hearing. No amendment shall be adopted by the Board of
Commissioners until after public notice and hearing. Notice of the public
hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town at
least once each week for two successive weeks prior to the hearing. The first
notice of public hearing shall not appear less than 10 days nor more than 25
days prior to the public hearing.
In the case of zoning map amendments, notice of the public hearing regarding
the zoning map amendment shall be mailed by first class mail to all adjoining
property owners. The first class mail notice shall not be required if the zoning
Page | 66
map amendment directly affects more than 50 properties, owned by a total of at
least 50 different property owners, and the Town elects to use the expanded
published notice provided for in this subsection. In this instance, the Town may
elect to either make the mailed notice provided for in this subsection, or may as
an alternative elect to publish notice of the hearing as required by G.S.
160A-364, but provided that each advertisement shall not be less than one-half
of a newspaper page in size. The advertisement shall only be effective for
property owners who reside in the area of general circulation of the newspaper
which publishes the notice. Property owners who reside outside of the
newspaper circulation area, according to the address listed on the most recent
property tax listing for the affected property, shall be notified according to the
provisions of the mailed notice enumerated in this subsection.
When a zoning map amendment is proposed, the Town shall prominently post a
notice of the public hearing on the site proposed for rezoning or on an adjacent
public street or highway right-of-way. When multiple parcels are included
within a proposed zoning map amendment, a posting on each individual parcel
is not required, but the Town shall post sufficient notices to provide reasonable
notice to interested groups.
2. Governing Board Conflict of Interest. A Board of Commissioners member shall
not vote on any zoning map or text amendment where the outcome of the
matter being considered is reasonably likely to have a direct, substantial, and
readily identifiable financial impact on the member.
3. Statement for Small-Scale Rezonings. A statement analyzing the reasonableness
of the proposed rezoning shall be prepared for each petition for a rezoning to a
special or conditional use district, or a conditional district, or other small-scale
rezoning.
4. Board of Commissioner Statement. Prior to adopting or rejecting any zoning
amendment, the Board of Commissioners shall adopt a statement describing
whether its action is consistent with an adopted comprehensive plan and
explaining why the board considers the action taken to be reasonable and in the
public interest.
Section 4. Protest Petitions.
The Spindale Zoning Ordinance may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed,
modified or repealed. In case, however, of a qualified protest against a Zoning Map Amendment,
that amendment shall not become effective except by favorable vote of three-fourths of all the
members of the Board of Commissioners. For the purposes of this subsection, vacant positions on
Page | 67
the Board of Commissioners and members who are excused from voting shall not be considered
members of the Board of Commissioners for calculation of the requisite supermajority.
To qualify as a protest under this section, the petition must be signed by the owners of either (i)
20% of more of the area included in the proposed change, or (ii) 5% of a 100-foot-wide buffer
extending along the entire boundary of each discrete or separate area proposed to be rezoned. A
street right-of-way shall not be considered in computing the 100-foot buffer area as long as that
street right-of-way is 100 feet wide or less. When less than an entire parcel of land is subject to the
proposed zoning map amendment, the 100-foot buffer shall be measured from the property line of
that parcel. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the Town may rely on the county tax listing
to determine the owners of potentially qualifying areas.
The foregoing provisions concerning protests shall not be applicable to any amendment which
initially zones property added to the territorial coverage of the ordinance as a result of annexation
or otherwise, or to an amendment to an adopted (i) special use district, (ii) conditional use district,
or (iii) conditional district if the amendment does not change the types of uses that are permitted
within the district or increase the approved density for residential development, or increase the
total approved size of nonresidential development, or reduce the size of any buffers or screening
approved for the special use district, conditional use district, or conditional district.
No protest against any change in or amendment to a zoning ordinance or zoning map shall be valid
or effective for the purposes of G.S. 160A-385 unless it be in the form of a written petition actually
bearing the signatures of the requisite number of property owners and stating that the signers do
protest the proposed change or amendment, and unless it shall have been received by the Town
Clerk in sufficient time to allow the Town at least two normal work days, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays, and legal holidays, before the date established for a public hearing on the proposed
change or amendment to determine the sufficiency and accuracy of the petition. The Board of
Commissioners may by ordinance require that all protest petitions be on a form prescribed and
furnished by the Town, and such form any prescribe any reasonable information deemed necessary
to permit the Town to determine the sufficiency and accuracy of the petition. A person may
withdraw his or her name from the petition at any time prior to the vote on the proposed zoning
amendment. Only those protest petitions that met the qualifying standards set forth in G.S.
160A-385 at the time of the vote on the zoning amendment shall trigger the supermajority voting
requirement.
Page | 68
ARTICLE V. Enforcement & Penalties
Section 1. Officials
It is the intention of this Chapter that all questions arising in connection with the enforcement of
this Chapter shall be presented first to the Zoning Administrator and that such questions shall be
presented to the Zoning Board of Adjustment only on appeal from the Zoning Administrator. From
the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, recourse shall be had to courts as provided by law.
It is further the intention of this chapter that the duties of the Board of Commissioners in
connection with this Ordinance shall not include the hearing and passing upon disputed questions
Page | 69
that may arise in connection with the enforcement thereof. The duties of the Board of
Commissioners shall be the action upon any proposed amendments or repeal of this Chapter.
Section 2. Remedies
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, demolished, altered,
repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of this chapter, the
Zoning Administrator or any other appropriate Town authority or any person who would be
damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute an action for injunction,
mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent or abate such violation.
Section 3. Penalties
The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, or any architect, builder,
contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such
violation may be found guilty of a separate offense and be subject to the penalties herein provided
in Town of Spindale Code of Ordinances Chapter 10.99, General Penalty .
PART E: DEFINITIONS
Unless otherwise specifically provided, or unless clearly required by the context, the words and
phrases defined in this section shall have the meaning indicated when used in this chapter.
Abandonment- To cease or discontinue a use or activity without intent to resume, but excluding
temporary or short term interruptions to a use or activity during periods of remodeling,
Page | 70
maintaining, or otherwise improving or rearranging a facility, or during normal periods of vacation
or seasonal closure.
Abutting- Having a common border with, or being separated from such a common border by a
right-of-way, alley or easement.
Accessory Use- A use commonly associated with the principal use of a parcel, which is incidental or
insubstantial in and of itself or in relation to the principal use.
Administrative Official- The person that is charged with the enforcement of the zoning ordinance.
Adult Day Care Facility- A state certified facility that provides an organized program of services
during the day in a community group setting for the purpose of supporting the personal
independence of older adults and promoting their social, physical, and emotional well-being.
Alley- A public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property.
Alteration- Any change, addition, or modification in construction or occupancy of an existing
structure.
Antenna- Equipment designed to transmit or receive electronic signals.
Base Flood- The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Usually referred to as the 100 year, or 500 year flood.
Bona-Fide Farm – The production and activities relating or incidental to the production of crops,
fruits, vegetables, ornamental and flowering plants, dairy, livestock, poultry, and all other forms of
agriculture as defined in NC G.S. 106-581.1. For purposes of this definition, the production of a
nonfarm product that the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services recognizes as a
“Goodness Grows in North Carolina” product that is produced on a farm subject to a conservation
agreement under G.S. 106-743.2 is a bona fide farm purpose.
Board of Adjustment- A quasi-judicial administrative body appointed by the board of
commissioners that operates on a level between the zoning enforcement officer and the courts.
Statutory responsibilities include interpretation (hearing appeals, correcting errors, and
interpreting district boundaries), issuance of special use permits, and the issuance of variances.
Boarding House- Any dwelling in which more than three persons, either individually or as families,
are lodged or housed for hire, with or without meals. A rooming house shall be considered a
boarding house.
Buffer- A man made or natural screen that obstructs the view between two parcels or uses.
Page | 71
Building- Any structure enclosed and isolated by exterior walls constructed or used for residence,
business, industry, or other public or private purposes, or accessory thereto, and including tents,
trailers, mobile homes, and similar structures, whether stationary or movable.
Building, Accessory- A minor building that is located on the same lot as a principal building and
that is used incidentally to a principal building or that houses an accessory use.
Building Height- The vertical distance from the mean elevation of the finished grade along the front
of the building to the highest point of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean
height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
Building Setback Line- A line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the nearest
portion of a building, excluding the outermost three feet of any uncovered porches, eaves, gutters,
and similar fixtures, and the street right-of-way line when measured perpendicularly thereto.
Covered porches, whether enclosed or not, shall be considered as part of the main building and
shall not project into the required yard.
Certify- Whenever this ordinance requires that some agency certify the existence of some fact or
circumstance to the town, the town may require that such certification be made in any manner that
provides reasonable assurance of the accuracy of the certification.
Child Care Home- A home for not more than nine orphaned, abandoned, dependent, abused, or
neglected children, together with not more than two adults who supervise such children, all of
whom live together a single housekeeping unit.
Child Care Institution- An institutional facility housing more than nine orphaned, abandoned,
dependent, abused or neglected children.
Child Day Care Facility, State Regulated- Any child day care arrangement that is subject to
regulation by the North Carolina Department of Human Resources, Division of Child Development,
or a successor agency, other than a Child Day Care Home.
Child Day Care Home- Any child day care arrangement wherein any person not excluded in G.S.
110-86(2) provides day care on a regular basis of at least once per week for more than four hours
but less than 24 hours per day for more than two children under 13 years of age, but not to exceed a
maximum of eight children at any one time. Of the children present at any one time, no more than
five children shall be pre-school aged as defined by the NC Child Day Care Commission. Cooperative
arrangements among parents to provide care for their own children as a convenience rather than
for employment are excluded.
Church, Established- This definition is solely for the purposes of (a) determining whether a
restaurant or private club can serve alcohol, and (b) determining the permitted location of a
sexually oriented business. An established church is a group of worshippers that call themselves a
Page | 72
church, be visibly identifiable as a church (i.e., a sign), and that have been meeting on a regular basis
in the same location/premises for one year.
Cluster Development- The grouping of buildings in order to conserve land resources and provide
for innovation in the design of the project. This term includes nonresidential development as well
as single family residential subdivisions and multi-family developments that do not involve the
subdivision of land.
Commissioners- An elected official on the Town of Spindale’s governing board.
Conditional Use Permit- A permit that is issued by the board of commissioners that authorizes the
recipient to make use of property in accordance with the requirements of this chapter as well as
any additional requirements.
Convenience Store- A one-story, retail store containing less than 2,000 square feet of gross floor
area that is designed and stocked to sell primarily food, beverages, and other household supplies to
customers who purchase only relatively few items (in contrast to a supermarket or grocery store).
It is designed to attract and depends upon a large volume of stop and go traffic.
Developer/Applicant- A person who is responsible for any undertaking that requires a zoning
permit, special-use permit, conditional-use permit, or sign permit.
Development- That which is to be done pursuant to a zoning permit, special-use permit,
conditional-use permit, or sign permit.
District- Any section of the town or its extraterritorial jurisdiction in which zoning regulations are
uniform.
Dwelling Unit- A building or portion thereof designed, arranged, or used for living quarters for one
family.
Dwelling Unit (Multi-Family)- A building or portion thereof used for or designed as a residence for
three or more families living independently of each other, including apartment houses and group
housing.
Dwelling Unit (Single-Family)- A building for, or occupied exclusively by one family.
Dwelling Unit (Duplex)- A residential building designed or arranged to be occupied by two families
living independently of each other.
Easement- The right of a person, government agency, or public utility company to use public or
private land owned by another for a specific purpose.
Page | 73
Expenditure- A sum of money paid out in return for some benefit or to fulfill some obligation. The
term also includes binding contractual commitments to make future expenditures, as well as any
other substantial changes in position.
Extraterritorial Planning Area- That portion of the town’s planning jurisdiction that lies outside
the corporate limit’s of the town.
Façade- The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view or that wall viewed by the persons
not within the building.
Family- Any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.
Family Care Home – As defined in NCGS 168-21, a home with support and supervisory personnel
that provides room and board, personal care and habilitation services in a family environment for
not more than six (6) resident persons with disabilities. “Person with disabilities” means a person
with a temporary or permanent physical, emotional, or mental disability including but not limited
to mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, hearing and sight impairments, emotional
disturbances, and orthopedic impairments but not including mentally ill persons who are
dangerous to others as defined in NCGS 122C-3(11)b.
Fence- Any artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to
enclose or screen areas of land.
Floodplain- Any land area susceptible to be inundated by water from the base flood. As used in this
chapter, the term refers to that area designated as subject to flooding from the base flood (100 year
flood) on the “Flood Boundary and Floodway Map” prepared by the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development, a copy of which is on file in Town Hall.
Floodway- The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot. As use in this chapter, the term refers to that area designated as a
floodway on the “Flood Boundary and Floodway Map” prepared by the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development, a copy of which is on file in Town Hall.
Floor Area, Gross- The total area of a building measured by taking the outside dimension of the
building at each floor level intended for occupancy or storage.
Garage, Private- A building for the private use of the owner or occupant of a principal building
situated on the same lot of the principal building for the storage of motor vehicles with no facilities
for mechanical service or repair of a commercial or public nature.
Page | 74
Grade- The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving, or sidewalk
within the area between the building and the property line, or when the property line is more than
five feet from the building, between the building and a line five feet from the building.
Group Home- A nonprofit residential child care facility, providing twenty four hour care for no
more than nine children, not including the operators own relatives residing in the home.
Habitable Floor- Any floor useable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating,
cooking, or recreation, or any combination thereof. A floor used only for storage is not a habitable
floor.
Halfway House- A home for not more than nine persons who have demonstrated a tendency
toward alcoholism, drug abuse, mental illness, or antisocial or criminal conduct, together with not
more than two persons providing supervision and other services to such persons, all of whom live
together as a single housekeeping unit.
Handicapped- As used herein, the term “handicapped” shall mean having: i) a physical or mental
impairment that substantially limits one or more of such person’s major life activities so that such
person is incapable of living independently; ii) a record of having such an impairment; or iii) being
regarded as having such an impairment. However, “handicapped” shall not include current illegal
use of or addiction to a controlled substance, nor shall it include any person whose residency in the
home would constitute a direct threat to the health and safety of other individuals.
Handicapped or Infirm Home- A residence within a single dwelling unit for at least six but not
more than nine persons who are physically or mentally handicapped, aged or inform, together with
not more than two persons providing care or assistance to such persons, all living together as a
single housekeeping unit.
Handicapped, Aged or Infirm Institution- A facility that provides residential care for more than
nine aged, disabled or handicapped persons whose principal need is a home with the sheltered or
personal care their age or disability requires. Medical care at such a facility is only occasional or
incidental, such as may be required in the home of any individual or family, but the administration
of medication is supervised. The residents of such a facility do not occupy separate dwelling units,
and this distinguishes such a facility from a multi-family development occupied by the elderly,
handicapped or disabled.
Hazardous Substance- Any substance which may pose a danger to the public health or safety if
contained in the public water supply. This includes all substances defined as hazardous chemicals
by the community right to know reporting requirements under Sections 311 and 312 of the
Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, and by the North Carolina Hazardous
Chemicals Right to Know Act (G.S. 95-173 to 95-218).
Page | 75
Home Occupation- Any occupation carried on by a member of a family residing on the premises,
employing no other than a resident of that home; provided, that no merchandise or commodity is
sold on the premises, and provided further that not over 25% of the total actual floor area of any
structure is used for home occupation. Provided, further, that Home Occupations shall be confined
to the main building on the lot or premises and no structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, or
altered to permit the extension of the home occupation outside the main building. The main
building, for the purpose of this definition, shall include the primary living quarters of a residence,
excluding porches, decks, garages, or other connecting structures to a residence not essential to the
main living quarters.
Industry, Heavy- A use engaged in the basic processing of industrial materials or products
predominately from extracted or raw materials, or use engaged in storage of, or industrial
processes using flammable or explosive materials, or storage or industrial processes that
potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
Industry, Light- A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared
materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment,
packaging, incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial
processing.
Intermediate Care Home- A facility maintained for the purpose of providing accommodations for
not more than seven occupants needing medical care and supervision at a lower level than that
provided in a nursing care institution but at a higher level than that provided in institutions for the
handicapped or infirm.
Intermediate Care Institution- An institution facility maintained for the purpose of providing
accommodations for more than seven persons needing medical care and supervision at a lower
level than that provided in a nursing care institution but at a higher level than that provided in
institutions for the handicapped or infirm.
Junk Yard- The use of more than 600 square feet of any lot or tract for the outdoor storage or sale
of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, or other junk, and including storage of motor vehicles and
dismantling of such vehicles or machinery.
Kennel- A commercial operation that: i) provides food and shelter and care of animals for purposes
not primarily related to medical care (a kennel may or may not be run by or associated with a
veterinarian), or ii) engages in the breeding of animals for sale.
Loading Zone or Area- That portion of the vehicle accommodation area used to satisfy the
requirements of Article 5.
Page | 76
Lot- A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by one main building or use, with its accessory
buildings, and including the open spaces accessory to it. No area shall be counted as accessory to
more than one main building or use, and no building or use shall be included or counted in the
calculation of open space accessory to any other main building or use. Lot also means “plot” or
“parcel”.
Lot Area- The total area circumscribed by the boundaries of a lot, except that: i) when the legal
instrument creating a lot shows the boundary of the lot extending into a public street right-of-way
line, or if the right-of-way line cannot be determined, a line running parallel to and 30 feet from the
center of the traveled portion of the street, and ii) in a residential district, when a private road that
serves more than three dwelling units is located along any lot boundary, then the lot boundary for
purposes of computing the lot area shall be the inside boundary of the traveled portion of that road.
Lot, Corner- A lot abutting on and at the intersection of two or more streets.
Lot Depth- The distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of
the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lines in the rear.
Lot of Record- A lot which is a part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the office
of the Register of Deeds of Rutherford County prior to the adoption of this chapter; or a lot
described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded prior to the
adoption of this chapter.
Lot Width- The distance between side lot lines, measured at the building setback line.
Manufactured (Mobile) Home – A manufactured housing unit, constructed after July 1, 1976 that
meets the standards of the US Department of Housing and Urban Development’s
manufactured-home construction standards at the time of construction; further, a manufactured (or
mobile) home is a detached dwelling unit intended for year-round living and designed for
transportation after fabrication on streets or highways on its own wheels or a flatbed or other
trailer, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for
occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or
other temporary or permanent foundations, connections to utilities, and the like. This definition
does not include Recreational Vehicles.
Manufactured Home Park- A parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned and
improved for the placement of mobile homes for nontransient use. Such park includes land used or
intended to be used, leased, or rented for occupancy by five or more mobile homes which are
mounted on wheels, anchored in place by a foundation or other stationary support to be used for
living or commercial quarters of any kind, together with automobile parking space and incidental
Page | 77
utility structures and facilities required and provided in connection therewith. This definition shall
not include a mobile home sales lot on which unoccupied mobile homes are parked for purposes of
inspection and sale.
Modular Home- A dwelling unit constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the state
building code applicable to site built homes and composed of components substantially assembled
in a manufacturing plant and transported to the building site for final assembly on a permanent
foundation. Among other possibilities, a modular home may consist of two sections transported to
the site in a manner similar to a mobile home (except that the modular home meets the state
building code applicable to site built homes), or a series of panels or room sections transported on a
truck and erected or joined together on the site.
Motel or Hotel- A building used for transit occupancy whether it is a detached, semi-detached, or
multiple unit building. A motel or hotel provides temporary housing for transient visitors with
off-street parking, and incidental accessory or utility uses which are provided in connection
therewith.
Nonconforming Lot- A lot existing at the effective date of this chapter (and not created for the
purposes of evading the restrictions of this chapter) that does not meet the minimum area
requirement of the district in which the lot is located.
Nonconforming Use- A nonconforming situation that occurs when property is used for a purpose
or in a manner made unlawful by the use regulations applicable to the district in which the property
is located. (For example, a commercial office building in a residential district may be a
nonconforming use.) The term also refers to the activity that constitutes the use made of the
property. (For example, all the activity associated with operating a retail clothing store in a
residentially zoned area constitutes a nonconforming use.)
Nursing Care Home- A facility maintained for the purpose of providing skilled nursing care and
medical supervision at a lower level than that available in a hospital to not more than nine persons.
Nursing Care Institution- An institutional facility maintained for the purpose of providing skilled
nursing care and medical supervision at a lower level than that available in a hospital to more than
nine persons.
Outside Display of Goods for Sale or Rent- Display outside of a fully enclosed building of the
particular goods or pieces of merchandise or equipment that are themselves for sale. Outside
display is to be distinguished from outside storage of goods that are not prepared and displayed for
immediate sale or rent.
Page | 78
Parcel- A continuous quantity of land in the possession of or owned by, or recorded as the property
of, the same person or persons.
Planned Unit Development- A group of two or more structures built on a single lot, tract, or parcel
of land not subdivided into the customary streets and lots and which will not be so subdivided, yet
as designed for occupancy by separate families, firms, or organizations, the Planning Board may
approve such developments if they would not be out of harmony with their surroundings.
Planning Commission- Is an official body appointed by the governing board of a jurisdiction (such
as town, city, or county) that is responsible for producing the comprehensive plan (or land use
plan), and also making recommendations to the governing body concerning zoning map
amendments, zoning ordinance amendments, zoning decisions, subdivision regulations, and on
development proposals.
Planning Jurisdiction- The area within the city limits as well as the area beyond the city limits (if a
jurisdiction has extraterritorial limits) within which the town or city is authorized to plan for and
regulate development.
Principal Use- The main use of land or structures, as distinguished from a secondary or accessory
use.
Recreational Vehicle - A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis designed to be used as a
temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses, permanently identified as a travel
trailer by the manufacturer of the unit; a large enclosed piece of equipment with wheels designed to
be moved from place to place for people to temporarily live in and be protected from the elements
while away from their permanent domicile. This definition includes the terms “Motor home”, “RV”,
“Camper”, “Travel Trailer”, etc.
School, Established- This definition is solely for the purposes of (a) determining whether a
restaurant or private club can serve alcohol, and (b) determining the permitted location of a
sexually oriented business. An established school is a public elementary, public middle and/or
public high school having similar curriculum and licensed child care givers, but not trade schools.
Service Station- Any building or land used for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale at retail of
any automobile fuels, lubricants, or tires; except that indoor car washing, minor motor adjustment,
and flat tire repair are only performed incidental to the normal uses of a service station.
Sexually Oriented Business- As defined in North Carolina Legislation Section 14-202.10, numbers
1 through 11
Page | 79
Special Events- Circuses, fairs, carnivals, festivals, or other types of special events that i) run longer
than one day but not longer than two weeks, ii) are intended to or likely to attract substantial
crowds, and iii) are unlike the customary or usual activities generally associated with the property
where the special event is to be located.
Special Use Permit- A permit issued by the board of adjustment that authorizes the recipient to
make use of property in accordance with the requirements of this chapter as well as any additional
requirements imposed by the board of adjustment.
Street- A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic which affords the principal
means of access to abutting properties.
Structure- Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent
location on the ground, or attachment to something having more or less permanent location on the
ground, including signs and billboards.
Subdivision- The division of a tract of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions
for the purpose of sale or building development (whether immediate or future) and including all
divisions of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets.
Tourist Home- Any dwelling occupied by the owner or operator in which rooms are rented for
guests and for lodging of transients and travelers for compensation.
Tower- Any structure whose principal function is to support one or more antennas.
Tract- A lot (see definition of “lot”). The term tract is used interchangeably with the term lot,
particularly in the context of subdivisions, where one “tract” is subdivided into several “lots”.
Travel Trailer- A structure that i) is intended to be transported over the streets and highways
(either as a motor home vehicle (motor home) or attached to or hauled by a motor vehicle and ii) is
designed for temporary use as sleeping quarters but that does not satisfy one or more of the
definitional criteria of a mobile home.
Use- A use listed in the Table of Permissible Uses or Special Uses in Article 4.
Used or Occupied- Include the words intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied.
Utility Facility- Any above-ground tructures or facilities (other than building, unless such buildings
are used as storage incidental to the operation of such structures or facilities) owned by a
governmental entity, a nonprofit organization, a corporation, or any entity defined as a public entity
Page | 80
for any purpose by state law and used in connection with the production, generation, transmission,
delivery, collection, or storage of water, electricity, gas, oil, or electronic signals.
Variance- A grant of permission by the board of adjustment that authorizes the recipient to do that
which, according to the strict letter of this ordinance, he could not otherwise legally do.
Yards:
Yard (Front)- An open space on the same lot with a main building, extending the full width of the
lot and situated between the front line of the lot and the building setback line. Where there is no
main building the front yard shall be an open space of at least 25 feet in depth.
Yard (Rear)- A yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the rear line
of the lot and the rear line of the main building. Minimum rear yard for a vacant lot shall be
considered as being 20 feet in width, measured from the rear line of the lot.
Yard (Side)- An unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building situated between the side
line of the building and the adjacent side line of the lot, and extending from the rear line of the front
yard, the front boundary of the side yard shall be the front line of the lot and if there be no rear
yard, the rear boundary of the side yard shall be the rear line of the lot. There shall be a required
minimum side yard of nine feet where no building exists.
Yard Sale - (also referred to as “garage sale”) A display and sale from a residence or residential
property of personal property which has been previously used. The term “yard sale” or “garage
sale” does not include the mere incidental sale of one or two items of personal property when such
sale is not part of a general sale of a number of items of personal property.
Zoning Permit- A permit issued by the land use administrator that authorizes the recipient to make
use of property in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
*Definitions regarding signage may be viewed in Article VIII, Signage.
**Definitions regarding parking may be viewed in Article VII, Parking.
Page | 81