Sewer Use Ordinance Adopted by City Council Dec. 19, 2000
Rate & Fee Schedule Amended 6/17/04; 8/16/05; 12/20/05; 6/20/06; 6/19/07; 6/17/08; 6/15/10; 6/14/18
Page 1 of 4
Sewer Rates and Fees Schedule
General
1. All owners of improved real property located within the City and whose property abuts the public sewer
line and whose premises on said property are located within two hundred (200) feet of the public sewer line and
can be served by gravity flow are required to connect said premises to the sewer line within six (6) months of
the sewer line construction and will be billed for consumption charges beginning upon the first day of use or six
(6) months after the project construction is completed, whichever occurs first.
2. Customers must file an application for sewer service with the City. Upon approval of the application,
the customer shall pay appropriate tap and connection fees before a tap is constructed or the customer is allowed
to connect his plumbing piping to the public sewer line.
3. Any customer who is within an area approved by the Trinity City Council for sewer line extensions and
who requests a service tap by a date certain as set by the Trinity City Council will be eligible to pay a discount
tap fee.
4. No swimming pools shall be connected to the sewer system.
A. Any residential customer with a privately-owned swimming pool will be allowed an annual
sewer bill adjustment for filling the pool. The minimum volume of water used for this purpose
must exceed 5,000 gallons based upon water consumption records for that month.
(1) The pool owner must make the request to the City and the last 12 months of water
consumption records will be reviewed by the City to determine the amount of the sewer
charge to be adjusted. Any residential customer who must refill a pool during the same
season because of making repairs to the pool must make application to the City, meet
the aforementioned minimum water consumption criteria and provide proof of
swimming pool repair.
5. Separate meters will be required for any customer who wishes to separate water consumption usage that
is not returned to the sewer system for filling pools, irrigation, etc.
1. Sewer Charges Based on Water Consumption/Inside City Limits
0-2,000 gallons per month $ 25.59 per month min.
Greater than 2,000 gallons per month $ 12.80 per 1,000 gallons
2. Sewer Charges Based on Water Consumption/Outside City Limits
Charges for customers whose property is outside the City Limits shall
be 200 percent (200%) of the rate charged to customers whose property
is inside the corporate boundaries of Trinity.
0-2,000 gallons per month $ 51.18 per month min.
Greater than 2,000 gallons per month $ 25.59 per 1,000 gallons
Sewer Use Ordinance Adopted by City Council Dec. 19, 2000
Rate & Fee Schedule Amended 6/17/04; 8/16/05; 12/20/05; 6/20/06; 6/19/07; 6/17/08; 6/15/10; 6/14/18
Page 2 of 4
3. Sewer Tap Fees
Existing Sewer System tap fees
4” sewer tap $ 1,500
6” sewer tap Actual Cost Plus 20%
New infill tap fees
4” Short side $ 2,000
4” Long side Actual Cost
6” sewer tap Actual Cost Plus 20%
Bore Fee Actual Cost
4. Sewer Connection Fee/Inside City Limits
$3.00 per gallon per day based upon Appendix A usage
schedule, except for single family detached homes which fee
shall be $1,000. Capacity fees are not applicable to existing
homes and businesses upon connection to the sewer system.
5. Sewer Connection Fee/Outside City Limits
Capacity fees for customers whose property is outside
the City Limits shall be 200 percent (200%) of the fee
charged to customers whose property is inside the
corporate boundaries of Trinity.
$6.00 per gallon per day based upon Appendix A usage
schedule, except for single family detached homes which fee
shall be $2,000.
6. Flat Rate Customers/Inside City Limits
Cost for sewer service for a single family residential home that
is not connected to a public water system and utilizes a private
well for water supply shall be based on the average monthly water
usage as determined by Davidson Water, Inc.
Flat Rate Fee $ 51.18 per month
7. Flat Rate Customers/Outside City Limits
Charges for customers whose property is outside the City Limits
shall be 200 percent (200%) of the rate charged to customers
whose property is inside the corporate boundaries of Trinity. $102.35 per month
8. Surcharge Rates for High Strength Waste
Biochemical Oxygen Demand $0.20 per pound per day
Total Suspended Solids $0.15 per pound per day
Pretreatment Monitoring Cost Actual Cost Plus 20%
9. Other Fees
Return Check Fee $25.00
Delinquent Bill Fee $25.00
Tampering Fee $50.00
Sewer Use Ordinance Adopted by City Council Dec. 19, 2000
Rate & Fee Schedule Amended 6/17/04; 8/16/05; 12/20/05; 6/20/06; 6/19/07; 6/17/08; 6/15/10; 6/14/18
Page 3 of 4
Appendix A – Usage Schedule
Type of Establishment Details Daily Flow for Design
Single Family Detached
Residences
$1,000
Barber Shop 50 gal/chair
Beauty Shop 125 gal/booth or bowl
Bowling Alley 50 gal/lane
Other Businesses Other than those listed on
this table
25 gal/employee
Church Not including food service,
daycare or camps
3 gal/seat
Country Club Resident Members 50 gal/person
Nonresident Members 20 gal/person
Day Care Facility 15 gal/person
Factory Excluding industrial waste
and per shift
25 gal/person
Add showers, per shift 10 gal/person
Food Service Facility
Restaurant
Including fast food 40 gal/seat or
40 gal/15 ft² of dining area,
whichever is greater.
24-hr Restaurant 50 gal/seat
Single-service Excluding fast food 25 gal/seat
Food Stand (1) Per 100 square feet of
total floor space
50 gal
(2) Add per employee 25 gal
Hospital 300 gal/bed
Laundry Self-Service 500 gal/machine
Meat Market (1) Per 100 square feet of
total floor space
50 gal
(2) Add per employee 25 gal
Motel/Hotel 120 gal/room
With cooking facility in room 175 gal/room
Nursing/Rest Home With laundry 120 gal/bed
Without laundry 60 gal/bed
Offices Per shift 25 gal/person
Residential Care Facility 60 gal/person
Resort Condominium, apartment,
motel, hotel
200 gal/room
Restaurant 40 gal/seat or 40 gal/15 ft² of dining
area (whichever is greater)
Sewer Use Ordinance Adopted by City Council Dec. 19, 2000
Rate & Fee Schedule Amended 6/17/04; 8/16/05; 12/20/05; 6/20/06; 6/19/07; 6/17/08; 6/15/10; 6/14/18
Page 4 of 4
Type of Establishment Details Daily Flow for Design
School: Day School Day school with cafeteria, gym &
showers
15 gal/person
With cafeteria only 12gal/person
With neither cafeteria nor showers 10 gal/person
School: Boarding 60 gal/person
Service Station 250 gal/water closet or
urinal
Stadium, Auditorium, Theater,
Drive-In
5 gal/seat or space
Store, Shopping Center, Mall Note: If incl. food service, then add
40 gal/seat
120 gal/1000 ft²
Swimming Pool, Bathhouse 10 gal/person


















AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE
DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS IN
RANDOLPH COUNTY, NORTH CAROLINA
Be it ordained by the Board of Commissioners of the County of Randolph:
Section 1. RESTRICTIONS
No person shall discharge a firearm in such a manner as to allow the projectile from that
firearm to impact upon or travel across the property of another without the consent of that
property owner or the lawful occupier thereof. A "firearm" means a weapon which will expel
a projectile by the action of an explosive.
Section 2. EXCEPTIONS
This ordinance shall not be construed as prohibiting discharge of a firearm:
A. By law enforcement or animal control officers in the performance of their duty;
B. In defense of life or property.
Section 3. EXEMPTIONS
This ordinance shall not be construed to rescind any of the state wildlife laws of North
Carolina.
Section 4. PENALTIES
A violation of this ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable
by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days;
provided further, that a violation of this ordinance may cause a civil penalty to be
recovered by Randolph County in a civil action in the nature of a debt in accordance
with NCGS 153A-123; provided further, that this ordinance may be enforced by an
appropriate, equitable remedy, including injunction and order of abatement, issued
from a court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with NCGS 153A-123. Each
day's continuing violation of this ordinance shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.
Section 5. EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall become effective June 7, 1993.
This ordinance was Introduced at the May 3, 1993 meeting of the Randolph County
Board of Commissioners.
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
Aug. 5, 2008: Presented to City of Trinity Infrastructure Committee. Committee tabled proposal pending coordination with
Thomasville because Trinity contracts with that city for ORC and system maintenance.
Dec. 2, 2008: Infrastructure Committee recommend adoption of Ordinance by Council
Page 1 of 4
City of Trinity, North Carolina
Oil and Grease Ordinance
Sanitary Sewer Use
Sec. I Purpose.
This ordinance is intended to aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages and
obstructions caused by the introduction, discharge and contribution of fats, oils, greases,
grease complexes, scum, sludge and other organic polar compounds into the City’s
wastewater collection system or publicly-owned treatment works by commercial, industrial,
institutional and all other non-residential activities.
Sec. II Definitions.
(1) “City” shall mean the City of Trinity, North Carolina, and its utility service area.
(2) “Person” shall mean any actual person, corporation, partnership, unincorporated
association, and any governmental entity or political subdivision and departments and
agencies thereof.
(3) “Grease” shall mean all greases, grease complexes, fats, oils, scum, sludges and all other
organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple
carbon chain triglyceride molecules. Such substances are detectable and measurable
using analytical procedures established in 40 C.F.R. 136.
(4) “Wastewater” shall mean any substance introduced, contributed to, or discharged into the
City’s wastewater collection system or publicly-owned treatment works (“POTW”).
(5) “Grease trap” or “grease interceptor” shall mean a device for separating and retaining
waterborne greases before the wastewater which contains such grease exits the grease
trap or interceptor into the City’s wastewater collection system or POTW. The grease trap
or interceptor also collects settable solids generated by or incidental to commercial,
industrial and food preparation activities.
(6) “Cooking establishment” shall mean any person primarily engaged in the activities of
cooking, preparing, serving or otherwise making available for human consumption any
form of foodstuff, and which uses one or more of the following cooking or preparation
methods in connection with such activities: cooking or preparation by frying (all
methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sautéing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all
methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, poaching, or any type of cooking or
preparation that produces a hot non-potable product in or on a receptacle that requires
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
Aug. 5, 2008: Presented to City of Trinity Infrastructure Committee. Committee tabled proposal pending coordination with
Thomasville because Trinity contracts with that city for ORC and system maintenance.
Dec. 2, 2008: Infrastructure Committee recommend adoption of Ordinance by Council
Page 2 of 4
washing, rinsing or other form of cleaning. Such establishments include, but are not
limited to, restaurants, cafeterias, extended care facilities, school cafeterias (public and
private), and daycare facilities where meals for more than six (6) children are prepared,
served or otherwise made available for human consumption.
(7) “Non-cooking establishment” shall mean any person primarily engaged in the rendering
or preparation of pre-cooked foodstuffs that do not require or involve any form of
cooking. Such establishments include, but are not limited to, establishments that are
primarily engaged in the rendering preparation of cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs. These
businesses are encouraged to explore methods of exemption and alternate compliance
status.
(8) “User” shall mean any person primarily engaged in any commercial, industrial,
institutional or other non-residential activity who introduces, contributes or discharges (or
causes or permits the introduction, contribution or discharge of) wastewater into the
City’s wastewater collection system or POTW, including but not limited to any person
who introduces, contributes or discharges wastewater into the wastewater collection
system or POTW through any mobile source.
(9) “Commercial establishment” and “industrial establishment” shall mean any user that has
the potential to use, contribute to or otherwise impact the City’s wastewater collection
system or POTW. Such establishments include, but are not limited to, maintenance
facilities, repair facilities and equipment cleaning facilities.
Sec. III Grease Trap and Interceptor Installation, Maintenance, Record-Keeping and
Removal.
(1) No later than one (1) year after adoption of this ordinance, all users shall install grease
traps or interceptors designed to limit the introduction, contribution and discharge of
greases into the City’s wastewater collection system or POTW. Grease traps and
interceptors with appropriate sampling or inspection points shall be installed at the user’s
expense whenever any user operates a commercial, industrial, or institutional cooking
establishment. Grease traps and interceptors must have a minimum capacity of one
thousand (1,000) gallons or more as required to affect a grease concentration maximum
of 100 mg/l.
(2) Alternative methods of compliance may be approved by the City if the user demonstrates
that compliance with this ordinance is impossible or impractical at the time of adoption of
this ordinance as a result of limited space. However, any such proposed alternative
method of compliance will be required to meet the performance criteria specified in
Section III-(1) of this ordinance, and the user must adequately demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the City that the proposed alternative method will satisfy those
performance criteria. In addition, any such alternative method must be cleaned at a more
frequent interval than is required of grease traps and interceptors under Section III-(5) of
this ordinance. Under-the-counter types of grease traps and interceptors shall be cleaned
at least daily. Prior to approval of any such proposed alternative method of compliance,
documentation of the proposed method’s actual performance criteria must be submitted
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
Aug. 5, 2008: Presented to City of Trinity Infrastructure Committee. Committee tabled proposal pending coordination with
Thomasville because Trinity contracts with that city for ORC and system maintenance.
Dec. 2, 2008: Infrastructure Committee recommend adoption of Ordinance by Council
Page 3 of 4
to the City Manager or the City’s designated Enforcement Official for review and
approval.
(3) Grease traps and interceptors may also be required in other facilities, as deemed necessary
by the City Manager or the City’s designated Enforcement Official.
(4) Upon the prior written approval of the City Manager, non-cooking establishments may be
exempted from the requirements of this ordinance after an inspection of the subject
premises and submission of adequate supporting documentation, as deemed necessary in
the sole and absolute discretion of the City Manager. At a minimum, such supporting
documentation shall include: blueprints of the subject premises, a full and detailed
description of the operations and activities at the subject premises, and a full and detailed
list of all potential sources of grease at the subject premises.
(5) Users shall empty and service grease traps and interceptors to comply with the
performance criteria in Section III-(1) of this ordinance as often as necessary, but in any
event no longer than every sixty (60) days. The City may require a specific schedule if
deemed necessary by the City Manager or designee. Under-the-counter types of grease
traps and interceptors shall be cleaned at least daily, and shall comply with the
performance criteria in Section III of this ordinance. There shall be no reintroduction of
wastewater back into the grease trap or interceptor unless and until said wastewater has
been proven to contain 100 mg/l or less of grease. Under no circumstances shall the
sludge or scum layer be reintroduced or discharged into the City’s wastewater collection
system or POTW.
(6) Users shall supply (i) an adequate sampling point downstream of the grease trap or
interceptor, prior to mixing with other sanitary flows, and (ii) an accessible entry into
each chamber of the grease trap or interceptor. The minimum requirement for the
sampling point shall be a four inch (4”) vertical clean-out. The City shall have the right to
inspect at any time and without prior notice.
(7) Users shall retain detailed records on-site for a minimum of three (3) years reflecting all
maintenance carried out pursuant to this ordinance. At a minimum, such records shall
contain the following information: date of service, name of the employee involved, and a
receipt reflecting all services rendered by the waste hauler providing the service.
(8) Users are required to keep the grease trap or interceptor free of inorganic solids such as
grit, towels, gloves, cigarettes, eating utensils, etc., which could clog or settle in the trap
or interceptor, thereby reducing the effective volume or capacity of the trap or
interceptor.
(9) Users are required to ensure that all waste material removed from grease traps and
interceptors is disposed of in a manner that complies with all federal, state and local
statutes, rules, regulations, policies and ordinances.
(10) Except as provided herein, for a period of one (1) year following the adoption of this
ordinance, no enforcement actions will be taken under this section for failure to achieve
the performance criteria specified in Section III of this ordinance. If, during such period,
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
Aug. 5, 2008: Presented to City of Trinity Infrastructure Committee. Committee tabled proposal pending coordination with
Thomasville because Trinity contracts with that city for ORC and system maintenance.
Dec. 2, 2008: Infrastructure Committee recommend adoption of Ordinance by Council
Page 4 of 4
(i) an obstruction of any of the City’s sanitary sewer main(s) occurs and causes a sewer
overflow, spill, leak or other event with any environmental impact, and (ii) such
overflow, spill, leak or other event may be attributed in part or in whole to a particular
user, then the City will seek enforcement action under the Sewer Use Ordinance. For
purposes of this section, an overflow, spill, leak or other event shall be deemed to have an
environmental impact when (i) such overflow or other event involves an amount of
wastewater equal to or in excess of one thousand (1,000) gallons, or (ii) any amount of
wastewater reaches any body of surface water.
Sec. IV Enforcement.
The City shall enforce this ordinance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 50 of the City’s
Code of Ordinances and City’s Sewer Use Ordinance.
ADOPTED this the 16th day of December, 2008.
________________________
Fran Andrews, Mayor
ATTEST:
________________________
Debbie Hinson, City Clerk
1
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE
Non-Coastal Regular Phase
ARTICLE 1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES........2
ARTICLE 2. DEFINITIONS. .............................................................................................................................................3
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL PROVISIONS. ..........................................................................................................................7
ARTICLE 4. ADMINISTRATION. ...................................................................................................................................8
ARTICLE 5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION. .........................................................................15
ARTICLE 6. LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS...............................................................................................................20
2
ARTICLE 1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
SECTION A. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has in Part 6, Article 21 of Chapter 143; Parts 3, 5, and 8 of Article 19 of
Chapter 160A; and Article 8 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes, delegated to local governmental units
the responsibility to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare.
Therefore, the City Council of Trinity, North Carolina, does ordain as follows:
SECTION B. FINDINGS OF FACT.
(1) The flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Trinity are subject to periodic inundation which results in
loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety, and general welfare.
(2) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights
and velocities and by the occupancy in flood prone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or other hazards.
SECTION C. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions within flood prone areas by provisions designed to:
(1) restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards or that result
in damaging increases in erosion, flood heights or velocities;
(2) require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the
time of initial construction;
(3) control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development that may increase erosion or flood damage; and
(5) prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase
flood hazards to other lands.
SECTION D. OBJECTIVES.
The objectives of this ordinance are to:
(1) protect human life, safety, and health;
(2) minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the
general public;
(4) minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;
(5) minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e. water and gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines,
streets, and bridges) that are located in flood prone areas;
3
(6) help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas; and
(7) ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a Special Flood Hazard Area.
ARTICLE 2. DEFINITIONS.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning
they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
“Accessory Structure (Appurtenant Structure)” means a structure located on the same parcel of property as the principal
structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and storage sheds are
common urban accessory structures. Pole barns, hay sheds and the like qualify as accessory structures on farms, and may or
may not be located on the same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.
“Addition (to an existing building)” means an extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building or structure.
“Appeal” means a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance.
“Area of Shallow Flooding” means a designated Zone AO on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base
flood depths determined to be from one (1) to three (3) feet. These areas are located where a clearly defined channel does not
exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.
“Area of Special Flood Hazard” see “Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)”.
“Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
“Base Flood” means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
“Base Flood Elevation (BFE)” means a determination of the water surface elevations of the base flood as published in the
Flood Insurance Study. When the BFE has not been provided in a “Special Flood Hazard Area”, it may be obtained from
engineering studies available from a Federal, State, or other source using FEMA approved engineering methodologies. This
elevation, when combined with the “Freeboard”, establishes the “Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation”.
“Building” see “Structure”.
“Chemical Storage Facility” means a building, portion of a building, or exterior area adjacent to a building used for the
storage of any chemical or chemically reactive products.
“Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings
or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or
materials.
“Disposal” means, as defined in NCGS 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or
placing of any solid waste into or on any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the solid waste may
enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwaters.
“Elevated Building” means a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by
foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
“Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings, structures or development into a
floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
“Existing Manufactured Home Park or Manufactured Home Subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision
for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at
a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads) was completed before the initial effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
“Flood” or “Flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
4
from:
(1) the overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
(2) the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
“Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)” means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, on which the Special Flood Hazard Areas and the floodways are delineated. This official map is a
supplement to and shall be used in conjunction with the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
“Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM)” means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, where the boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard Areas have been defined as Zone A.
“Flood Insurance” means the insurance coverage provided under the National Flood Insurance Program.
“Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, on which both the Special Flood Hazard Areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are
delineated.
“Flood Insurance Study (FIS)” means an examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards, corresponding water
surface elevations (if appropriate), flood hazard risk zones, and other flood data in a community issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The Flood Insurance Study report includes Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and
Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), if published.
“Flood Prone Area” see “Floodplain”
“Floodplain” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.
“Floodplain Administrator” is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.
“Floodplain Development Permit” means any type of permit that is required in conformance with the provisions of this
ordinance, prior to the commencement of any development activity.
“Floodplain Management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing
flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.
“Floodplain Management Regulations” means this ordinance and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building
codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power. This term describes Federal,
State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and
damage.
“Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities, structures,
and their contents.
“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot.
“Flood Zone” means a geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map that reflects
the severity or type of flooding in the area.
“Freeboard” means the height added to the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) to account for the many unknown factors that could
contribute to flood heights greater that the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave
action, blockage of bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. The Base Flood Elevation
plus the freeboard establishes the “Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation”.
“Functionally Dependent Facility” means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located in close
proximity to water, limited to a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers,
shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
5
“Hazardous Waste Management Facility” means, as defined in NCGS 130A, Article 9, a facility for the collection, storage,
processing, treatment, recycling, recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste.
“Highest Adjacent Grade (HAG)” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction,
immediately next to the proposed walls of the structure.
“Historic Structure” means any structure that is:
(a) listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the US Department of
Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
(b) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of
a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district;
(c) individually listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks in communities with a “Certified Local
Government (CLG) Program”; or
(d) certified as contributing to the historical significance of a historic district designated by a community with a
“Certified Local Government (CLG) Program”.
Certified Local Government (CLG) Programs are approved by the US Department of the Interior in cooperation with
the North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources through the State Historic Preservation Officer as having met the
requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 as amended in 1980.
“Lowest Adjacent Grade (LAG)” means the elevation of the ground, sidewalk or patio slab immediately next to the building,
or deck support, after completion of the building.
“Lowest Floor” means lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other than a basement area is
not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation
of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance.
“Manufactured Home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
“manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
“Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
“Market Value” means the building value, not including the land value and that of any accessory structures or other
improvements on the lot. Market value may be established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated
for age of building and quality of construction (Actual Cash Value); or adjusted tax assessed values.
“Mean Sea Level” means, for purposes of this ordinance, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in
1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988, or other vertical control datum used as a reference
for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain, to which Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are
referenced. Refer to each FIRM panel to determine datum used.
“New Construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of the
initial floodplain management regulations and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
“Non-Encroachment Area” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1)
foot as designated in the Flood Insurance Study report.
“Post-FIRM” means construction or other development for which the “start of construction” occurred on or after the effective
date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate Map.
“Pre-FIRM” means construction or other development for which the “start of construction” occurred before the effective date
of the initial Flood Insurance Rate Map.
6
“Principally Above Ground” means that at least 51% of the actual cash value of the structure is above ground.
“Public Safety” and/or “Nuisance” means anything which is injurious to the safety or health of an entire community or
neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
“Recreational Vehicle (RV)” means a vehicle, which is:
(a) built on a single chassis;
(b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
“Reference Level” is the top of the lowest floor for structures within Special Flood Hazard Areas designated as Zone A1-
A30, AE, A, A99 or AO.
“Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation” means the “Base Flood Elevation” plus the “Freeboard”. In “Special Flood Hazard
Areas” where Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus two (2) feet of
freeboard. In “Special Flood Hazard Areas” where no BFE has been established, this elevation shall be at least two (2) feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
“Remedy a Violation” means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with State and community
floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts
may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the
enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing Federal financial
exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
“Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
“Salvage Yard” means any non-residential property used for the storage, collection, and/or recycling of any type of
equipment, and including but not limited to vehicles, appliances and related machinery.
“Solid Waste Disposal Facility” means any facility involved in the disposal of solid waste, as defined in NCGS 130A-
290(a)(35).
“Solid Waste Disposal Site” means, as defined in NCGS 130A-290(a)(36), any place at which solid wastes are disposed of by
incineration, sanitary landfill, or any other method.
“Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)” means the land in the floodplain subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of
being flooded in any given year, as determined in Article 3, Section B of this ordinance.
“Start of Construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180
days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
“Structure” means a walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a gas, liquid, or liquefied gas storage tank that is
principally above ground.
“Substantial Damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any one-year period whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure
7
before the damage occurred. See definition of “substantial improvement”. Substantial damage also means flood-related
damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of
each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred
“Substantial Improvement” means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement
of a structure, taking place during any one-year period for which the cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of
the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
“substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(a) any correction of existing violations of State or community health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(b) any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure.
“Variance” is a grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance.
“Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other
evidence of compliance required in Articles 4 and 5 is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
“Water Surface Elevation (WSE)” means the height, in relation to mean sea level, of floods of various magnitudes and
frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas.
“Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at
least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
SECTION A. LANDS TO WHICH THIS ORDINANCE APPLIES.
This ordinance shall apply to all Special Flood Hazard Areas within the jurisdiction, including Extra-Territorial Jurisdictions
(ETJs) if applicable, of the City of Trinity and within the jurisdiction of any other community whose governing body agrees,
by resolution, to such applicability.
SECTION B. BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
The Special Flood Hazard Areas are those identified under the Cooperating Technical State (CTS) agreement between the
State of North Carolina and FEMA in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and its accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRM), for Randolph County dated January 2, 2008, which are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
ordinance.
The initial Flood Insurance Rate Maps are as follows for the jurisdictional areas at the initial date:
Randolph County Unincorporated Area, dated July 16, 1981
The City of Trinity, dated January 2, 2008
SECTION C. ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance prior to the
commencement of any development activities within Special Flood Hazard Areas determined in accordance with the
provisions of Article 3, Section B of this ordinance.
SECTION D. COMPLIANCE.
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, altered, or developed in any way without full compliance
8
with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
SECTION E. ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this ordinance and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.
SECTION F. INTERPRETATION.
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be:
(a) considered as minimum requirements;
(b) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(c) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.
SECTION G. WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be increased by manmade
or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the Special Flood Hazard Areas or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City
of Trinity or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
SECTION H. PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not more than $50.00 or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both. Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Trinity from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
ARTICLE 4. ADMINISTRATION.
SECTION A. DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
The Planning and Zoning Administrator, hereinafter referred to as the “Floodplain Administrator”, is hereby appointed to
administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION B. FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION, PERMIT AND CERTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS.
(1) Application Requirements. Application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be made to the Floodplain
Administrator prior to any development activities located within Special Flood Hazard Areas. The following items
shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply for a floodplain development permit:
(a) A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following specific details of the
proposed floodplain development:
(i) the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of development/disturbance; existing and
proposed structures, utility systems, grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage
facilities, and other development;
(ii) the boundary of the Special Flood Hazard Area as delineated on the FIRM or other flood map as
determined in Article 3, Section B, or a statement that the entire lot is within the Special Flood Hazard
Area;
9
(iii) flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as determined on the FIRM or other flood
map as determined in Article 3, Section B;
(iv) the boundary of the floodway(s) or non-encroachment area(s) as determined in Article 3, Section B;
(v) the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in Article 3, Section B; Article 4, Section C;
or Article 5, Section D;
(vi) the old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed
development;
(vii) the certification of the plot plan by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer.
(b) Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a Special Flood Hazard Area including but
not limited to:
(i) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed reference level (including basement) of all
structures;
(ii) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure in Zone AE, A or AO will
be flood-proofed; and
(iii) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed utility systems will be elevated or
floodproofed;
(c) If floodproofing, a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65) with supporting data and an operational plan
that includes, but is not limited to, installation, exercise, and maintenance of floodproofing measures.
(d) A Foundation Plan, drawn to scale,, which shall include details of the proposed foundation system to ensure all
provisions of this ordinance are met. These details include but are not limited to:
(i) The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill, solid foundation perimeter wall, solid
backfilled foundation, open foundation on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls);
(ii) Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on walls in accordance with
Article 5, Section B(4)(c) when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AO, AE, and A1-
30;
(e) Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor.
(f) Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems to be located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
(g) Certification that all other Local, State and Federal permits required prior to floodplain development permit
issuance have been received.
(h) Documentation for placement of Recreational Vehicles and/or Temporary Structures, when applicable, to
ensure that the provisions of Article 5, Section B, subsections (6) and (7) of this ordinance are met.
(i) A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation, when applicable, including an engineering
report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on plot plan) showing the location
of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation.
(2) Permit Requirements. The Floodplain Development Permit shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) A description of the development to be permitted under the floodplain development permit.
10
(b) The Special Flood Hazard Area determination for the proposed development in accordance with available data
specified in Article 3, Section B.
(c) The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the reference level and all attendant utilities.
(d) The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the protection of all public utilities.
(e) All certification submittal requirements with timelines.
(f) A statement that no fill material or other development shall encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment
area of any watercourse, as applicable.
(g) The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AO, AE or A1-30.
(h) Limitations of below BFE enclosure uses (if applicable). (i.e., parking, building access and limited storage
only).
(3) Certification Requirements.
(a) Elevation Certificates
(i) An Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required prior to the actual start of any new
construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be
corrected by the permit holder prior to the beginning of construction. Failure to submit the certification
or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit.
(ii) An Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required after the reference level is established. Within
seven (7) calendar days of establishment of the reference level elevation, it shall be the duty of the permit
holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the elevation of the reference level, in
relation to mean sea level. . Any work done within the seven (7) day calendar period and prior to
submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder’s risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall
review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to further work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the
project.
(iii) A final as-built Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required after construction is completed and
prior to Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built construction of the elevation of the
reference level and all attendant utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and
prior to Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy issuance. In some instances, another certification may be
required to certify corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make
required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy.
(b) Floodproofing Certificate
If non-residential floodproofing is used to meet the regulatory flood protection elevation requirements, a
Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection
and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the
permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the floodproofed design elevation of
the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea level. Floodproofing certification shall be
prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The
Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational plan, and the inspection and
maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit
approval. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a
floodplain development permit. Failure to construct in accordance with the certified design shall be cause to
11
withhold the issuance of a Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy.
(c) If a manufactured home is placed within Zone A, AO, AE, or A1-30 and the elevation of the chassis is more
than 36 inches in height above grade, an engineered foundation certification is required in accordance with the
provisions of Article 5, Section B(3)(b).
(d) If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; a
professional engineer’s certified report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of
the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map showing the
location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior
to issuance of a floodplain development permit.
(e) Certification Exemptions. The following structures, if located within Zone A, AO, AE or A1-30, are exempt
from the elevation/floodproofing certification requirements specified in items (a) and (b) of this subsection:
(i) Recreational Vehicles meeting requirements of Article 5, Section B(6)(a);
(ii) Temporary Structures meeting requirements of Article 5, Section B(7); and
(iii) Accessory Structures less than 150 square feet meeting requirements of Article 5, Section B(8).
SECTION C. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the following duties:
(1) Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for all proposed development within Special Flood
Hazard Areas to assure that the requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied.
(2) Review all proposed development within Special Flood Hazard Areas to assure that all necessary Local, State and
Federal permits have been received.
(3) Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina Department of Crime Control and Public Safety, Division of
Emergency Management, State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA).
(4) Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the floodcarrying
capacity is maintained.
(5) Prevent encroachments into floodways and non-encroachment areas unless the certification and flood hazard reduction
provisions of Article 5, Section F are met.
(6) Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the reference level (including basement) and all attendant
utilities of all new and substantially improved structures, in accordance with Article 4, Section B(3).
(7) Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which all new and substantially improved structures and
utilities have been floodproofed, in accordance with the provisions of Article 4, Section B(3).
(8) Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all public utilities in accordance with the provisions of Article
4, Section B(3).
(9) When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer
or architect in accordance with the provisions of Article 4, Section B(3) and Article 5, Section B(2).
(10) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard Areas, floodways, or
non-encroachment areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given
a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article.
12
(11) When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in accordance with Article 3, Section B, obtain, review,
and reasonably utilize any Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data, along with floodway data or non-encroachment area data
available from a Federal, State, or other source, including data developed pursuant to Article 5, Section D(2)(b), in
order to administer the provisions of this ordinance.
(12) When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway or non-encroachment area data has been provided
in accordance with Article 3, Section B, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or non-encroachment
area data available from a Federal, State, or other source in order to administer the provisions of this ordinance.
(13) When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a structure or the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a
Special Flood Hazard Area is above the Base Flood Elevation, advise the property owner of the option to apply for a
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) from FEMA. Maintain a copy of the Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) issued
by FEMA in the floodplain development permit file.
(14) Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of this ordinance and make these records available
for public inspection, recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, as amended.
(15) Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to a floodplain development permit progresses,
the floodplain administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the work is
being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the
floodplain administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
(16) Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or
repaired in violation of this ordinance, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be immediately stopped.
The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work
order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the condition(s) under
which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor.
(17) Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain Administrator may revoke and require the return
of the floodplain development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the revocation.
Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the approved application, plans, and specifications; for
refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of State or local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations
made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable State
or local law may also be revoked.
(18) Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the community. The
Floodplain Administrator and each member of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon presentation
of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable
hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
(19) Follow through with corrective procedures of Article 4, Section D.
(20) Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance requests.
(21) Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to, the FIS Report, FIRM and other official flood maps
and studies adopted in accordance with Article 3, Section B of this ordinance, including any revisions thereto
including Letters of Map Change, issued by FEMA. Notify State and FEMA of mapping needs.
(22) Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including Letters of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) and
Letters of Map Revision (LOMR).
SECTION D. CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES.
(1) Violations to be Corrected: When the Floodplain Administrator finds violations of applicable State and local laws, it
shall be his or her duty to notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or occupant shall
immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such notification.
(2) Actions in Event of Failure to Take Corrective Action: If the owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt
13
corrective action, the Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or registered mail to
the owner’s last known address or by personal service, stating:
(a) that the building or property is in violation of the floodplain management regulations;
(b) that a hearing will be held before the floodplain administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten
(10) days after the date of the notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
(c) that following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the
building; or to remove fill as applicable.
(3) Order to Take Corrective Action: If, upon a hearing held pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain
Administrator shall find that the building or development is in violation of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance,
they shall issue an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation within a specified time
period, not less than sixty (60) calendar days, nor more than (120) calendar days. Where the Floodplain Administrator
finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, they may order that corrective action be taken in such
lesser period as may be feasible.
(4) Appeal: Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action may appeal the order to the local elected
governing body by giving notice of appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the clerk within ten (10)
days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order of the Floodplain Administrator shall
be final. The local governing body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm,
or revoke the order.
(5) Failure to Comply with Order: If the owner of a building or property fails to comply with an order to take corrective
action for which no appeal has been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an appeal,
the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished at the discretion of the court.
SECTION E. VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
(1) The Board of Adjustments as established by the City of Trinity, hereinafter referred to as the “appeal board”, shall hear
and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance.
(2) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision to the Court, as provided in
Chapter 7A of the North Carolina General Statutes.
(3) Variances may be issued for:
(a) the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(b) functionally dependent facilities if determined to meet the definition as stated in Article 2 of this ordinance,
provided provisions of Article 4, Section E(9)(b), (c), and (e) have been satisfied, and such facilities are
protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to
public safety.
(c) any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements of this Section.
(4) In passing upon variances, the appeal board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards
specified in other sections of this ordinance, and:
(a) the danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(b) the danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
14
(c) the susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the
individual owner;
(d) the importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
(e) the necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined under Article 2 of this ordinance as a functionally
dependent facility, where applicable;
(f) the availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
(g) the compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(h) the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that
area;
(i) the safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) the expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of
wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) the costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and
repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be submitted with the application for a variance.
(6) Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this ordinance, the appeal board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this ordinance.
(7) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the Base
Flood Elevation (BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction below the Base
Flood Elevation increases risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below
the Base Flood Elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 per $100 of insurance
coverage. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions, including justification for their
issuance.
(8) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and the State of North Carolina upon request.
(9) Conditions for Variances:
(a) Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the structure in violation of other Federal, State, or
local laws, regulations, or ordinances.
(b) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or non-encroachment area if the variance would
result in any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge.
(c) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering
the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(d) Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit approval.
(e) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(i) a showing of good and sufficient cause;
(ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and
(iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
15
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(10) A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage
yards, and chemical storage facilities that are located in Special Flood Hazard Areas provided that all of the following
conditions are met.
(a) The use serves a critical need in the community.
(b) No feasible location exists for the use outside the Special Flood Hazard Area.
(c) The reference level of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood protection
elevation.
(d) The use complies with all other applicable Federal, State and local laws.
(e) The City of Trinity has notified the Secretary of the North Carolina Department of Crime Control and Public
Safety of its intention to grant a variance at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to granting the variance.
ARTICLE 5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
SECTION A. GENERAL STANDARDS.
In all Special Flood Hazard Areas the following provisions are required:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant
to flood damage.
(3) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damages.
(4) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding to the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. These include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water
softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes, hot water heaters,
and electric outlets/switches.
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the system.
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from
them during flooding.
(8) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of
this ordinance, shall meet the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this ordinance.
(9) Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or replacement of a building or structure existing on
the effective date of this ordinance and located totally or partially within the floodway, non-encroachment area, or
stream setback, provided there is no additional encroachment below the regulatory flood protection elevation in the
floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback, and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or replacement
meets all of the other requirements of this ordinance.
(10) New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical
16
storage facilities shall not be permitted, except by variance as specified in Article 4, Section E(10). A structure or tank
for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater
treatment facility may be located in a Special Flood Hazard Area only if the structure or tank is either elevated or
floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of
Article 4, Section B(3).
(11) All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
(12) All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
(13) All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure
to flood hazards.
(14) All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have received all necessary permits from those
governmental agencies for which approval is required by Federal or State law, including Section 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
(15) When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for
new construction and substantial improvements.
(16) When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood
elevations, the provisions for the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood elevation shall
apply.
SECTION B. SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
In all Special Flood Hazard Areas where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has been provided, as set forth in Article 3,
Section B, or Article 5, Section D, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of Article 5, Section A, are
required:
(1) Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure (including
manufactured homes) shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation, as defined in Article 2 of this ordinance.
(2) Non-Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other
non-residential structure shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation, as defined in Article 2 of this ordinance. Structures located in A, AE, AO, and A1-30 Zones may
be floodproofed to the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation provided that all areas of the structure,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation are watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. For AO Zones, the floodproofing elevation shall be in
accordance with Article 5, Section G(2). A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards
of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in
Article 4, Section B(3), along with the operational and maintenance plans..
(3) Manufactured Homes.
(a) New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that the reference level of the manufactured
home is no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in Article 2 of this ordinance.
17
(b) Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement, either by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the
most current edition of the State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured Homes adopted by the
Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to NCGS 143-143.15. Additionally, when the elevation would be met by
an elevation of the chassis thirty-six (36) inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be
supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is above thirty-six
(36) inches in height, an engineering certification is required.
(c) All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the requirements of Article 5, Section B(4).
(d) An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all residents of all new, substantially improved or
substantially damaged manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This plan
shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the local Emergency Management
coordinator.
(4) Elevated Buildings. Fully enclosed area, of new construction and substantially improved structures, which is below
the lowest floor:
(a) shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only be used for parking of vehicles, building
access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the
enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage
of maintenance equipment (standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The
interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms, except to enclose
storage areas;
(b) shall be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least to the regulatory flood protection elevation;
(c) shall include, in Zones A, AO, AE, and A1-30, flood openings to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum design
criteria:
(i) A minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding;
(ii) The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one (1) square inch for each square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding;
(iii) If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed area must have flood openings to allow
floodwaters to automatically enter and exit;
(iv) The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above the adjacent grade;
(v) Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided they
permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; and
(vi) Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and,
therefore, do not require flood openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status,
is considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
(5) Additions/Improvements.
(a) Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the addition and/or improvements in combination
with any interior modifications to the existing structure are:
(i) not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements must be designed to minimize flood
damages and must not be any more non-conforming than the existing structure.
(ii) a substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must
comply with the standards for new construction.
18
(b) Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications to the existing structure other than a standard door in
the common wall shall require only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.
(c) Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the addition and/or improvements in
combination with any interior modifications to the existing structure are:
(i) not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements only must comply with the standards
for new construction.
(ii) a substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must
comply with the standards for new construction.
(6) Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall either:
(a) be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently attached additions); or
(b) meet all the requirements for new construction.
(7) Temporary Non-Residential Structures. Prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for a temporary
structure, the applicant must submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure(s) in the
event of a hurricane, flash flood or other type of flood warning notification. The following information shall be
submitted in writing to the Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:
(a) a specified time period for which the temporary use will be permitted. Time specified may not exceed three (3)
months, renewable up to one (1) year;
(b) the name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible for the removal of the temporary structure;
(c) the time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall
of a hurricane or immediately upon flood warning notification);
(d) a copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity responsible for physical removal of the
structure; and
(e) designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside the Special Flood Hazard Area, to which the
temporary structure will be moved.
(8) Accessory Structures. When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages, etc.) are to be placed within a Special
Flood Hazard Area, the following criteria shall be met:
(a) Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation (including working, sleeping, living, cooking or
restroom areas);
(b) Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
(c) Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential;
(d) Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance
to the flow of floodwaters;
(e) Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with the provisions of Article 5, Section A(1);
(f) All service facilities such as electrical shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of Article 5, Section
A(4); and
(g) Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below
19
regulatory flood protection elevation in conformance with the provisions of Article 5, Section B(4)(c).
An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150 square feet that satisfies the criteria outlined above does not
require an elevation or floodproofing certificate. Elevation or floodproofing certifications are required for all other
accessory structures in accordance with Article 4, Section B(3).
SECTION C. RESERVED.
SECTION D. STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAINS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD
ELEVATIONS.
Within the Special Flood Hazard Areas designated as Approximate Zone A and established in Article 3, Section B, where no
Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of
Article 5, Section A, shall apply:
(1) No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements or new development shall be permitted
within a distance of twenty (20) feet each side from top of bank or five times the width of the stream, whichever is
greater, unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
(2) The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be determined based on the following
criteria:
(a) When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is available from other sources, all new construction and substantial
improvements within such areas shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this ordinance and shall be
elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in Article 5, Sections A and B.
(b) When floodway data is available from a Federal, State, or other source, all new construction and substantial
improvements within floodway areas shall also comply with the requirements of Article 5, Sections B and F.
(c) All subdivision, manufactured home park and other development proposals shall provide Base Flood Elevation
(BFE) data if development is greater than five (5) acres or has more than fifty (50) lots/manufactured home
sites. Such Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference in accordance with Article 3,
Section B and utilized in implementing this ordinance.
(d) When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is not available from a Federal, State, or other source as outlined above,
the reference level shall be elevated or floodproofed (nonresidential) to or above the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation, as defined in Article 2. All other applicable provisions of Article 5, Section B shall also
apply.
SECTION E. STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE FLOODPLAINS WITH BFE BUT WITHOUT ESTABLISHED
FLOODWAYS OR NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.
Along rivers and streams where BFE data is provided by FEMA or is available from another source but neither floodway nor
non-encroachment areas are identified for a Special Flood Hazard Area on the FIRM or in the FIS report, the following
requirements shall apply to all development within such areas:
(1) Standards of Article 5, Sections A and B; and
(2) Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment area is designated, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development, shall be permitted unless certification with supporting
technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community.
SECTION F. FLOODWAYS AND NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.
Areas designated as floodways or non-encroachment areas are located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in
20
Article 3, Section B. The floodways and non-encroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity of
floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and potential projectiles. The following provisions, in addition to
standards outlined in Article 5, Sections A and B, shall apply to all development within such areas:
(1) No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments shall be
permitted unless:
(a) it is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in the flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice and presented to the Floodplain Administrator prior to issuance of floodplain
development permit, or
(b) a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) has been approved by FEMA. A Letter of Map Revision
(LOMR) must also be obtained upon completion of the proposed encroachment.
(2) If Article 5, Section F(1) is satisfied, all development shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction
provisions of this ordinance.
(3) No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except replacement manufactured homes in an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision, provided the following provisions are met:
(a) the anchoring and the elevation standards of Article 5, Section B(3); and
(b) the no encroachment standard of Article 5, Section F(1).
SECTION G. STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (ZONE AO).
Located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in Article 3, Section B, are areas designated as shallow flooding
areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. In addition to Article 5,
Sections A and B, all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the following requirements:
(1) The reference level shall be elevated at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM), in feet, plus a freeboard of two (2) feet, above the highest adjacent grade; or at least two (4) feet above the
highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
(2) Non-residential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be floodproofed to the same level as required in Article 5, Section
G(1) so that the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below that level shall be watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is required in accordance with
Article 4, Section B(3) and Article 5, Section B(2).
(3) Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures.
ARTICLE 6. LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS.
SECTION A. EFFECT ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES UNDER THE EXISTING FLOOD DAMAGE
PREVENTION ORDINANCE.
This ordinance in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance
enacted March 16, 2004 as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue to enforce without
interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be
enforced. The enactment of this ordinance shall not affect any action, suit or proceeding instituted or pending. All
provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance of the City of Trinity enacted on March 16, 2004, as amended, which
are not reenacted herein are repealed.
The date of the initial Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance for Randolph County is May 4, 1987.
21
SECTION B. EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size, or designated use of any development or
any part thereof for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the floodplain administrator or his or her
authorized agents before the time of passage of this ordinance; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under
such outstanding permit within a period of six (6) months subsequent to the date of issuance of the outstanding permit,
construction or use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION C. EFFECTIVE DATE.
This ordinance shall become effective January 2, 2008.
SECTION D. ADOPTION CERTIFICATION.
I hereby certify that this is a true and correct copy of the flood damage prevention ordinance as adopted by the City
Council of Trinity, North Carolina, on the 20th day of November, 2007.
WITNESS my hand and the official seal of the City of Trinity, this the 26th day of November, 2007.
_______________________________________ _______________________________________
Mayor City Clerk






















































Page 1 of 6
Proposed to City Council 10/12/10
Adopted 10/19/10
CITY OF TRINITY
ORDINANCE
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
Section 1: Definitions
(a) The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this
ordinance:
(1) Bulk Container means a metal container made of watertight construction
with sliding doors opening on two sides and hinged top, constructed so
that it can be emptied mechanically by specially equipped trucks.
(2) City means the City of Trinity.
(3) Construction or demolition when used in connection with waste or debris
means solid waste resulting solely from construction, remodeling, repair,
or demolition operations on pavement, buildings, or other structures.
(4) Garbage means all solid waste that is capable of being decomposed of by
microorganisms with sufficient rapidity as to cause nuisances from odors
and gases, such as kitchen wastes and carcasses, including animal
carcasses and recognizable industrial byproducts, but excluding sewage
and human waste.
(5) Hazardous waste means solid waste, or combinations of solid wastes,
which because of its quantity, concentration, physical, chemical, or
infectious characteristics may:
a. Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness;
or
b. Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or
the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of or otherwise managed.
(6) Junk means any object, thing, matter or substance that appears to a
reasonable person to be of no economic value or worth. This shall include
accumulations of rubbish and household waste that are normally stored for
a short period to time before being disposed of by the property owner or
occupant. This definition shall also apply to collections of motor vehicles,
machinery, appliances, rags, cardboard and building materials.
Page 2 of 6
Proposed to City Council 10/12/10
Adopted 10/19/10
(7) Medical waste means any solid waste which is generated in the diagnosis,
treatment, immunization of human beings or animals, in research
pertaining thereto, or in the production or testing.
(8) Oil means any oil, new or used, which been refined from crude oil or
synthetic oil and, as a result of use, storage, or handling has become
unsuitable for its original purpose due to the presence of impurities and
loss of original properties but which may be suitable for further use and is
economically recyclable.
(9) Person means an individual, corporation, company, association,
partnership, unit of local government, state agency, federal agency or
other legal entity.
(10) Recyclable material means those materials which are capable of being
recycled, can be marketed at a value greater than the costs associated with
processing and shipping that material to a buyer, and which would
otherwise be processed and disposed of as solid waste.
(11) Recycling means any process by which solid waste, or materials which
would otherwise become solid waste, are collected, separated, or
processed, and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or
products.
(12) Refuse means solid waste that is not likely to become putrid or capable of
being quickly decomposed by microorganisms.
(13) Rollout container means a wheeled solid waste or recycling receptacle
provided by the City or its contractor that can be serviced with automated
collection system equipment.
(14) Rubbish (See definition of junk)
(15) Solid waste means any hazardous or non hazardous garbage or refuse.
(16) Special wastes means solid waste that can require special handling and
management, including white goods, whole tires, used oil, lead acid
batteries and medical waste.
(17) Tire means a continuous solid or pneumatic rubber covering intended to
encircle the wheel of a motor vehicle.
(18) White goods include inoperative and discarded refrigerators, ranges, water
heaters, freezers, and other similar domestic and commercial large
appliances.
(19) Yard waste means solid waste consisting solely of vegetative matter
resulting from landscaping maintenance, which includes but is not limited
to tree limbs grass clippings, leaves, brush, etc.
Page 3 of 6
Proposed to City Council 10/12/10
Adopted 10/19/10
Section 2: Garbage, Garbage Containers
(a) Roll out garbage containers with a capacity of approximately 96 gallons shall be
provided by the City or its contractor and shall remain the property of the City or
its contractor. Containers shall be maintained in a sound and serviceable condition
such that they can be emptied with automated collection system equipment.
(b) Each customer as defined in Section 5 (a), (b), (c) and (e) shall be entitled to one
container which shall be serviced, at curbside (or at the street right-of-way in the
absence of curbs), once per week. Additional containers may be available and
may be provided for with an additional monthly fee.
(c) All household garbage and trash must be placed inside the roll out container to be
serviced.
(d) The following items are not accepted at regulated landfills and therefore may not
be placed in containers:
Yard waste
Medical waste
Construction and demolition materials
Auto parts and fluids
Hazardous waste
White goods
(e) The City and the contractor reserve the right to temporarily suspend service when
weather conditions make delivery of service unsafe.
(f) Containers shall be placed at curbside (or at the street right-of-way in the absence
of curbs) for collection immediately prior to time of collection and shall be
removed from the public area or way as soon as possible thereafter. However in
residential areas, when collection time is prior to 9 a.m. containers may be placed
in designated service areas the night before.
(g) The schedule of days and collection times shall be available at the City Offices.
Notices of changes or alterations to scheduled collection days will be distributed
through local media outlets including the City web site, social media networks,
the City Connection newsletter and/or direct mailings.
(h) Containers, when placed for collection, must be placed such that they will not
interfere with traffic on foot, in vehicles, or otherwise and can be serviced by an
automated collection system vehicle without interference from utility poles,
mailboxes, trees, and parked cars.
Section 3: Storage and Removal of Rubbish
(a) Bulk handling or storage of refuse of any characteristic shall be subject to review
by the City Council, and the owner or occupant of any industrial, commercial, or
Page 4 of 6
Proposed to City Council 10/12/10
Adopted 10/19/10
business establishment shall make provisions as the City Council may require for
the sanitary storage and collection of such refuse.
(b) The open storage of junk, solid waste, and refuse in the public view shall not be
permitted.
(c) In the interest of the health and safety of the community, excessive accumulations
of junk, solid waste and refuse shall not be permitted to be stored on private
property, regardless of the method and length of storage.
(d) The owner of property that is in violation of this Ordinance shall be notified by
first class mail of the violation of this section of the Ordinance. The property
owner will have a maximum of ten days from the date postmarked on the
notification to correct the violation.
(e) A civil penalty of $25.00 for the first day and $10.00 for each subsequent day
may be assessed for the violation of the provisions of this section of the
Ordinance.
(f) The City may, upon excessive delay in correcting the violation, remove the
offending solid waste or refuse at the owner’s expense. In such cases the owner
must pay all costs associated with correcting the violation in addition to any
assessed civil penalties.
(g) Junk, refuse, rubbish and solid waste shall be as defined in Sec. 1 (6), (12), (14)
and (15).
Section 4 Collection of Recyclable Materials and Recycling Containers
(a) Recyclable materials shall be placed in the roll out container provided to each
customer by the City or its contractor. Customers shall be as defined by Section 5
(a), (b), (c) and (e). Containers shall remain the property of the City or its
contractor.
(b) Recyclables shall be collected biweekly by the City or its contractor.
(c) Recycling containers shall be placed at curbside (or at the street right-of-way in
the absence of curbs) for collection immediately prior to time of collection and
shall be removed from the public area or way as soon as possible thereafter.
However, in residential areas, when collection time is prior to 9 a.m. containers
may be placed in designated service area the night before.
(d) The schedule of days, collection times and acceptable recycling materials shall be
available at the City Offices. Notices of changes or alterations to scheduled
collection days will be distributed through local media outlets including the City
web site, social media networks, the City Connection newsletter and/or direct
mailings.
(e) Recycling containers when placed for collection, must be placed such that they
will not interfere with traffic on foot, in vehicles, or otherwise and can be serviced
by an automated collection system vehicle without interference from utility poles,
mailboxes, trees, and parked cars.
Page 5 of 6
Proposed to City Council 10/12/10
Adopted 10/19/10
(f) Recyclable materials and their subsequent resale value are subject to market
economies, and therefore the items accepted for recycling may be changed,
amended, or canceled as per the contracts with the City’s recycling contractor.
Section 5 Customer Groups and Service Responsibilities
(a) Residential Customers are defined as those customers living in single family
households and whose driveways connect to a public road. Residential customers
residing in single family households shall have their garbage collected at the
curbside (or at the street right-of-way in the absence of curbs) once per week and
their recyclable materials collected on a bi-weekly basis. A monthly fee for
service approved by City Council shall be added to every utility bill.
(b) Residential customers (on private roads) are defined as those customers living in
single family households and whose driveways connect to a private road.
Residential customers on private roads shall not receive City provided solid waste
collection service and shall not be billed for service unless:
1. Owners of residences abutting a single private road or homeowners
associations representing entire neighborhoods submit to the City a
petition for service and agree to hold the City harmless from damages to
the private road. Said petition to be on a form provided by the City; and
2. Service provision is approved by the City upon consideration of access to
the private property, condition of roadway and ability to provide service
along the private roadway without damage to existing structures and
facilities.
3. If service is provided, said residential customers shall have their garbage
collected at the curbside (or at the street right-of-way in the absence of
curbs) once per week and their recyclable materials collected on a biweekly
basis. A monthly fee for service approved by City Council shall be
added to every utility bill.
(c) Non-residential Customers(without bulk containers) are defined as those
businesses or other non-residential enterprises that generate junk, recyclable
material, refuse, rubbish, and non-hazardous solid waste as defined in Sec. 1 (6),
(10), (12), (14) and (15) and deposit said materials in containers with a capacity of
no more than 96 gallons as described in Sections 2 and 4. Non-residential
(without bulk containers) customers shall have their garbage collected at the
curbside (or at the street right-of-way in the absence of curbs) once per week and
their recyclable materials collected on a bi-weekly basis. A monthly fee for
service approved by City Council shall be added to every utility bill.
(d) Non-residential Customers (with bulk containers) receive garbage collection
through a private collector and at no expense to the City.
(e) Multi-family Residential Customers (without bulk containers) are defined as those
apartments, condominiums, duplexes, manufactured home parks and other similar
housing complexes at which roll-out containers with a capacity of no more than
96 gallons as described in Sections 2 and 4 are utilized to deposit junk, recyclable
Page 6 of 6
Proposed to City Council 10/12/10
Adopted 10/19/10
material, refuse, rubbish, and non-hazardous solid waste as defined in Sec. 1 (6),
(10), (12), (14) and (15) from individual households and collection is provided
from a public roadway. Multi-family Residential Customers (without bulk
containers) shall have their garbage collected at the curbside (or at the street rightof-
way in the absence of curbs) once per week and their recyclable materials
collected on a bi-weekly basis. A monthly fee for service approved by City
Council shall be added to every utility bill.
(f) Multi-family Residential Customers (with bulk containers) receive garbage
collection through a private collector and at no expense to the City.
(g) Industrial and Manufacturing Customers are responsible for their own garbage
collection and disposal at no expense to the City.
Section 6: Rules and Regulations Authorized
The City Manager may make such rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter as s/he
deems advisable to safeguard the health and welfare of the citizens of the City in the disposal of
solid waste.
1
“The Universal Stormwater Management Program
Ordinance” for the City of Trinity, NC,
2
Table of Contents
Universal Stormwater Model Ordinance for North Carolina .......................................... 1
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS .......................................................................... 7
Sec - 101 Title ..................................................................................................................... 7
Sec - 102 Authority ............................................................................................................. 7
Sec - 103 Findings .............................................................................................................. 7
Sec - 104 Purpose ............................................................................................................... 7
(A) General ............................................................................................................... 7
(B) Specific ............................................................................................................... 8
Sec - 105 Applicability and Jurisdiction ............................................................................ 9
(A) General ............................................................................................................... 9
(B) Exemptions ........................................................................................................ 9
(1) Thresholds ....................................................................................................... 9
(2) General exemption .......................................................................................... 9
(C) No Development or Redevelopment Until Compliance and Permit ............. 9
(D) Map................................................................................................................... 10
Sec - 106 Interpretation ................................................................................................... 10
(A) Meaning and Intent......................................................................................... 10
(B) Text Controls in Event of Conflict ................................................................ 10
(C) Authority for Interpretation .......................................................................... 10
(D) References to Statutes, Regulations, and Documents .................................. 10
(E) Computation of Time ...................................................................................... 11
(F) Delegation of Authority .................................................................................. 11
(G) Usage ................................................................................................................ 11
(1) Mandatory and Discretionary Terms ............................................................ 11
(2) Conjunctions ................................................................................................. 11
(3) Tense, Plurals, and Gender ........................................................................... 11
(H) Measurement and Computation .................................................................... 11
Sec - 107 Design Manual ................................................................................................. 11
(A) Reference to Design Manual .......................................................................... 11
(B) Relationship of Design Manual to Other Laws and Regulations ............... 12
(C) Changes to Standards and Specifications ..................................................... 12
(D) [Amendments to Design Manual] .................................................................. 12
3
Sec - 108 Relationship to Other Laws, Regulations and Private Agreements ............... 12
(A) Conflict of Laws .............................................................................................. 12
(B) Private Agreements ......................................................................................... 12
Sec - 109 Severability ....................................................................................................... 13
Sec - 110 Effective Date and Transitional Provisions .................................................... 13
(A) Effective Date .................................................................................................. 13
(B) Final Approvals, Complete Applications ...................................................... 13
(C) Violations Continue ........................................................................................ 13
ARTICLE 2: ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES ............................................ 14
Sec - 201 Review and Decision-Making Entities ............................................................ 14
(A) Stormwater Administrator ............................................................................ 14
(1) Designation ................................................................................................... 14
(2) Powers and Duties......................................................................................... 14
Sec - 202 Review Procedures ........................................................................................... 15
(A) Permit Required; Must Apply for Permit .................................................... 15
(B) Effect of Permit ............................................................................................... 15
(C) Authority to File Applications ....................................................................... 15
(D) Establishment of Application Requirements, Schedule, and Fees ............. 15
(1) Application Contents and Form .................................................................... 15
(2) Submission Schedule .................................................................................... 15
(3) Permit Review Fees ...................................................................................... 16
(4) Administrative Manual ................................................................................. 16
(E) Submittal of Complete Application ............................................................... 16
(F) Review .............................................................................................................. 16
(1) Approval ....................................................................................................... 16
(2) Fails to Comply ............................................................................................. 16
(3) Revision and Subsequent Review ................................................................. 17
Sec - 203 Applications for Approval ................................................................................ 17
(A) Concept Plan and Consultation Meeting ...................................................... 17
(1) Existing Conditions / Proposed Site Plans .................................................... 17
(2) Natural Resources Inventory ......................................................................... 17
(3) Stormwater Management System Concept Plan ........................................... 18
(B) Stormwater Management Permit Application ............................................. 18
(C) As-Built Plans and Final Approval ............................................................... 18
(D) Other Permits .................................................................................................. 19
Sec - 204 Approvals .......................................................................................................... 19
4
(A) Effect of Approval ........................................................................................... 19
(B) Time Limit/Expiration.................................................................................... 19
Sec - 205 Appeals ............................................................................................................. 19
(A) Right of Appeal ............................................................................................... 19
(B) [Filing of Appeal and Procedures]................................................................. 19
(C) [Review by Superior Court] ........................................................................... 20
ARTICLE 3: STANDARDS............................................................................................. 21
Sec - 301 General Standards............................................................................................ 21
Sec - 302 impervious surface requirements .................................................................... 21
(A) Setback requirement ....................................................................................... 21
(B) No new impervious or partially pervious surface in floodplain ................. 21
Sec - 303 structural stormwater control requirements ................................................... 21
Sec - 305 Standards for Stormwater Control Measures ................................................. 22
(A) Evaluation According to Contents of Design Manual ................................. 22
(B) Determination of Adequacy; Presumptions and Alternatives .................... 22
(C) Separation from Seasonal High Water Table .............................................. 22
Sec - 306 Stream Buffer Required………………………………………………………22
Sec - 307 Variances .......................................................................................................... 23
Sec - 308 Development Regulations…………………………………………………….24
(A) Establishment of Watershed Overlay Districts…………………………… 24
(1) [Pet waste] ................................................................................................... 255
ARTICLE 4: MAINTENANCE ...................................................................................... 26
Sec - 401 General Standards for Maintenance ............................................................... 26
(A) Function of BMPs As Intended ...................................................................... 26
(B) Annual Maintenance Inspection and Report ............................................... 26
Sec - 402 Operation and Maintenance Agreement ......................................................... 26
(A) In General ........................................................................................................ 26
(B) Special Requirement for Homeowners’ and Other Associations ............... 27
Sec - 403 Inspection Program.......................................................................................... 28
Sec - 404 Performance Security for Installation and Maintenance .............................. 29
(A) May Be Required ............................................................................................ 29
(B) Amount............................................................................................................. 29
(1) Installation..................................................................................................... 29
5
(2) Maintenance .................................................................................................. 29
(C) Uses of Performance Security ........................................................................ 29
(1) Forfeiture Provisions ..................................................................................... 29
(2) Default........................................................................................................... 29
(3) Costs in Excess of Performance Security ..................................................... 30
(4) Refund ........................................................................................................... 30
Sec - 405 Notice to owners ............................................................................................... 30
(A) Deed Recordation and Indications On Plat .................................................. 30
(B) Signage ............................................................................................................. 30
Sec - 406 Records of Installation and Maintenance Activities ....................................... 30
Sec - 407 Nuisance ........................................................................................................... 30
Sec - 408 [Maintenance Easement .................................................................................. 31
ARTICLE 5: ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATIONS ................................................... 32
Sec - 501 General ............................................................................................................. 32
(A) Authority to Enforce ....................................................................................... 32
(B) Violation Unlawful .......................................................................................... 32
(C) Each Day a Separate Offense ......................................................................... 32
(D) Responsible Persons/Entities.......................................................................... 32
(1) Person Maintaining Condition Resulting In or Constituting Violation ........ 32
(2) Responsibility For Land or Use of Land....................................................... 32
Sec - 502 Remedies and Penalties ................................................................................... 33
(A) Remedies .......................................................................................................... 33
(1) Withholding of Certificate of Occupancy ..................................................... 33
(2) Disapproval of Subsequent Permits and Development Approvals ............... 33
(3) Injunction, Abatements, etc. ......................................................................... 33
(4) Correction as Public Health Nuisance, Costs as Lien, etc. ........................... 33
(5) [Stop Work Order ......................................................................................... 33
(B) Civil Penalties .................................................................................................. 34
(C) Criminal Penalties ........................................................................................... 34
Sec - 503 Procedures ........................................................................................................ 34
(A) Initiation/Complaint ....................................................................................... 34
(B) Inspection ......................................................................................................... 34
(C) Notice of Violation and Order to Correct ..................................................... 34
(D) Extension of Time ........................................................................................... 35
(E) Enforcement After Time to Correct .............................................................. 35
(F) Emergency Enforcement ................................................................................ 35
6
ARTICLE 6: DEFINITIONS ........................................................................................ 366
Sec - 601 Terms Defined ................................................................................................ 366
ARTICLE 7: Illicit Discharges ........................................................................................ 39
Sec - 701 Illicit Discharges and Connections ................................................................. 39
(A) Illicit Discharges .............................................................................................. 39
(B) Illicit Connections ........................................................................................... 40
(C) Spills ................................................................................................................. 40
(D) Nuisance ......................................................................................................... 411
7
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec-101 TITLE
This ordinance shall be officially known as “The Universal Stormwater Management
Program Ordinance.” It is referred to herein as “this ordinance.”
Sec-102 AUTHORITY
The (Trinity City Council) is authorized to adopt this ordinance pursuant to North Carolina
law, including but not limited to Article 14, ARTICLE 5 of the Constitution of North
Carolina; (City of Trinity); North Carolina General Statutes 143-214.7 and rules promulgated
by the Environmental Management Commission there under; Session Law 2006-246;
Chapter 160A, §§ 174, 185 and (Chapter 143, Article 21, Part 6 (Floodway Regulation), [;
Chapter 160A, Article 19 (Planning and Regulation of Development); Chapter 153A, Article
18].
Sec-103 FINDINGS
It is hereby determined that:
Development and redevelopment alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase
stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, soil erosion, stream channel erosion,
nonpoint and point source pollution, and sediment transport and deposition, as well as
reducing groundwater recharge;
These changes in stormwater runoff contribute to increased quantities of water-borne
pollutants and alterations in hydrology that are harmful to public health and safety as well as
to the natural environment; and
These effects can be managed and minimized by applying proper design and well-planned
controls to manage stormwater runoff from development sites.
Further, the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 (“Clean Water Act”) and federal
Phase II Stormwater Rules promulgated under it, as well as rules of the North Carolina
Environmental Management Commission promulgated in response to federal Phase II
requirements, compel certain urbanized areas, including this jurisdiction, to adopt minimum
stormwater controls such as those included in this ordinance.
Therefore, the (Trinity City Council) establishes this set of water quality and quantity
regulations to meet the requirements of state and federal law regarding control of
stormwater runoff and discharge.
Sec-104 PURPOSE
(A) General
The purpose of this ordinance is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health,
safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and
procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater
runoff and nonpoint and point source pollution associated with new development and
redevelopment [as well as illicit discharges into municipal stormwater systems]. It has
been determined that proper management of construction-related and post8
development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property
and infrastructure; safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare; and
protect water and aquatic resources.
(B) Specific
This ordinance seeks to meet its general purpose through the following specific
objectives and means:
1. Establishing decision-making processes for development that protects the
integrity of watersheds and preserves the health of water resources;
2. Requiring that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development
hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable for the
applicable design storm to reduce flooding, stream bank erosion, nonpoint and
point source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and to maintain the
integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats;
3. Establishing minimum post-development stormwater management standards
and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity
and quality;
4. Establishing design and review criteria for the construction, function, and use
of structural stormwater BMPs that may be used to meet the minimum postdevelopment
stormwater management standards;
5. Encouraging the use of better management and site design practices, such as
the use of vegetated conveyances for stormwater and the preservation of green
space, riparian buffers and other conservation areas to the maximum extent
practicable;
6. Establishing provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance
of structural and nonstructural stormwater BMPs to ensure that they continue to
function as designed, are maintained appropriately, and pose no threat to public
safety;
7. Establishing administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval
and disapproval of stormwater management plans, for the inspection of approved
projects, and to assure appropriate long-term maintenance.
8. Coordinating site design plans that include open space and natural areas with
the (City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance ARTICLEs 6-11 and 6-18 Open
Space Standards, also Zoning Ordinance ARTICLE 12-5, open space
requirements).
[9. Controlling illicit discharges into the municipal separate stormwater system.]
[10. Assigning responsibility and processes for approving the creation and
maintenance of adequate drainage and flood damage prevention measures.]
9
Sec-105 APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION
(A) General
Beginning with and subsequent to its effective date, this ordinance shall be
applicable to all development and redevelopment, including, but not limited to, site plan
applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt
pursuant to SubARTICLE (B) of this ARTICLE, Exemptions.
(B) Exemptions
(1) Thresholds
[Residential development that cumulatively disturbs less than one acre and is not part
of a larger common plan of development or sale, and non-residential development that
cumulatively disturbs less than one-half acre and is not part of a larger common plan of
development or sale is exempt from the provisions of this ordinance.
Redevelopment outside the floodplain that results in no net increase in built-upon area and
provides equal or greater stormwater control than the previous development is
exempt from the provisions of this ordinance
Redevelopment of residential structures that results in no net increase in built-upon area
and provides equal or greater stormwater control than the previous development is
exempt from the provisions of this ordinance whether or not within the floodplain.
Redevelopment of non-residential structures that disturbs less than one-half acre, that
is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale, that is within the floodplain, and
that results in no net increase in built-upon area and provides equal or greater
stormwater control than the previous development is exempt from the provisions of
this ordinance.
.
Development and redevelopment that disturb less than a stated area threshold are not
exempt if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development or sale that
exceeds the area threshold, even though multiple, separate or distinct activities take
place at different times on different schedules.
(2) General exemption
Activities that are exempt from permit requirements of ARTICLE 404 of the
federal Clean Water Act as specified in 40 CFR 232 (primarily, ongoing farming and
forestry activities) are exempt from the provisions of this ordinance.
(C) No Development or Redevelopment Until Compliance and Permit
No development or redevelopment shall occur except in compliance with the provisions
of this ordinance or unless exempted. No development for which a permit is required
pursuant to this ordinance shall occur except in compliance with the provisions,
conditions, and limitations of the permit.
10
(D) Map
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply within the areas designated on the map
titled "USMP Stormwater Map of (City of Trinity), North Carolina" ("the
Stormwater Map"), which is adopted simultaneously herewith. The Stormwater Map
and all explanatory matter contained thereon accompany and are hereby made a part
of this ordinance.1
The Stormwater Map shall be kept on file by the Stormwater Administrator and
shall be updated to take into account changes in the land area covered by this
ordinance and the geographic location of all structural BMPs permitted under this
ordinance. In the event of a dispute, the applicability of this ordinance to a
particular area of land or BMP shall be determined by reference to the North
Carolina Statutes, the North Carolina Administrative Code, and local zoning and
jurisdictional boundary ordinances.
Sec-106 INTERPRETATION
(A) Meaning and Intent
All provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this ordinance shall be
construed according to the general and specific purposes set forth in ARTICLE 1,
Section 104, Purpose. If a different or more specific meaning is given for a term
defined elsewhere in (City of Trinity’s code of ordinances), the meaning and
application of the term in this ordinance shall control for purposes of application of
this ordinance.2
(B) Text Controls in Event of Conflict
In the event of a conflict or inconsistency between the text of this ordinance and
any heading, caption, figure, illustration, table, or map, the text shall control.
(C) Authority for Interpretation
The Stormwater Administrator has authority to determine the interpretation of this
ordinance. Any person may request an interpretation by submitting a written request
to the Stormwater Administrator, who shall respond in writing within 30 days. The
Stormwater Administrator shall keep on file a record of all written interpretations of
this ordinance.
(D) References to Statutes, Regulations, and Documents
Whenever reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, manual
(including the Design Manual), or document, it shall be construed as a reference to
the most recent edition of such that has been finalized and published with due
provision for notice and comment, unless otherwise specifically stated.
11
(E) Computation of Time
The time in which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day
and including the last day. If a deadline or required date of action falls on a Saturday,
Sunday, or holiday observed by the (City of Trinity), the deadline or required date of
action shall be the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or holiday observed by the
(City of Trinity). References to days are calendar days unless otherwise stated.
(F) Delegation of Authority
Any act authorized by this Ordinance to be carried out by the Stormwater
Administrator of the (City of Trinity) may be carried out by his or her designee.
(G) Usage
(1) Mandatory and Discretionary Terms
The words “shall,” “must,” and “will” are mandatory in nature, establishing an
obligation or duty to comply with the particular provision. The words “may”
and “should” are permissive in nature.
(2) Conjunctions
Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, conjunctions shall be
interpreted as follows: The word “and” indicates that all connected items,
conditions, provisions and events apply. The word “or” indicates that one or
more of the connected items, conditions, provisions or events apply.
(3) Tense, Plurals, and Gender
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the
singular number include the plural number and the plural number includes the
singular number, unless the context of the particular usage clearly indicates
otherwise. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine gender,
and vice versa.
(H) Measurement and Computation
Lot area refers to the amount of horizontal land area contained inside the lot lines
of a lot or site.
Sec-107 DESIGN MANUAL
(A) Reference to Design Manual
The Stormwater Administrator shall use the policy, criteria, and information,
including technical specifications and standards, in the NCDENR Stormwater Best
Management Practices Design Manual (referred to as the Design Manual) as the basis
for decisions about stormwater permits and about the design, implementation and
performance of structural and non-structural stormwater BMPs.
The Design Manual includes a list of acceptable stormwater treatment practices,
including specific design criteria for each stormwater practice. Stormwater treatment
12
practices that are designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with these
design and sizing criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality
performance standards of the Phase II and other applicable stormwater laws.3
(B) Relationship of Design Manual to Other Laws and Regulations
If the specifications or guidelines of the Design Manual are more restrictive or apply a
higher standard than other laws or regulations, that fact shall not prevent application
of the specifications or guidelines in the Design Manual.
(C) Changes to Standards and Specifications
If the standards, specifications, guidelines, policies, criteria, or other information in
the Design Manual are amended subsequent to the submittal of an application for
approval pursuant to this ordinance but prior to approval, the new information shall
control and shall be utilized in reviewing the application and in implementing this
ordinance with regard to the application.
(D) [Amendments to Design Manual]
[The Design Manual used by the City of Trinity was established by NCDENR, may
be updated and expanded from time to time, based on advancements in technology,
engineering and improved knowledge of local conditions. Prior to amending the
Design Manual, proposed changes are expected to be publicized by the State and
made available for review.
Sec-108 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS, REGULATIONS AND PRIVATE AGREEMENTS
(A) Conflict of Laws
This ordinance is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule,
regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this ordinance are in
addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other
provision of law. Where any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other
provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher
protective standards for human or environmental health, safety, and welfare shall
control.
(B) Private Agreements
This ordinance is not intended to revoke or repeal any easement, covenant, or other
private agreement. However, where the regulations of this ordinance are more
restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such an easement,
covenant, or other private agreement, the requirements of this ordinance shall
govern. Nothing in this ordinance shall modify or repeal any private covenant or
deed restriction, but such covenant or restriction shall not legitimize any failure to
comply with this ordinance. In no case shall (City of Trinity) be obligated to enforce
the provisions of any easements, covenants, or agreements between private parties.
13
Sec-109 SEVERABILITY
If the provisions of any ARTICLE, subARTICLE, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this
ordinance shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall
not affect or invalidate the remainder of any ARTICLE, subARTICLE, paragraph,
subdivision or clause of this ordinance.
Sec-110 EFFECTIVE DATE AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
(A) Effective Date
This Ordinance shall take effect on January 21, 2009.
(B) Final Approvals, Complete Applications
All development and redevelopment projects for which complete and full applications
were submitted and approved by the (City of Trinity) prior to the effective date of
this ordinance and which remain valid, unexpired, unrevoked and not otherwise
terminated at the time of development or redevelopment shall be exempt from complying
with all provisions of this ordinance dealing with the control and/or management of
post-construction runoff, but shall be required to comply with all other applicable
provisions[, including but not limited to illicit discharge provisions].
A phased development plan shall be deemed approved prior to the effective date of
this ordinance if it has been approved by all necessary government units, it remains
valid, unexpired, unrevoked and not otherwise terminated, and it shows:
1. For the initial or first phase of development, the type and intensity of use for a
specific parcel or parcels, including at a minimum, the boundaries of the project and
a subdivision plan that has been approved.
2. For any subsequent phase of development, sufficient detail so that
implementation of the requirements of this ordinance to that phase of development
would require a material change in that phase of the plan.
(C) Violations Continue
Any violation of provisions existing on the effective date of this ordinance shall
continue to be a violation under this ordinance and be subject to penalties and
enforcement under this ordinance unless the use, development, construction, or other
activity complies with the provisions of this ordinance.
14
ARTICLE 2: ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
Sec-201 REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING ENTITIES
(A) Stormwater Administrator
(1) Designation
A Stormwater Administrator shall be designated by the (Trinity City Council) to
administer and enforce this ordinance.
(2) Powers and Duties
In addition to the powers and duties that may be conferred by other provisions
of the (City of Trinity Ordinance) and other laws, the Stormwater Administrator
shall have the following powers and duties under this ordinance:
a. To review and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove
applications for approval of plans pursuant to this ordinance.
b. To make determinations and render interpretations of this ordinance.
Any person may request an interpretation by submitting a written
request to the Stormwater Administrator who shall respond within 30
calendar days. The Stormwater Administrator shall keep on file a record
of all written interpretations of this ordinance.
c. To establish application requirements and schedules for submittal and
review of applications and appeals, to review and make
recommendations to the (Trinity City Council) on applications for
development or redevelopment approvals.
d. To enforce the provisions of this ordinance in accordance with its
enforcement provisions.
e. To maintain records, maps, forms and other official materials as relate
to the adoption, amendment, enforcement, and administration of this
ordinance.
f. To provide expertise and technical assistance to the (Trinity City
Council and the Stormwater Advisory Board), upon request.
g. To designate appropriate other person(s) who shall carry out the
powers and duties of the Stormwater Administrator.
h. To take any other action necessary to administer the provisions of this
ordinance.
15
Sec-202 REVIEW PROCEDURES
(A) Permit Required; Must Apply for Permit
A stormwater permit is required for all development and redevelopment unless exempt
pursuant to this ordinance. A permit may only be issued subsequent to a properly
submitted and reviewed permit application, pursuant to this ARTICLE.
(B) Effect of Permit
A stormwater permit shall govern the design, installation, and construction of
stormwater management and control practices on the site, including structural BMPs
and elements of site design for stormwater management other than structural BMPs.
The permit is intended to provide a mechanism for the review, approval, and
inspection of the approach to be used for the management and control of
stormwater for the development or redevelopment site consistent with the requirements
of this ordinance, whether the approach consists of structural BMPs or other
techniques such as low-impact or low-density design. The permit does not continue
in existence indefinitely after the completion of the project; rather, compliance after
project construction is assured by the maintenance provisions of this ordinance.
(C) Authority to File Applications
All applications required pursuant to this Code shall be submitted to the Stormwater
Administrator or his or her designee by the land owner or the land owner’s duly
authorized agent.
(D) Establishment of Application Requirements, Schedule, and Fees
(1) Application Contents and Form
The Stormwater Administrator [Stormwater Advisory Board] shall establish
requirements for the content and form of all applications and shall amend and
update those requirements from time to time. At a minimum, the stormwater
permit application shall describe in detail how post-development stormwater
runoff will be controlled and managed, the design of all stormwater facilities
and practices, and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this
ordinance. The Stormwater application and plan checklist will be available at the
office of the Stormwater Administrator or Planning officer for the City of
Trinity.
(2) Submission Schedule
The Stormwater Administrator [Stormwater Advisory Board] shall establish a
submission schedule for applications. The schedule shall establish deadlines by
which complete applications must be submitted for the purpose of ensuring
that there is adequate time to review applications, and that the various stages in
the review process are accommodated.
16
(3) Permit Review Fees
The (Trinity City Council) shall establish permit review fees as well as policies
regarding refund of any fees upon withdrawal of an application, and may amend
and update the fees and policies from time to time.
(4) Administrative Manual
For applications required under this Code, the Stormwater Administrator shall
compile the application requirements, submission schedule, fee schedule, a copy
of this ordinance, and information on how and where to obtain the Design
Manual in an Administrative Manual, which shall be made available to the
public.
(E) Submittal of Complete Application
Applications shall be submitted to the Stormwater Administrator pursuant to the
application submittal schedule in the form established by the Stormwater
Administrator, along with the appropriate fee established pursuant to this
ARTICLE.
An application shall be considered as timely submitted only when it contains all
elements of a complete application pursuant to this ordinance, along with the
appropriate fee. If the Stormwater Administrator finds that an application is
incomplete, the applicant shall be notified of the deficient elements and shall be
provided with an opportunity to submit a complete application. However, the
submittal of an incomplete application shall not suffice to meet a deadline contained
in the submission schedule established above.
(F) Review
[Within _30_____ working days after a complete application is submitted,] the
Stormwater Administrator shall review the application and determine whether the
application complies with the standards of this ordinance.
(1) Approval
If the Stormwater Administrator finds that the application complies with the
standards of this ordinance, the Stormwater Administrator shall approve the
application. The Stormwater Administrator may impose conditions of approval
as needed to ensure compliance with this ordinance. The conditions shall be
included as part of the approval.
(2) Fails to Comply
If the Stormwater Administrator finds that the application fails to comply with
the standards of this ordinance, the Stormwater Administrator shall notify the
applicant and shall indicate how the application fails to comply. The applicant
shall have an opportunity to submit a revised application.
17
(3) Revision and Subsequent Review
A complete revised application shall be reviewed by the Stormwater
Administrator [within _30__ working days] after its re-submittal and shall be
approved, approved with conditions or disapproved.
If a revised application is not re-submitted within thirty (30) calendar days from
the date the applicant was notified, the application shall be considered
withdrawn, and a new submittal for the same or substantially the same project
shall be required along with the appropriate fee for a new submittal.
One re-submittal of a revised application may be submitted without payment of
an additional permit review fee. Any re-submittal after the first re-submittal
shall be accompanied by a permit review fee additional fee, as established
pursuant to this ordinance.
Sec-203 APPLICATIONS FOR APPROVAL
(A) Concept Plan and Consultation Meeting
Before a stormwater management permit application is deemed complete, the
Stormwater Administrator or developer may request a consultation on a concept
plan for the post-construction stormwater management system to be utilized in the
proposed development project. This consultation meeting should take place at the time
of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process.
The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-construction stormwater
management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and
assess constraints, opportunities and potential approaches to stormwater
management designs before formal site design engineering is commenced. Local
watershed plans, the (City of Trinity’s Land Use Development Plan), and other
relevant resource protection plans should be consulted in the discussion of the
concept plan.
To accomplish this goal, the following information should be included in the
concept plan, which should be submitted in advance of the meeting:
(1) Existing Conditions / Proposed Site Plans
Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a
minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent
streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (if available);
boundaries of existing predominant vegetation; proposed limits of clearing and
grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas
and other impervious surfaces.
(2) Natural Resources Inventory
A written or graphic inventory of natural resources at the site and surrounding
area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description
should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, geologic features,
topography, wetlands, and native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the
18
location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation
areas such as lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g.,
drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be
paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities
or constraints for development and stormwater management.
(3) Stormwater Management System Concept Plan
A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater
management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed
structural stormwater controls; low-impact design elements; location of existing
and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm
drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to
upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of
any proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings.
(B) Stormwater Management Permit Application
The stormwater management permit application shall detail how post-development
stormwater runoff will be controlled and managed and how the proposed project
will meet the requirements of this ordinance, including ARTICLE 3, Standards. All
such plans shall be prepared by a qualified registered North Carolina professional
engineer, surveyor, soil scientist or landscape architect, and the engineer, surveyor,
soil scientist or landscape architect shall perform services only in their area of
competence, and shall verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities
and practices meets the submittal requirements for complete applications, that the
designs and plans are sufficient to comply with applicable standards and policies
found in the Design Manual, and that the designs and plans ensure compliance with
this ordinance.
The submittal shall include all of the information required in the submittal checklist
established by the Stormwater Administrator. Incomplete submittals shall be treated
pursuant to ARTICLE 202(D).
(C) As-Built Plans and Final Approval
Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be
granted, the applicant shall certify that the completed project is in accordance with
the approved stormwater management plans and designs, and shall submit actual “as
built” plans for all stormwater management facilities or practices after final
construction is completed.
The plans shall show the final design specifications for all stormwater management
facilities and practices and the field location, size, depth, and planted vegetation of
all measures, controls, and devices, as installed. The designer of the stormwater
management measures and plans shall certify, under seal, that the as-built
stormwater measures, controls, and devices are in compliance with the approved
stormwater management plans and designs and with the requirements of this
ordinance. A final inspection and approval by the Stormwater Administrator shall
occur before the release of any performance securities.
19
(D) Other Permits
No certificate of compliance or occupancy shall be issued by the (Randolph County)
without final as-built plans and a final inspection and approval by the Stormwater
Administrator, except where multiple units are served by the stormwater practice or
facilities, in which case the (Randolph County) may elect to withhold a percentage
of permits or certificates of occupancy until as-built plans are submitted and final
inspection and approval has occurred.
Sec-204 APPROVALS
(A) Effect of Approval
Approval authorizes the applicant to go forward with only the specific plans and
activities authorized in the permit. The approval shall not be construed to exempt
the applicant from obtaining other applicable approvals from local, state, and federal
authorities.
(B) Time Limit/Expiration
An approved plan shall become null and void if the applicant fails to make substantial
progress on the site within one year after the date of approval. The Stormwater
Administrator may grant a single, one-year extension of this time limit, for good
cause shown, upon receiving a written request from the applicant before the
expiration of the approved plan.
In granting an extension, the Stormwater Administrator may require compliance
with standards adopted since the original application was submitted unless there has
been substantial reliance on the original permit and the change in standards would
infringe the applicant’s vested rights.
Sec-205 APPEALS
(A) Right of Appeal
Any aggrieved person affected by any decision, order, requirement, or determination
relating to the interpretation or application of this ordinance made by the
Stormwater Administrator, may file an appeal to the (Board of Adjustment) within
30 days.
(B) [Filing of Appeal and Procedures]
[Appeals shall be taken within the specified time period by filing a notice of appeal
and specifying the grounds for appeal on forms provided by (City of Trinity). The
Stormwater Administrator shall transmit to the (the Board of Adjustments) all
documents constituting the record on which the decision appealed from was taken.
The hearing conducted by the (Board of Adjustments) shall be conducted in the
nature of a quasi-judicial proceeding with all findings of fact supported by
competent, material evidence. ]
20
(C) [Review by Superior Court]
[Every decision of the (Board of Adjustments shall be subject to Superior Court
review by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. Petition for review by the Superior
Court shall be filed with the Clerk of Superior Court within thirty (30) days after the
latter of the following:
(1) The decision of the (Board of Adjustments) is filed; or
(2) A written copy of the decision is delivered to every aggrieved party who has filed
a written request for such copy with the (Chair or Secretary of the Board of
Adjustments) at the time of its hearing of the case.]
21
ARTICLE 3: STANDARDS
Sec-301 GENERAL STANDARDS
All development and redevelopment to which this ordinance applies shall comply with the
standards of this ARTICLE.
Sec-302 IMPERVIOUS SURFACE REQUIREMENTS
.
(A) Setback requirement
All impervious surfaces, except for roads, paths, and water dependent structures,
shall be located at least 30 feet landward of all perennial and intermittent surface
waters.
A perennial or intermittent surface water shall be deemed present if the feature is
shown on either the most recent version of the soil survey map prepared by the
Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA) or the most recent complete version of the 1:24,000 scale (7.5
minute) quadrangle topographic maps prepared by the United States Geologic
Survey (USGS). An exception to this requirement may be allowed when surface
waters are not present in accordance with the provisions of 15A NCAC 2B .0233 (3)
(a) or similar site-specific determination made using Division-approved methodology.
(B) No new impervious or partially pervious surface in floodplain
For development activities outside the counties subject to the Coastal Area
Management Act of 1974, no new impervious or partially pervious surfaces, except
for roads, paths, and water dependent structures, shall be allowed within the
floodplain
Sec-303 STRUCTURAL STORMWATER CONTROL REQUIREMENTS
Owners of property subject to this ordinance and required to install structural stormwater
control measures shall implement those measures in compliance with each of the following
standards:
(A) The measures shall control and treat runoff from the first inch of rain.
Runoff volume drawdown time for wet detention ponds shall be a
minimum of 48 hours, but not more than 120 hours.
(B) All structural stormwater treatment systems used to meet these
requirements shall be designed to have a minimum of 85% average annual
removal for Total Suspended Solids (TSS);
(C) General engineering design criteria for all projects shall be in accordance
with 15A NCAC 2H .1008(c), as explained in the Design Manual;
22
(D) The measure shall discharge the storage volume at a rate equal or less than
the pre-development discharge rate for the 1-year, 24-hour storm.
(E) The approval of the stormwater permit shall require enforceable restrictions
on property usage that runs with the land, including recorded deed
restrictions and protective covenants, to ensure that future development and
redevelopment maintains the site consistent with the approved project plans.
Sec-305 STANDARDS FOR STORMWATER CONTROL MEASURES
(A) Evaluation According to Contents of Design Manual
All stormwater control measures and stormwater treatment practices (also referred
to as Best Management Practices, or BMPs) required under this ordinance shall be
evaluated by the Stormwater Administrator according to the policies, criteria, and
information, including technical specifications and standards and the specific design
criteria for each stormwater practice, in the Design Manual. The Stormwater
Administrator shall review whether proposed BMPs will be adequate to meet the
requirements of this ordinance. All BMP’s shall be certified to be in compliance with
the Design Manual by the designing professional engineer.
(B) Determination of Adequacy; Presumptions and Alternatives
Stormwater treatment practices that are designed, constructed, and maintained in
accordance with the criteria and specifications in the Design Manual will be presumed
to meet the minimum water quality and quantity performance standards of this
ordinance. Whenever an applicant proposes to utilize a practice or practices not
designed and constructed in accordance with the criteria and specifications in the
Design Manual, the applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that the
practice(s) will satisfy the minimum water quality and quantity performance
standards of this ordinance. The Stormwater Administrator may require the
applicant to provide the documentation, calculations, and examples necessary for
the Stormwater Administrator to determine whether such an affirmative showing is
made.
(C) Separation from Seasonal High Water Table
For BMPs that require a separation from the seasonal high-water table, the
separation shall be provided by at least 12 inches of naturally occurring soil above
the seasonal high-water table.4
Sec-306 STREAM BUFFER REQUIRED
A stream buffer with a minimum width as specified in the table below measured landward
from the normal pool elevation of impoundments and from the top of bank of each side of
streams or rivers shall be maintained along all perennial and intermittent streams. This
requirement is not applicable to enclosed subsurface drainage segments of intermittent
streams, or to perennial streams outside of water supply watersheds in which the North
Carolina Division of Water Quality has issued a 401 Water Quality Certification. No new
23
development is allowed in the buffer except for water dependent structures, other structures
such as flag poles, signs and security lights which result in only diminutive increases in
impervious area and public projects such as road crossings and greenways where no practical
alternative exists. These activities shall minimize built-upon surface area, direct runoff away
from the surface waters and maximize the utilization of stormwater BMPs. The stream
buffer for the NPDES water supply districts other than Randleman Lake shall have the first
(20) feet from top of bank, landward, designated as a Water Quality Conservation Easement
(WQCE) and the remainder of the stream buffer shall be a vegetated area.
Randleman Lake –These rules apply to all landowners within the Randleman Lake
watershed, regardless of the threshold of land disturbance. The Low Density Option
the stream buffer shall be comprised of Zone 1, which shall be an undisturbed area of
vegetation extending a distance of (30) feet landward from the top of bank along both sides
of the stream and Zone 2, which begins at the outer edge of Zone 1 and extends (20) feet
and shall be vegetated. Under the High Density Option, the first (50) feet of stream buffers
shall conform requirements of Zone 1 and 2, the remainder shall be vegetated. All runoff
shall be diffuse flow into the riparian buffer by dispersing concentrated flow and vegetating.
Diffuse flow of runoff shall be maintained in the riparian buffer by dispersing concentrated
flow and reestablishing vegetation. Concentrated flow from new ditches or manmade
conveyances shall be converted to diffuse flow before entering Zone 2 of the buffer.
Periodic corrective action to restore diffuse flow shall be taken if necessary by the property
owner to impede the formation of erosion gullies.
NOTE: All stream buffers shall be labeled on recorded plats as “Drainage and Stream
Buffer Easement”.
WATERSHED LOW DENSITY DEV. HIGH DENSITY DEV.
Perennial Streams,
Lakes and Ponds
Intermittent Streams Perennial Streams,
Lakes and Ponds
Intermittent Streams
WS – III
Uwharrie River
30 ft. 30 ft. 100 ft. 30 ft.
WS – IV
Randleman Lake
50 ft. 50 ft. 100 ft. 50 ft.
Sec-307 VARIANCES
(A) Any person may petition the (City of Trinity) for a variance granting permission to use
the person's land in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance. To qualify for a
variance, the petitioner must show all of the following:
(1) Unnecessary hardships would result from strict application of this ordinance.
(2) The hardships result from conditions that are peculiar to the property, such as
the location, size, or topography of the property.
(3) The hardships did not result from actions taken by the petitioner.
(4) The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and intent of this
ordinance; will secure public safety and welfare; and will preserve substantial justice.
(B) The (City of Trinity) may impose reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards
upon any variance it grants.
(C) Statutory exceptions
24
Notwithstanding subdivision (A) of this ARTICLE, exceptions from the 30-foot landward
location of built upon area requirement as well as the deed restrictions and protective
covenants requirements shall be granted in any of the following instances:
(1) When there is a lack of practical alternatives for a road crossing, railroad
crossing, bridge, airport facility, or utility crossing as long as it is located, designed,
constructed, and maintained to minimize disturbance, provide maximum nutrient
removal, protect against erosion and sedimentation, have the least adverse effects on
aquatic life and habitat, and protect water quality to the maximum extent practicable
through the use of BMPs.
(2) When there is a lack of practical alternatives for a stormwater management
facility; a stormwater management pond; or a utility, including, but not limited to,
water, sewer, or gas construction and maintenance corridor, as long as it is located
15 feet landward of all perennial and intermittent surface waters and as long as it is
located, designed, constructed, and maintained to minimize disturbance, provide
maximum nutrient removal, protect against erosion and sedimentation, have the
least adverse effects on aquatic life and habitat, and protect water quality to the
maximum extent practicable through the use of BMPs.
(3) A lack of practical alternatives may be shown by demonstrating that, considering
the potential for a reduction in size, configuration, or density of the proposed
activity and all alternative designs, the basic project purpose cannot be practically
accomplished in a manner which would avoid or result in less adverse impact to
surface waters.
Sec-308 DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
(A) Establishment of Watershed Overlay Districts.
To provide an additional layer of protection for drinking water supply watersheds,
the following watershed overlay district is established
Uwharrie River (Lake Reece) WS – III – BW (Balance of Watershed)
(1) Low Density Development. In order to maintain a low to medium land use
intensity pattern, single family detached uses shall development at a maximum of
two (2) dwelling units per acre. However, in the absence of public sewer, all waste
treatment must be permitted by the County Health Department, in which case the
minimum lot size is 40,000 sq. ft. All other residential and non-residential
development shall be allowed a maximum of twenty-four percent (24%) built-upon
area.
(2) Cluster Development-High Density.
(3) A lack of practical alternatives may be shown by demonstrating that, considering
the potential for a reduction in size, configuration, or density of the proposed
activity and all alternative designs, the basic project purpose cannot be practically
accomplished in a manner which would avoid or result in less adverse impact to
surface waters.
25
(1) [Pet waste]
(a) Dogs At Large Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to allow the animal to be off the
premises of his owner and not on a leash in (City of Trinity).
(b) Restrictions on Pet Waste
(I) It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog to take it
off the owner’s own property limits without the means to properly remove
and dispose of the dog’s feces from any public or private property.
(ii) It is the responsibility of a dog’s owner or custodian to clean up the
dog’s feces from any public or private property outside of the dog’s owner’s
own property limits. Such property includes, but is not limited to, parks,
rights-of-way, paths, and public access areas.
(iii) “Means to properly remove and dispose of feces” shall consist of
having on or near one’s person a device such as a plastic bag, or other
suitable plastic or paper container, that can be used to clean up and contain
dog waste until it can be disposed of in an appropriate container. Such a
device must be produced and shown, upon request, to anyone authorized to
enforce these ordinances.
(iv) This provision shall not apply to handicapped persons assisted by
trained guide or assistance dogs.
(v) “Public nuisance” is defined to include “a dog which deposits feces
on public property or on private property without the consent of the owner
or person in lawful possession of the private property, and the person
owning, possessing, harboring or having the care, charge, control or
custody of the dog fails to remove the feces so deposited. Provided,
however, this definition shall not apply to any dog assisting a handicapped
person.
26
ARTICLE 4: MAINTENANCE
Sec-401 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR MAINTENANCE
(A) Function of BMPs As Intended
The owner of each structural BMP installed pursuant to this ordinance shall maintain
and operate it so as to preserve and continue its function in controlling stormwater
quality and quantity at the degree or amount of function for which the structural
BMP was designed.
(B) Annual Maintenance Inspection and Report
The person responsible for maintenance of any structural BMP installed pursuant to
this ordinance shall have an Annual Inspection performed by the (City of Trinity)
Stormwater Administrator or designee. The inspection report shall contain all of the
following:
(1) The name and address of the land owner;
(2) The recorded book and page number of the lot of each structural BMP;
(3) A statement that an inspection was made of all structural BMPs;
(4) The date the inspection was made;
(5) A statement that all inspected structural BMPs are performing properly and
are in compliance or not in compliance (stating reasons and corrective
action) with the terms and conditions of the approved maintenance
agreement required by this ordinance.
All inspection reports shall be on forms supplied by the Stormwater Administrator.
An original inspection report shall be provided to the Stormwater Administrator
along with the as-built certification
Sec-402 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT
(A) In General
Prior to the conveyance or transfer of any lot or building site to be served by a
structural BMP pursuant to this ordinance, and prior to issuance of any permit for
development or redevelopment requiring a structural BMP pursuant to this ordinance, the
applicant or owner of the site must execute an operation and maintenance agreement
that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site, portions of the site, and
lots or parcels served by the structural BMP. Until the transference of all property,
sites, or lots served by the structural BMP, the original owner or applicant shall have
primary responsibility for carrying out the provisions of the maintenance agreement.
27
The operation and maintenance agreement shall require the owner or owners to
maintain, repair and, if necessary, reconstruct the structural BMP, and shall state the
terms, conditions, and schedule of maintenance for the structural BMP. In addition, it
shall grant to (City of Trinity) a right of entry in the event that the Stormwater
Administrator has reason to believe it has become necessary to inspect, monitor,
maintain, repair, or reconstruct the structural BMP; however, in no case shall the right
of entry, of itself, confer an obligation on (City of Trinity) to assume responsibility
for the structural BMP.
The operation and maintenance agreement must be approved by the Stormwater
Administrator prior to plan approval, and it shall be referenced on the final plat and
shall be recorded with the county Register of Deeds upon final plat approval. A
copy of the recorded maintenance agreement shall be given to the Stormwater
Administrator within fourteen (14) days following its recordation.
(B) Special Requirement for Homeowners’ and Other Associations
For all structural BMPs required pursuant to this ordinance and that are to be or are
owned and maintained by a homeowners’ association, property owners’ association,
or similar entity, the required operation and maintenance agreement shall include all
of the following provisions:
(1) Acknowledgment that the association shall continuously operate and
maintain the stormwater control and management facilities.
(2) Establishment of an escrow account, which can be spent solely for
sediment removal, structural, biological or vegetative replacement, major
repair, or reconstruction of the structural BMPs. If structural BMPs are not
performing adequately or as intended or are not properly maintained, the
(City of Trinity), in its sole discretion, may remedy the situation, and in such
instances the (City of Trinity) shall be fully reimbursed from the escrow
account. Escrowed funds may be spent by the association for sediment
removal, structural, biological or vegetative replacement, major repair, and
reconstruction of the structural BMPs, provided that the (City of Trinity)
shall first consent to the expenditure.
(3) Both developer contribution and annual sinking funds shall fund the
escrow account. Prior to plat recordation or issuance of construction
permits, whichever shall first occur, the developer shall pay into the escrow
account an amount equal to fifteen (15) per cent of the initial construction
cost of the structural BMPs. Two-thirds (2/3) of the total amount of sinking
fund budget shall be deposited into the escrow account within the first five
(5) years and the full amount shall be deposited within ten (10) years
following initial construction of the structural BMPs. Funds shall be
deposited each year into the escrow account. A portion of the annual
assessments of the association shall include an allocation into the escrow
account. Any funds drawn down from the escrow account shall be replaced
in accordance with the schedule of anticipated work used to create the
sinking fund budget.
28
(4) The percent of developer contribution and lengths of time to fund the
escrow account may be varied by the (City of Trinity) depending on the
design and materials of the stormwater control and management facility.
(5) Granting to the (City of Trinity) a right of entry to inspect, monitor,
maintain, repair, and reconstruct structural BMPs.
(6) Allowing the (City of Trinity) to recover from the association and its
member’s any and all costs the (City of Trinity) expends to maintain or
repair the structural BMPs or to correct any operational deficiencies. Failure
to pay the (City of Trinity) all of its expended costs, after forty-five days
written notice, shall constitute a breach of the agreement. In case of a
deficiency, the (City of Trinity) shall thereafter be entitled to bring an action
against the association and its members to pay, or foreclose upon the lien
hereby authorized by the agreement against the property, or both.. Interest,
collection costs, and attorney fees shall be added to the recovery.
(7) A statement that this agreement shall not obligate the (City of Trinity to
maintain or repair any structural BMPs, and the (City of Trinity) shall not be
liable to any person for the condition or operation of structural BMPs.
(8) A statement that this agreement shall not in any way diminish, limit, or
restrict the right of the (City of Trinity) to enforce any of its ordinances as
authorized by law.
(9) A provision indemnifying and holding harmless the (City of Trinity) for any
costs and injuries arising from or related to the structural BMP, unless the
(City of Trinity) has agreed in writing to assume the maintenance
responsibility for the BMP and has accepted dedication of any and all rights
necessary to carry out that maintenance.
Sec-403 INSPECTION PROGRAM
Inspections and inspection programs by (City of Trinity) shall be conducted or
established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to routine inspections;
random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible
violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental
or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing
maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater,
and material or water in BMPs; and evaluating the condition of BMPs.5
If the owner or occupant of any property refuses to permit such inspection, the
Stormwater Administrator shall proceed to obtain an administrative search warrant
pursuant to G.S. 15-27.2 or its successor. No person shall obstruct, hamper or
interfere with the Stormwater Administrator while carrying out his or her official
duties.
29
Sec-404 PERFORMANCE SECURITY FOR INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE
(A) May Be Required
The (City of Trinity) may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a
performance security or bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit or other
acceptable legal arrangement prior to issuance of a permit in order to ensure
that the structural BMPs are
(1) Installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater
management plan, and/or
(2) Maintained by the owner as required by the operation and maintenance
agreement.
(B) Amount
(1) Installation
The amount of an installation performance security shall be the total estimated
construction cost of the BMPs approved under the permit, plus 25%.
(2) Maintenance
The amount of a maintenance performance security shall be the present value
of an annuity of perpetual duration based on a reasonable estimate of the annual
cost of inspection, operation and maintenance of the BMPs approved under the
permit, at a discount rate that reflects the jurisdiction’s cost of borrowing minus
a reasonable estimate of long-term inflation.
(C) Uses of Performance Security
(1) Forfeiture Provisions
The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure, after
proper notice, to complete work within the time specified, or to initiate or
maintain any actions which may be required of the applicant or owner in
accordance with this ordinance, approvals issued pursuant to this ordinance, or
an operation and maintenance agreement established pursuant to this ordinance.
(2) Default
Upon default of the owner to construct, maintain, repair and, if necessary,
reconstruct any structural BMP in accordance with the applicable permit or
operation and maintenance agreement, the Stormwater Administrator shall
obtain and use all or any portion of the security to make necessary
improvements based on an engineering estimate. Such expenditure of funds
shall only be made after requesting the owner to comply with the permit or
maintenance agreement. In the event of a default triggering the use of
installation performance security, the (City of Trinity) shall not return any of the
unused deposited cash funds or other security, which shall be retained for
maintenance.
30
(3) Costs in Excess of Performance Security
If (City of Trinity) takes action upon such failure by the applicant or owner, the
(City of Trinity) may collect from the applicant or owner the difference between
the amount of the reasonable cost of such action and the amount of the security
held, in addition to any other penalties or damages due.
(4) Refund
Within sixty days of the final approval, the installation performance security
shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated, except any amount attributable
to the cost (plus 25%) of landscaping installation and ongoing maintenance
associated with the BMPs covered by the security. Any such landscaping shall
be inspected one (1) year after installation with replacement for compliance with
the approved plans and specifications and, if in compliance, the portion of the
financial security attributable to landscaping shall be released.
Sec-405 NOTICE TO OWNERS
(A) Deed Recordation and Indications On Plat
The applicable operations and maintenance agreement, conservation easement,
pertaining to every structural BMP shall be referenced on the final plat and shall be
recorded with the county Register of Deeds upon final plat approval. If no
subdivision plat is recorded for the site, then the operations and maintenance
agreement, conservation easement, shall be recorded with the county Register of
Deeds so as to appear in the chain of title of all subsequent purchasers under
generally accepted searching principles.
(B) Signage
Where appropriate in the determination of the Stormwater Administrator to assure
compliance with this ordinance, structural BMPs shall be posted with a conspicuous
sign stating who is responsible for required maintenance and annual inspection. The
sign shall be maintained so as to remain visible and legible.
Sec-406 RECORDS OF INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES
The owner of each structural BMP shall keep records of inspections, maintenance, and repairs
for at least five years from the date of creation of the record and shall submit the same upon
reasonable request to the Stormwater Administrator.6
Sec-407 NUISANCE
The owner of each stormwater BMP, whether structural or non-structural BMP, shall maintain it
so as not to create or result in a nuisance condition.
31
Sec-408 [MAINTENANCE EASEMENT
Every structural BMP installed pursuant to this ordinance shall be made accessible for
adequate maintenance and repair by a 20ft (Foot) maintenance easement. The easement shall
be recorded and its terms shall specify who may make use of the easement and for what
purposes.
32
ARTICLE 5: ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATIONS
Sec-501 GENERAL
(A) Authority to Enforce
The provisions of this ordinance shall be enforced by the Stormwater
Administrator, his or her designee, or any authorized agent of (City of Trinity).
Whenever this ARTICLE refers to the Stormwater Administrator, it includes his or
her designee as well as any authorized agent of (City of Trinity).
(B) Violation Unlawful
Any failure to comply with an applicable requirement, prohibition, standard, or
limitation imposed by this ordinance, or the terms or conditions of any permit or
other development or redevelopment approval or authorization granted pursuant to this
ordinance, is unlawful and shall constitute a violation of this ordinance.
(C) Each Day a Separate Offense
Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation
or offense.
(D) Responsible Persons/Entities
Any person who erects, constructs, reconstructs, alters (whether actively or
passively), or fails to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, repair or maintain any
structure, BMP, practice, or condition in violation of this ordinance shall be subject
to the remedies, penalties, and/or enforcement actions in accordance with this
ARTICLE. Persons subject to the remedies and penalties set forth herein may
include any architect, engineer, builder, contractor, developer, agency, or any other
person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, causes, or maintains a condition
that results in or constitutes a violation of this ordinance, or fails to take appropriate
action, so that a violation of this ordinance results or persists; or an owner, any tenant
or occupant, or any other person, who has control over, or responsibility for, the
use or development of the property on which the violation occurs.
For the purposes of this article, responsible person(s) shall include but not be
limited to:
(1) Person Maintaining Condition Resulting In or Constituting Violation
An architect, engineer, builder, contractor, developer, agency, or any other
person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, causes, or maintains a
condition that constitutes a violation of this ordinance, or fails to take
appropriate action, so that a violation of this ordinance results or persists.
(2) Responsibility For Land or Use of Land
The owner of the land on which the violation occurs, any tenant or occupant of
the property, any person who is responsible for stormwater controls or
practices pursuant to a private agreement or public document, or any person,
33
who has control over, or responsibility for, the use, development or redevelopment of
the property.
Sec-502 REMEDIES AND PENALTIES
The remedies and penalties provided for violations of this ordinance, whether civil or
criminal, shall be cumulative and in addition to any other remedy provided by law, and may
be exercised in any order.
(A) Remedies
(1) Withholding of Certificate of Occupancy
The Stormwater Administrator or other authorized agent may refuse to issue a
certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or
being constructed on the site and served by the stormwater practices in question
until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures
set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations
described therein.
(2) Disapproval of Subsequent Permits and Development Approvals
As long as a violation of this ordinance continues and remains uncorrected, the
Stormwater Administrator or other authorized agent may withhold, and the
(City of Trinity, Planning and Zoning Board) may disapprove, any request for
permit or development approval or authorization provided for by this ordinance or
the (zoning, subdivision, and/or building regulations, as appropriate) for the
land on which the violation occurs.
(3) Injunction, Abatements, etc.
The Stormwater Administrator, with the written authorization of the (City
Manager), may institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction for a
mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement to correct a
violation of this ordinance. Any person violating this ordinance shall be subject
to the full range of equitable remedies provided in the General Statutes or at
common law.
(4) Correction as Public Health Nuisance, Costs as Lien, etc.
If the violation is deemed dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or public
safety and is within the geographic limits prescribed by North Carolina G.S. §
160A-193, the Stormwater Administrator, with the written authorization of the
(City Manager), may cause the violation to be corrected and the costs to be
assessed as a lien against the property.
(5) [Stop Work Order
The Stormwater Administrator may issue a stop work order to the person(s)
violating this ordinance. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the
person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or
has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein. The stop work
34
order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the person to take the necessary
remedial measures to cure such violation or violations.
Commentary: A stop work order is an important tool where, as in the case of stormwater violations, the
consequences of delay in halting illegal activity can result in significant harm to the environment and
public health, safety or welfare. However, the enabling authority for use of a stop work order by local
governments is unclear. As a practical matter, if a legal challenge is brought to a local government’s use of
a stop work order, it is unlikely to result in negative consequences for the local government, since the legal
remedy would likely consist of the court’s invalidation of the stop work order.
If a local government chooses to include this stop work provision, it should do so in consultation with legal
counsel, and an accelerated appeal process pursuant to ARTICLE 205, Appeals, should be provided for
situations where a stop work order is applied. One way to accelerate the appeal process is to shorten the
timeframe for review of appeals. A special or emergency Board of Adjustment meeting could be called, so
that a party seeking to challenge a stop work order would achieve a speedy resolution of the matter.
(B) Civil Penalties
Violation of this ordinance may subject the violator to a civil penalty to be
recovered in a civil action in the nature of a debt if the violator does not pay the
penalty within 30 days after notice of the violation is issued by the Stormwater
Administrator. Civil penalties may be assessed up to the full amount of penalty to
which (City of Trinity) is subject for violations of its USMP Stormwater permit, or if
no USMP Stormwater permit exists for the jurisdiction, civil penalties may be
assessed up to the full amount allowed by law.
(C) Criminal Penalties
Violation of this ordinance may be enforced as a misdemeanor subject to the
maximum fine permissible under North Carolina law.
Sec-503 PROCEDURES
(A) Initiation/Complaint
Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any
person may file a written complaint. Such complaint shall state fully the alleged
violation and the basis thereof, and shall be filed with the Stormwater
Administrator, who shall record the complaint. The complaint shall be investigated
promptly by the Stormwater Administrator.
(B) Inspection
The Stormwater Administrator shall have the authority, upon presentation of proper
credentials, to enter and inspect any land, building, structure, or premises to ensure
compliance with this ordinance.
(C) Notice of Violation and Order to Correct
When the Stormwater Administrator finds that any building, structure, or land is in
violation of this ordinance, the Stormwater Administrator shall notify, in writing, the
property owner or other person violating this ordinance. The notification shall
indicate the nature of the violation, contain the address or other description of the
site upon which the violation is occurring, order the necessary action to abate the
35
violation, and give a deadline for correcting the violation. If civil penalties are to be
assessed, the notice of violation shall also contain a statement of the civil penalties
to be assessed, the time of their accrual, and the time within which they must be
paid or be subject to collection as a debt.
The Stormwater Administrator may deliver the notice of violation and correction
order personally, by the (City of Trinity code enforcement personnel), by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, or by any means authorized for the service
of documents by Rule 4 of the North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure.
If a violation is not corrected within a reasonable period of time, as provided in the
notification, the Stormwater Administrator may take appropriate action under this
ordinance to correct and abate the violation and to ensure compliance with this
ordinance.
(D) Extension of Time
A person who receives a notice of violation and correction order, or the owner of the
land on which the violation occurs, may submit to the Stormwater Administrator a
written request for an extension of time for correction of the violation. On
determining that the request includes enough information to show that the violation
cannot be corrected within the specified time limit for reasons beyond the control
of the person requesting the extension, the Stormwater Administrator may extend
the time limit as is reasonably necessary to allow timely correction of the violation,
up to, but not exceeding __90____ days. The Stormwater Administrator may grant
__60____ -day extensions in addition to the foregoing extension if the violation
cannot be corrected within the permitted time due to circumstances beyond the
control of the person violating this ordinance. The Stormwater Administrator may
grant an extension only by written notice of extension. The notice of extension shall
state the date prior to which correction must be made, after which the violator will
be subject to the penalties described in the notice of violation and correction order.
(E) Enforcement After Time to Correct
After the time has expired to correct a violation, including any extension(s) if
authorized by the Stormwater Administrator, the Stormwater Administrator shall
determine if the violation is corrected. If the violation is not corrected, the
Stormwater Administrator may act to impose one or more of the remedies and
penalties authorized by this ordinance.
(F) Emergency Enforcement
If delay in correcting a violation would seriously threaten the effective enforcement
of this ordinance or pose an immediate danger to the public health, safety, or
welfare, then the Stormwater Administrator may order the immediate cessation of a
violation. Any person so ordered shall cease any violation immediately. The
Stormwater Administrator may seek immediate enforcement, without prior written
notice, through any remedy or penalty authorized by this article.
36
ARTICLE 6: DEFINITIONS
Sec-601 TERMS DEFINED
When used in this Ordinance, the following words and terms shall have the meaning set
forth in this ARTICLE, unless other provisions of this Ordinance specifically indicate
otherwise.
Best Management Practice (BMP)
A structural or nonstructural management-based practice used singularly or in combination
to reduce nonpoint source inputs to receiving waters in order to achieve water quality
protection goals.
Built-upon area (BUA)
That portion of a development project that is covered by impervious or partially impervious
surface including, but not limited to, buildings; pavement and gravel areas such as roads,
parking lots, and paths; and recreation facilities such as tennis courts. “Built-upon area” does
not include a wooden slatted deck, the water area of a swimming pool, or pervious or
partially pervious paving material to the extent that the paving material absorbs water or
allows water to infiltrate through the paving material.
Conservation Easement for Drainageway
Land designated for use as open or subsurface channel conveying the flow from a onehundred
year storm event. Conservation Easements shall be left in its natural condition or
graded to a ARTICLE approved by the Stormwater Administrator or designee which allow
economical and efficient maintenance and shall be stabilized with permanent vegetative
cover.
Department
The North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources.
Design Manual
The stormwater design manual (NCDENR) approved for use in Phase II jurisdictions by the
Department [developed by (City of Trinity) and certified by this jurisdiction [approved by the
Division] as at least as stringent as the stormwater design manual approved for use in Phase II
jurisdictions by the Department] for the proper implementation of the requirements of the
federal Phase II stormwater program. All references herein to the Design Manual are to the
latest published edition or revision.
Development
Any land-disturbing activity that increases the amount of built upon area or that otherwise
decreases the infiltration of precipitation into the soil.
Division
The Division of Water Quality in the Department.
Floodplain
The one percent Annual Chance Floodplain as delineated by the North Carolina Floodplain
Mapping Program in the Division of Emergency Management.
37
Larger common plan of development or sale
Any area where multiple, separate and distinct construction or land-disturbing activities will
occur under one plan. A plan is any announcement or piece of documentation (including but
not limited to a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, loan application,
drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design) or physical demarcation
(including but not limited to boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings) indicating that
construction activities may occur on a specific plot.
1-year, 24-hour storm
The surface runoff resulting from a 24-hour rainfall of intensity expected to be equaled or
exceeded, on average, once in 12 months and with duration of 24 hours.
Owner
The legal or beneficial owner of land, including but not limited to a mortgagee or vendee in
possession, receiver, executor, trustee, or long-term or commercial lessee, or any other
person or entity holding proprietary rights in the property or having legal power of
management and control of the property. “Owner” shall include long-term commercial
tenants; management entities, such as those charged with or engaged in the management of
properties for profit; and every person or entity having joint ownership of the property. A
secured lender not in possession of the property does not constitute an owner, unless the
secured lender is included within the meaning of “owner” under another description in this
definition, such as a management entity.
Redevelopment
Any development on previously-developed land, other than a rebuilding activity that results in
no net increase in built-upon area and provides equal or greater stormwater control than the
previous development.
Storm, One-Hundred (100)-Year
The surface runoff resulting from a rainfall of an intensity that has a one (1) percent chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year and of a duration which will produce the
maximum peak rate of runoff for the watershed of interest under average antecedent
wetness conditions
Stream Buffer
A natural or vegetated area through which stormwater runoff flows in a diffuse manner so
that the runoff does not become channelized and which provides for infiltration of the
runoff and filtering pollutants. The buffer width is measured landward from the normal pool
elevation of impoundments and from the top of bank of each side of the streams or rivers.
Structural BMP
A physical device designed to trap, settle out, or filter pollutants from stormwater runoff; to
alter or reduce stormwater runoff velocity, amount, timing, or other characteristics; to
approximate the pre-development hydrology on a developed site; or to achieve any
combination of these goals. Structural BMP includes physical practices such as constructed
wetlands, vegetative practices, filter strips, grassed swales, and other methods installed or
created on real property. “Structural BMP” is synonymous with “structural practice,”
“stormwater control facility,” “stormwater control practice,” “stormwater treatment
38
practice,” “stormwater management practice,” “stormwater control measures,” “structural
stormwater treatment systems,” and similar terms used in this ordinance.
Substantial progress
For the purposes of determining whether sufficient progress has been made on an approved
plan, one or more of the following construction activities toward the completion of a site or
subdivision plan shall occur: obtaining a grading permit and conducting grading activity on a
continuous basis and not discontinued for more than thirty (30) days; or installation and
approval of on-site infrastructure; or obtaining a building permit for the construction and
approval of a building foundation. “Substantial progress” for purposes of determining
whether an approved plan is null and void is not necessarily the same as “substantial
expenditures” used for determining vested rights pursuant to applicable law.
39
ARTICLE 7: ILLICIT DISCHARGES
Sec-701 ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS7
(A) Illicit Discharges
No person shall cause or allow the discharge, emission, disposal, pouring, or pumping
directly or indirectly to any stormwater conveyance, the waters of the State, or upon the land
in manner and amount that the substance is likely to reach a stormwater conveyance or the
waters of the State, any liquid, solid, gas, or other substance, other than stormwater;
provided that non-stormwater discharges associated with the following activities are allowed
and provided that they do not significantly impact water quality:
(1) Water line flushing;
(2) Landscape irrigation;
(3) Diverted stream flows;
(4) Rising ground waters;
(5) Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20));
(6) Uncontaminated pumped ground water;
(7) Discharges from potable water sources;
(8) Foundation drains;
(9) Air conditioning condensation;
(10) Irrigation water;
(11) Springs;
(12) Water from crawl space pumps;
(13) Footing drains;
(14) Lawn watering;
(15) Individual residential car washing;
(16) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(17) De-chlorinated swimming pool discharges;
(18) Street wash water; and
40
(19) Other non-stormwater discharges for which a valid NPDES discharge permit has
been approved and issued by the State of North Carolina, and provided that any such
discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system shall be authorized by (City of
Trinity).
Prohibited substances include but are not limited to: oil, anti-freeze, chemicals, animal waste,
paints, garbage, and litter.
(B) Illicit Connections
(1) Connections to a stormwater conveyance or stormwater conveyance system that
allow the discharge of non-stormwater, other than the exclusions described in subARTICLE
(A) above, are unlawful. Prohibited connections include, but are not limited to: floor drains,
waste water from washing machines or sanitary sewers, wash water from commercial vehicle
washing or steam cleaning, and waste water from septic systems.
(2) Where such connections exist in violation of this ARTICLE and said connections
were made prior to the adoption of this provision or any other ordinance prohibiting such
connections, the property owner or the person using said connection shall remove the
connection within one year following the effective date of this ordinance. However, the
one-year grace period shall not apply to connections which may result in the discharge of
hazardous materials or other discharges which pose an immediate threat to health and safety,
or are likely to result in immediate injury and harm to real or personal property, natural
resources, wildlife, or habitat.
(3) Where it is determined that said connection:
a. May result in the discharge of hazardous materials or may pose an immediate threat
to health and safety, or is likely to result in immediate injury and harm to real or
personal property, natural resources, wildlife, or habitat, or
b. Was made in violation of any applicable regulation or ordinance, other than this
ARTICLE;
The Stormwater Administrator shall designate the time within which the connection shall be
removed. In setting the time limit for compliance, the Stormwater Administrator shall take
into consideration:
1. The quantity and complexity of the work,
2. The consequences of delay,
3. The potential harm to the environment, to the public health, and to public and
private property, and
4. The cost of remedying the damage.
(C) Spills
Spills or leaks of polluting substances released, discharged to, or having the potential to
released or discharged to the stormwater conveyance system, shall be contained, controlled,
collected, and properly disposed. All affected areas shall be restored to their preexisting
condition.
41
Persons in control of the polluting substances immediately prior to their release or discharge,
and persons owning the property on which the substances were released or discharged, shall
immediately notify the (Randolph County Fire Chief) of the release or discharge, as well as
making any required notifications under state and federal law. Notification shall not relieve
any person of any expenses related to the restoration, loss, damage, or any other liability
which may be incurred as a result of said spill or leak, nor shall such notification relieve any
person from other liability which may be imposed by State or other law.
(D) Nuisance
Illicit discharges and illicit connections which exist within the (City of Trinity) are hereby
found, deemed, and declared to be dangerous or prejudiced to the public health or public
safety and are found, deemed, and declared to be public nuisances. Such public nuisances
shall be abated in accordance with the procedures set forth in ARTICLE _1 subARTICLEs1
and 9(City of Trinity, Declaration of Public Nuisance)
42
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -1
City of Trinity
Subdivision Ordinance
(Amended 8.14.17)
ARTICLE I: SHORT TITLE ..................................................................................... 3
ARTICLE II: PURPOSE ........................................................................................... 3
ARTICLE III: AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION .............................................. 3
Section 3-1 Authority .............................................................................................. 3
Section 3-2 Jurisdiction........................................................................................... 3
ARTICLE IV: LEGAL PROVISIONS ...................................................................... 3
Section 4-1 Application of Ordinance .................................................................... 3
Section 4-2 Exceptions ........................................................................................... 4
Section 4-3 Approval Required for Building Permit .............................................. 4
Section 4-4 Variances Due to Site Conditions ........................................................ 4
Section 4-5 Penalties for Transferring Lots in Unapproved Subdivision ............... 4
Section 4-6 Subdivision Administrator ................................................................... 5
Section 4-7 Conflicting Ordinances ........................................................................ 5
Section 4-8 Separability .......................................................................................... 5
Section 4-9 Effective Date ..................................................................................... 5
Section 4-10 Amendment Procedure ...................................................................... 5
Section 4-11 State Platting and Disclosure Statement Requirement ...................... 5
ARTICLE V: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PLATS FOR SUBDIVISIONS
..................................................................................................................................... 5
Section 5-1 Major Subdivision Definition: ...............................................................
Section 5-2 Sketch Plan, Major Subdivision ............................................................
Section 5-3 Preliminary Plat, Major Subdivisions ....................................................
Section 5-4 Final Plat, Major Subdivisions ..............................................................
Section 5-6 Minor Subdivisions: ..............................................................................
ARTICLE VI: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS OF
DESIGN ...................................................................................................................... 7
Section 6-1 General................................................................................................. 7
Section 6-2 Compliance with Official Plans and Ordinances ................................. 7
Section 6-3 Road Frontage ...................................................................................... 8
Section 6-4 Streets and Roads................................................................................. 8
Section 6-5 Private Roads ....................................................................................... 8
Section 6-6 Sidewalks ............................................................................................. 9
Section 6-7 Stormwater Control ............................................................................. 9
Section 6-8 Blocks .................................................................................................. 9
Section 6-9 Lots ...................................................................................................... 9
Section 6-10 Water and Sewer Facilities .............................................................. 10
Section 6-11 Oversized Improvements ................................................................. 11
Section 6-12 Street Lights ..................................................................................... 11
Section 6-13 Easements ........................................................................................ 11
Section 6-14 Recreation Areas and Site for Public Facilities Open Space ........... 11
Section 6-16 Water Courses.................................................................................. 11
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -2
Section 6-17 Buffer Strips – Streams.................................................................... 12
Section 6-19 Mobile Home Subdivisions ............................................................. 12
ARTICLE VII: Improvements Required Prior to Approval of Final Plats .............. 12
Section 7-1 Installation of Improvements ............................................................. 12
Section 7-2 Guarantee of Improvements .............................................................. 12
Section 7-3 Submission Requirements ................................................................. 12
Section 7-4 Required Improvements .................................................................... 13
Section 7-5 Procedures for Dedication of Subdivision Development………….. 16
Appendix A ....................................................................................................................... 15
Appendix B ....................................................................................................................... 17
Specification for Final Plat ........................................................................................... 17
Appendix C ....................................................................................................................... 18
Specifications for Minor Subdivision Plat .................................................................... 18
Appendix D ....................................................................................................................... 19
Design Standards for Private Streets............................................................................. 19
Appendix E ....................................................................................................................... 20
Approval of Water Supply and Waste Treatment Systems .......................................... 20
Appendix F........................................................................................................................ 21
Required Certifications ................................................................................................. 21
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -3
ARTICLE I: SHORT TITLE
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Trinity, North
Carolina.
ARTICLE II: PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for
the orderly subdivision of land in the City of Trinity. Among other reasons, this Ordinance is deemed
necessary to (1) assure the appropriate layout and use of land; (2) provide safe, convenient and economic
circulation of vehicular traffic; (3) provide for the dedication of reservation of street rights-of-way, utility
easements and public facility sites; (4) assure the proper installation of streets and utilities; (5) avoid undue
concentrations of population; and (6) insure proper legal description, identification, documentation and
recordation of property boundaries.
ARTICLE III: AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION
Section 3-1 Authority
The enactment of this Ordinance is authorized under provisions pursuant to Chapter 160A-371 of the
General Statutes of North Carolina.
Section 3-2 Jurisdiction
This Ordinance shall govern the platting and recording of any subdivision of land lying within the City of
Trinity.
ARTICLE IV: LEGAL PROVISIONS
Section 4-1 Application of Ordinance
(A) This Ordinance is applicable to all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots,
building sites or other division, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building
development and shall include all divisions of land involving the dedication of a new street or a
change in existing streets.
(B) No lot or plat (except as provided by Section 2 below) within City of Trinity’s subdivision
jurisdiction shall be transferred, nor shall a plat or record thereof be recorded by the County
Register of Deeds until a final plat of the subdivision has been submitted to and approved by the
Planning and Zoning Board or the City Council (Major Subdivisions, Article V, Section 3). Such
approval shall be indicated on the face of the plat and signed by the City of Trinity Subdivision
Administrator (See Appendix F for certification form).
(C) The Register of Deeds shall not file a plat or record of subdivision of land within the city’s
jurisdiction nor shall the Clerk of Superior Court order such recording without the required
certification and signature of the Subdivision Administrator.
(D) The approval of a plat pursuant to this Ordinance shall not be deemed to constitute or affect the
acceptance by the City or the public of the dedication of any street or other ground, public utility
line or other public facility shown on the plat.
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -4
Section 4-2 Exceptions
(A) The following shall not be included nor be subject to the regulations prescribed by this Ordinance:
(1) The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total
number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards
of the city as described herein;
(2) The division of land into parcels greater than ten acres where no street right-of-way
dedication is involved;
(3) The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening or opening of
streets;
(4) The division of a tract in single ownership, the entire area of which is no greater than two
acres into not more than three lots, where no street right-of-way dedication is involved
and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of this Subdivision
Ordinance; and
(B) Plats not subject to the provisions of this Ordinance may be recorded provided the owner desiring
to record such plats shall obtain a Certificate of Exemption (See Appendix F) from the
Subdivision Administrator and shall present such certificate to the Register of Deeds Office as
proof that one of the conditions of exception noted above is present.
Section 4-3 Approval Required for Building Permit
No building permit shall be used for the erection of any building on any lot within a subdivision unless a
final plat of such subdivision has been approved as required by this Ordinance or a certificate of exemption
obtained, provided, however, that this shall not apply to any subdivision recorded by the County Register of
Deeds prior to August 27, 1997, the first effective date of this Ordinance.
Section 4-4 Variances Due to Site Conditions
Where the subdivider can show that a provision of these requirements would cause unnecessary hardship, if
strictly adhered to due to topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, the Subdivision
Administrator may grant a variance of up to 10% of the square footage as long as the average square
footage per lot meets the minimum Zoning Requirements. Otherwise, if the variance is greater than 10% or
if the variance is related to something else besides square footage, than the Board of Adjustments shall
approve a variance when it finds that such variance may be granted without destroying the intent of this
Ordinance. Any variance thus approved by the Board of Adjustments shall be noted in the minutes of the
meeting at which the variance is granted and such notation shall include the reasons for the variance.
Section 4-5 Penalties for Transferring Lots in Unapproved Subdivision
(A) Any person who, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located within the subdivision
regulation jurisdiction of the City of Trinity who subdivides such land in violation of this
Ordinance or transfers or sells any part of such land by reference to, exhibition of or any other use
of a plat showing a subdivision of land before such plat has been properly approved under the
provisions of this Ordinance and recorded in the office of the Randolph County Register of Deeds,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(B) This Ordinance may also be enforced by injunction, order of abatement or other equitable remedy
upon application to the General Court of Justice.
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -5
(C) Building permits required pursuant to G.S. 160A-147 may be denied for lots that have been
illegally subdivided.
Section 4-6 Subdivision Administrator
The administrator shall be appointed by the Trinity City Manager. The powers and duties of the
administrator shall be to implement the provisions of the ordinance with the assistance of the appropriate
technical staff. The specific responsibilities of the administrator shall include, but not be limited to,
conferring with the subdividers, reviewing plans and plats, coordinating and collaborating with the
appropriate experts on the plans and plats, making field investigations of plans and improvements, and
presenting plans and plat with findings and recommendations to the Planning Board.
Section 4-7 Conflicting Ordinances
Where another applicable regulation, ordinance or statute imposes more restrictive regulations than those
contained in this Ordinance, the more restrictive regulation shall govern.
Section 4-8 Separability
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be for any reason held void or invalid, it shall not affect
the validity of any other section or provision hereof which is not itself held void or invalid.
Section 4-9 Effective Date
This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after August 27, 1997, and as subsequently
amended by the City of Trinity, North Carolina, City Council.
Section 4-10 Amendment Procedure
This Ordinance may be amended or revised from time to time by the City of Trinity City Council as
provided by North Carolina General Statutes, Chapter 153A-323, but no amendment shall become effective
unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have been submitted to the City of Trinity Planning Board for
review and recommendation. If the Planning Board fails to provide a recommendation within 45 days of
submission to the Council, it shall be deemed to have favorably recommended the amendment.
Section 4-11 State Platting and Disclosure Statement Requirement
All subdividers planning to sell lots not platted and recorded prior to October 1, 1975, are advised to
consult N.C. General Statutes 136-102.6 “Compliance of Subdivision Streets with Minimum Standards of
the Board of Transportation,” which requires that all new streets, whether public or private, and all changes
in streets be platted. N.C.G.S. 136-102.6 also requires the subdivider to furnish to each lot purchaser a
Subdivision Streets Disclosure Statement revealing the status of new streets, whether they are constructed
to N.C. Department of Transportation standards, and who will bear maintenance responsibility for the
streets. No provision of the City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance or of any other local Ordinance shall
exempt a division of land from the provisions of N.C.G.S. 136-102.6.
ARTICLE V: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PLATS FOR
SUBDIVISIONS
Section 5-1 Major Subdivision Definition: A subdivision with four (4) or more lots
created for the purpose of sale or building development or a subdivision that requires the creation of a new
public or private street.
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -6
Section 5-2 Preliminary Map, Major Subdivision
The developer shall prepare a preliminary map to show general plans for the subdivision. A minimum
scale of 1 inch = 100 feet is required for the preliminary map. The preliminary map should contain:
(1) A sketch vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision in relation to neighboring
tracts and roads;
(2) Boundaries of the tract and portion to be subdivided;
(3) Total acres to be subdivided;
(4) Acreage of public use sites;
(5) Number of parcels;
(6) Average parcel size;
(7) Proposed general street and lot layout;
(8) Liner feet of street;
(9) Location of entrance and exit spots;
(10) Zoning classification of tract and adjacent properties; and
(11) Name, address and telephone number of owner.
The Technical Review Committee shall review the preliminary map and recommend changes, if necessary,
prior to the preliminary map going in front of the Planning Board. Once a review and recommendation has
been performed by the Planning Board, the map will go in front of the City Council for approval.
The Subdivision Administrator shall also notify in writing all adjoining property owners of the submission
of the map. Such notice shall state the date of the Planning Board meeting when the map will be
considered and shall be mailed in sufficient time to provide adequate notice.
Section 5-3 Preliminary Plans, Major Subdivisions
(A) Submission Requirements. A preliminary plan of a proposed major subdivision shall be prepared
by the developer. Specifications for preliminary plans are contained in Appendix A.
Three copies of the preliminary plans, along with proposed deed restrictions shall be submitted to
the TRC. Upon review, if conditions are laid upon the subdivider, the subdivider has the choice of
accepting those conditions or appealing the conditions to the Board of Adjustments.
The Subdivision Administrator shall give a progress report to the Planning Board and the City
Council.
Section 5-4 Final Plat, Major Subdivisions
(A) Submission Requirements. When the requirements of this Ordinance have been satisfied, the
subdivider shall submit three copies of the final subdivision plat and any deed restriction applying
thereto to the Technical Review Committee to determine that the final plat conforms to the
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -7
requirements of this Ordinance. Three copies of the final plat and final drawings shall be
submitted no less than fourteen days before the TRC meeting at which the plat is to be reviewed.
Decisions or approval or denial of final plats may be made only on the basis of standards explicitly
set forth in the subdivision or zoning ordinance.
(B) Improvements and Certificates. No final plat shall be approved until all improvements are
installed or their execution guaranteed as set forth in this Ordinance and all certificates required
for final plats by this Ordinance or approvals by state law have been properly completed and
signed.
(C) Recordation. The approval of the final plat by the TRC shall be on condition that such plat is
recorded in the Office of Register of Deeds within 60 days after approval.
Section 5-5 Minor Subdivisions Definition:
A subdivision of three (3) or fewer lots created for the purpose of sale or building development with all lots
having access to an existing state or City maintained road.
Section 5-6 Minor Subdivisions:
The developer of a minor subdivision may apply for final approval of any minor subdivision through the
procedures set forth in this section.
(A) Submission Requirements. Three copies of a plat, prepared according to specifications in
Appendix C shall be presented to the Technical Review Committee for all minor subdivisions.
Plats for minor subdivisions must be accompanied by a certificate of survey and accuracy as
specified in Appendix F-6 by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer licensed and
registered to practice in North Carolina.
(B) Review Procedure. The Technical Review Committee shall review each minor subdivision and
shall find that it either does or does not meet the requirements of this Ordinance. Based on these
findings, the TRC shall approve, disapprove or approve conditionally the proposed minor
subdivision within sixty (60) days of its submission. The decision of the TRC is subject to appeal
by the subdivider to the Board of Adjustments, which must act on any appeal within sixty (60)
days.
(C) Certificate of Approval for Recording. If the administrator approves the proposed minor
subdivision, a certificate of approval for recording, Appendix F-2, shall show such approval.
ARTICLE VI: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MINIMUM
STANDARDS OF DESIGN
Section 6-1 General
Land shall be subdivided in accordance with good land planning practices, including adequate
consideration of a natural topography and drainage features and type of development proposed.
Section 6-2 Compliance with Official Plans and Ordinances
Land shall be subdivided in compliance with the City of Trinity Zoning Ordinance and other pertinent
official development plans and ordinances. In addition, where land lies within the area of a public water
supply reservoir, so designated by a Governmental authority, subdivider of such land shall be required to
give notice on the face of the final subdivision plat that land within the subdivision lies within a designated
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -8
public water supply reservoir area and may be the subject of future public purchase. (See Appendix F-5 for
Certificate of Disclosure of Public Purchase.)
Section 6-3 Road Frontage
All lots in a subdivision must front on a public paved road, unless a private road is specifically provided for
in Section 6-5 of this Article. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to streets except where
cause can be shown that such control would best serve the purpose of this Ordinance.
Section 6-4 Streets and Roads
(A) The design of all public streets and roads within the City of Trinity shall conform to the minimum
standards set forth in the most recent edition of “Minimum Construction Standards for
Subdivision Road” as published by the N.C. Department of Transportation, Division of Highways.
(B) Upon signing of ‘Final Plat’, effective August 14th, 2017 any streets constructed, inspected and
approved by the Public Works Director or an authorized representative of the City of Trinity to
meet the minimum standards set forth in the most recent edition of “Minimum Construction
Standards for Subdivision Road” as published by the NCDOT Division of Highways shall become
City of Trinity streets for ownership and maintenance.
(C) Disclosure and approval by the Division of Highways shall comply with G.S. 136-102.6.
(D) All streets shall be named and signs conforming to Randolph County and City standards shall be
posted at intersections showing the name of every street. New streets, which are obviously in
alignment with others already named and existing, shall bear the names of the existing streets. In
no case shall the names of new streets phonetically resemble existing street names.
(E) Subdivision Names. All subdivisions requiring the development of new public roads must be
named. A sign clearly indicating the name of the subdivision shall be posted at each entrance to
the subdivision.
(F) Access to Adjoining Property. Means of ingress and egress for adjoining properties within the
subdivision shall be provided.
(G) Cul-de-Sacs. Cul-de-sacs or other dead end streets designed to be permanently closed shall be
provided at the closed end with sufficient right-of-way for vehicular turnarounds. Circular rightsof-
way at the closed end shall have a minimum radius of fifty (50) feet and the surfacing shall
have a minimum radius of thirty-five (35) feet.
Section 6-5 Private Roads
(A) Private roads or drives shall be permitted only in the following circumstances:
(1) Developments which by the nature of their design could not occur if required to meet
DOT subdivision road standards, as for example residential developments under unified
or homeowner association control (mobile home parks, apartment complexes, attached
housing, PUDS, etc.) and commercial or industrial development under unified control.
(2) Division of land into tracts that are five acres or greater in size.
(3) In subdivisions in which a new street provides access to two or fewer lots provided that
the new street connects directly to a public street currently accepted and maintained by
the N.C. DOT or the City of Trinity, and further provided that the new street is no longer
in length than 0.2 miles.
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -9
(B) Future resubdivision of lots served by private roads in subdivisions approved after August 21,
1997, into smaller tracts shall not be permitted unless plans for upgrading the private road to a
public street are approved by the N.C. Division of Highways and until said roads are built
according to approved plans or proper assurance of completion is accepted by the Trinity City
Council. This requirement shall be stated on the recorded plat.
(C) New minor subdivisions abutting an existing private road approved prior to August 21, 1997 shall
be permitted. This section shall not apply to commercial and industrial subdivisions and lots
served by sewer.
(D) New major residential subdivisions abutting a private road approved prior to August 21, 1997 or
designed to utilize a private road for access to the subdivision shall not be permitted without
upgrading the private road to a public road per standards established by the City of Trinity and
until said streets are built according to approved plans or proper assurance of completion is
accepted by the Trinity City Council. This section shall not apply to commercial and industrial
subdivisions and lots served by sewer.
(E) Where permitted, private roads may be constructed in compliance with the following conditions:
(1) The developer shall sign a certificate attesting to the fact than an instrument will be
recorded with the final plat which guarantees:
(a) a right of access by all lots served by the private road; and
(b) a full disclosure of the state of the road and specific road maintenance
responsibilities (as required by G.S. 136-102.6) and that these listed items
shall run with the land. (A maintenance agreement shall have been previously
agreed to by the City of Trinity Council and the City Attorney).
(F) All developers who incorporate private roads into their subdivisions will be required to present
plans to the City of Trinity City Council for review.
(G) Design standards for private roads are listed in Appendix D.
Section 6-6 Sidewalks (See City of Trinity Zoning Ordinance)
Section 6-7 Stormwater Control (See City of Trinity Stormwater Ordinance)
Section 6-8 Blocks
Blocks shall be laid out with due consideration given to traffic circulation patterns and contemplated use.
(A) Length. Blocks shall be not less than 400 or more than 1,600 feet in length, except as considered
necessary to secure efficient use of land or desired features of street pattern by the Council. In
blocks over 800 feet in length one or more crosswalks not less than ten (10) feet in width
extending entirely across the street may be required at locations deemed necessary by the Council.
(B) Widths. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots of minimum depth, (reference
Table of Area and Yard Requirements, Zoning Ordinance), except where fronting on major streets
or prevented by topographic conditions, in which case a single tier of lots may be approved.
Section 6-9 Lots
Lots shall be designed in shape, size and location with due regard to topographic conditions, features of the
surrounding area, contemplated use and official plans and ordinances.
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -10
(A) Marginal Land. Land subject to flooding or land which may aggravate the flood hazard or
increase danger to life or property if developed, and land uninhabitable for other reasons, shall not
be considered platted for occupancy and shall not be used in determining the minimum lot area or
maximum lot depth.
(B) Frontage on a Public Street. Every lot shall front or abut a public street (except where private
roads are permitted) and shall have a minimum frontage as required by the dimensional
requirements for each zoning district.
(C) Double and Reverse Frontage. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided, except
where required in unusual circumstances specifically approved by the City Council in the
preliminary plat.
(D) Side Lot Lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to straight street lines or radial
to curved street lines.
(E) Area and Dimensions of Lots. All lots shall conform to the minimal dimensional requirements for
each zoning district as prescribed in the Table of Area and Yard Requirements of the City of
Trinity Zoning Ordinance. In summary, the following minimum area and dimensional
requirements shall be met:
DISTRICT AREA WIDTH AT BUILDING LINE
RA District 40,000 square feet 100 feet
R-40 District (1 unit/acre) 40,000 square feet 100 feet
R-20 District (2 units/acre) 20,000 square feet 80 feet
R-12 (3 units/acre) 12,000 square feet 75 feet
R-10 (4 units/acre) 10,000 square feet 60 feet
RM & RM-U District for
Single-Family Homes – 4
units/acre
10,000 square feet 60 feet
RM & RM-U District for
Multi-Family Homes
12,000 square feet + 3,000 for
each unit over 2
N/A
Section 6-10 Water and Sewer Facilities
New subdivisions shall connect to the City of Trinity municipal sewer system according to the guidelines
established by the City of Trinity and public water system according to the City of Trinity and Davidson
Water, Inc., the plans for both of which must be submitted to and approved by the appropriate state
agencies. In areas were public water and/or sewer are not available, the subdivider shall install private
systems that have been approved by the appropriate County or State agency
(A) Where public water and sewer facilities are not available and individual water supplies or
individual sewage disposal systems are planned, the subdivider, at his own expense, shall have the
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -11
site investigated by the Randolph County Health Department or other authorized, qualified,
individual, firm or agency, to determine whether or not such individual facilities are feasible and
shall present proof to the Subdivision Administrator that appropriate soil tests have been
conducted and that each lot in the subdivision not served by public water or sewage disposal
systems has been approved by the Randolph County Health Department for individual water
supplies and/or sewage disposal systems. The site investigation for sewage disposal shall include
sufficient number of percolation tests. The number of percolation tests required and the depth of
test holes shall be determined by the County Sanitarian.
(B) Where individual septic tank systems are planned, minimum lot sizes specified in this Ordinance
may need to be increased as required by the results of percolation tests and subsoil investigation.
(C) Water supply and sewage facilities shall comply with applicable state and county health and
environmental laws and regulations. (See Appendix E for water and waste disposal approval
requirements).
(D) Building Lines. On residential lots the minimum depth of the front building line from the front
property line shall be 35 feet. This depth shall be increased on recommendation of the County
Health Department, if necessary for the installation of an individual sewage disposal system on the
front of a lot. On double frontage lots, the minimum depth of the rear building line from the rear
property lines from the side property line of the side street shall be 15 feet. On lake front lots
(other than those located in designated Water Critical Areas surrounding water supply lakes) there
shall be a lake building line consisting of a line located across the lot parallel to and 25 feet from
the official pond level measured along the natural ground surface and in no case shall a building
be located below a contour line which shall be three feet above normal pond level.
Section 6-11 Oversized Improvements
The City of Trinity may require the installation of certain oversized facilities such as water and sewer
mains or oversized sewer pumping stations where it is in the interest of future development.
Section 6-12 Street Lights
All public streets, sidewalks, and other common areas or facilities in subdivisions shall be sufficiently
illuminated to ensure the security of property and the safety of person using such streets, sidewalks, and
other common areas or facilities. Streetlights are to be installed by the developer in accordance with the
Trinity Street light Policy. A street lighting plan will be submitted with the preliminary plat.
Section 6-13 Easements
To provide for public service poles, wires, conduits, storm or sanitary sewers, storm drainage channels,
surface overflow, gas, water or heat mains, or other utilities, easements maybe required. When necessary
such easements shall be reviewed by the City engineer.
Section 6-14 Recreation Areas and Site for Public Facilities Open Space
Where a school site is shown on a publicly approved plan, which plan shall have been recorded with the
Register of Deeds and requested by the local Board of Education, such site shall either be dedicated for the
public purposes at the option of the property owner or reserved for acquisition by the appropriate public
body for a period not exceeding 18 months from the date of approval of the preliminary subdivision plan.
Section 6-15 Water Courses
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -12
If there is any water course or dry branch of any type running through or within 150 feet of the property
proposed for subdivision, the prospective subdivider shall furnish reasonable evidence to the Planning and
Zoning Administrator that residential lots within the subdivision will not be flooded. Lots located entirely
in the flood plain shall not be sold for residential purposes. Lots partially located within a flood plain shall
provide adequate space for a primary structure and any accessory structures outside of the floodplain.
Under no circumstances should lots be sold for construction that is entirely within a floodplain. All
structures most also conform to the Floodplain Ordinance of the City of Trinity.
Section 6-16 Buffer Strips – Streams See City of Trinity Stormwater Ordinance
Section 6-17 Mobile Home Subdivisions
Mobile home subdivisions shall comply in all respects to the requirements of this Ordinance and of the
Manufactured Home Overlay District provided in the City of Trinity Zoning Ordinance.
ARTICLE VII: Improvements Required Prior to Approval of Final
Plats
Section 7-1 Installation of Improvements
No subdivision plats shall be granted final approval until the required improvements have been made in
accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 7-2 Guarantee of Improvements
Guarantee of Improvements. Grading and base construction for streets must be installed prior to
submission of the plat for final approval. Where other required improvements have not been completed,
the approval of said plat shall be subject to the sub divider’s guaranteeing the installation of said
improvements in one of the following methods:
(A) Cash or certified check.
(B) Performance or surety bond executed by a company duly licensed to do business in the State
of North Carolina.
(C) Irrevocable letter of credit
Section 7-3 Submission Requirements
Data demonstrating compliance with the improvement requirements must be prepared and submitted along
with the final plat for the meeting of the City Council at which final approval is sought. Twelve copies of
the final plat and all plans, profiles, specifications and other required information should be required.
Specifications for final plats are listed in Appendix B.
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -13
Section 7-4 Required Improvements
The following improvements requirements shall be fulfilled or guaranteed before a final plat shall be
approved by the City Council for recording:
(A) Public Streets. Streets and all associated improvements, to include storm drains, grading,
base and paving, shall be constructed by the subdivider in accordance with the specifications
and standards of the N.C. Department of Transportation, Division of Highways and shall be
approved by the City.
(B) Private Streets. Private streets or drives shall be permitted only in the situations described in
Article VI, Section 5. The word private shall be clearly stamped on the final plat and this
shall be recorded with all conveyances along with road maintenance provisions. Design
standards for private roads are noted in Appendix D.
(C) Monuments. Permanent concrete monuments four (4) inches in diameter or square, three (3)
feet long, shall be placed at not less that two (2) corners of the subdivision, provided that
additional monuments shall be placed where necessary to that no point within the subdivision
lies more than five hundred (500) feet from a monument. Two or more of the required
monuments shall be designated as control corners. The top of each monument shall have an
indented cross, metal pin or metal plate to identify properly the location of the point. All
monuments shall be shown on the final plat.
(D) Utilities. The subdivider shall install public water mains and sanitary sewers where existing
public utilities are available. In other areas the subdivider shall install either individual
private lot or private community water and/or sewer systems. If such installation is made,
the subdivider shall comply with all rules and regulations prescribed for private and/or
community water supply and waste disposal by the North Carolina Department of Human
Resources, the North Carolina Department of Natural Resources and Community
Development, the Randolph County Health Department, and the Sewer Use Ordinance of the
City of Trinity and with all regulations and construction specifications of any municipality to
whose utility system such water mains and/or sanitary sewers may eventually be connected.
Electrical utilities and communication lines shall be installed with arrangements made by the
subdivider with the utility company or cooperative authorized to serve the area of the
subdivision. Installation shall be in keeping with the latest accepted design standards and
procedures along lot lines.
Electrical and communication lines shall be installed underground within major subdivisions
unless the City determines underground installation is inappropriate.
Utilities, which encroach upon the State Highway system, shall require an Encroachment
Contract executed by the person or firm responsible for maintenance.
(E) Water Supply and Sewage Disposal on Individual Lots When Public Water and Sewer are
Unavailable. The size, location, soil conditions and drainage of all lots in the subdivision
shall be approved by the Randolph County Health Department relative to individual water
supply and sewage disposal systems. Water supply and waste treatment approval
requirements are noted in Appendix E.
(F) Erosion Control. The subdivider shall mulch, seed, sod or otherwise protect all grading,
excavations, open cuts, side slopes and other land surface disturbances.
It is also the subdivider’s responsibility to comply with the North Carolina Sedimentation and
Pollution Control Act and the City of Trinity Stormwater Management Policies. The
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -14
developer is to contact the N.C. Department of Natural Resources and Community
Development, Land Quality Section, which agency provides technical assistance and
enforcement of the Sedimentation and Pollution Control Act.
(G) Removal of Rubbish. The subdivider shall remove all cut or fallen trees, stumps or rubbish
from the subdivision.
Section 7-5 Procedures for Dedication of Subdivision Development
(a) Punch list – near completion of the subdivision development, a punch list will be provided to
the owner detailing the deficiencies needing completion.
(b) Final plat – The owner will submit a final plat, deed of dedication and maintenance
agreement to the Planning & Zoning Administrator at the completion of the punch list.
(c) Final inspection – After receiving the Final Plat, Deed of Dedication and Maintenance
Agreement, the City of Trinity Technical Review Committee will conduct a final inspection.
If there are no deficiencies, the Final Plat will be added to the TRC agenda for approval.
Once the final plat is approved by TRC. Once the TRC approves the Final Plat, permission
is granted to begin residential home construction and a building permit can be issued.
Section 7-6 Technical Review Committee (TRC)
A Technical Review Committee shall be established to assist the staff, Planning Board, and City Council in
review of site development plans. The purpose of the TRC shall be to determine whether or not proposed
developments meet the standards established in the Ordinance and all other applicable regulations within
the City of Trinity and to provide guidance as how to provide for the betterment of public safety and
welfare. The TRC review of development plans shall be of a technical nature only, and shall not involve
negotiation with developers. All development requests that require review from the Planning Board and
City Council shall first be reviewed by the TRC.
1. TRC Membership - A member shall represent the TRC from City Administration, Planning
Department, Public Works, Stormwater, Local Fire Protection Agency and the NC Department of
Transportation and any other department and/or professional that would be beneficial for technical
review.
2. TRC Chair - The Planning Director shall serve as chair of the TRC. A secretary shall be
appointed to compile notes on all projects reviewed by the TRC.
3. TRC Meetings - The TRC shall meet every Wednesday as needed. After receipt of a development
proposal, the TRC shall complete its review within 30 days
4. Appeal of TRC Decision - Appeals shall be to the City Council after review and recommendation
from the Planning Board provided the appeal is made by the applicant within thirty (30) days of
the TRC determination. All decisions on appeals made by the City Council are final.
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -15
Appendix A
The preliminary plans shall be submitted 3 (three copies) on 24” x 36” sheets drawn to a scale of not less
than 50 feet to the inch and shall contain the following information:
(A) Title Data
(1) Date of survey, date plan drawn, and revision dates as applicable.
(2) Name, address and telephone number of Owner(s)
(3) Name, address and telephone number of Developer, if different from Owner
(4) Name of subdivision (Subdivision names shall not duplicate or approximate, phonetically,
existing subdivision names.)
(5) Location designation (township, county, state)
(6) Location map (no less than 1” = 2000’) showing the property and its relationship to the
surrounding area
(7) Seal and signature of a licensed engineer or surveyor, with name, address and telephone
number of the preparer.
(8) Scale in figures and bar graph
(9) North arrow and orientation. Sheets will not be accepted with North facing toward the
bottom of the sheet.
(10) “Preliminary Plan” notation
(11) Proposed use of property to be subdivided
(12) Tax parcel number
(B) Existing Conditions (on property to be subdivided and within 500 feet of property being
subdivided)
(1) Source of datum, and location of benchmark(s) at the site
(2) Existing street rights-of-way, width of pavement and names
(3) Location and size of any existing private or public utilities including water sewer,
electrical, phone gas and cable facilities
(4) Location and size of existing bridges, culverts and other storm drainage facilities
(5) Location, width and purpose of all existing easements
(6) Bearings and distances of property boundary with, accurate reference to control points
defined by state plane coordinates where required by the “Standards of Practice for Land
Surveying in North Carolina”.
(7) Surrounding property lines, property owners and subdivisions
(8) Boundaries and identification of political subdivisions, where applicable
(9) Zoning classification of property to be subdivided and zoning of all adjacent parcels with
owner(s) name(s)
(10) Existing buildings
(11) Topography including water courses and wooded areas
(12) Existing elevations referenced to mean sea level, with a contour interval of two feet,
accurate to one-half contour to indicate surface drainage patterns.
(13) Location, extent and identification of flood plain, watershed, water critical area or other
restricted land
(14) Driveways and roads (in use or abandoned) leading to other property
(15) Location of any known gravesites or cemeteries located on the property
(16) Delineation of any stream and/or wetland areas under the jurisdiction of the US Army
Corps of Engineers and/or the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural
Resources.
(17) Other natural or manmade conditions affecting site development
(C) Proposed Plans (proposed features shall be shown heavily lined)
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -16
(1) Proposed street alignments, rights-of-way, names
(2) Detail plan of all entrances, driveways, roadways, etc. that connect to existing roads
(Connection to State roads requires permits from NCDOT)
(3) Proposed private or public utilities, including water and sewer sizes, materials with
locations of proposed tie-ins noted.
(4) Proposed location and sizes of water lines, services, hydrants, water meters, and backflow
devices.
(5) Locations, size and material of proposed sewer mains, force mains, manholes, service
lines and clean-outs, and sewerage lift stations.
(6) Location and size of proposed bridges, culverts and other storms drainage facilities
(7) Location, width and purpose of all proposed easements (15’ easement required centered
over water line; 20’ easement required centered over sewer line)
(8) Plan and profile of proposed sanitary and storm sewers (scale no less than 1” = 100’
horizontally, 1” = 10’ vertically); elevations based on mean sea level.
(9) Lines, numbers and approximate dimensions of proposed lots and blocks
(10) Proposed buildings with finished floor elevations shown (must be 2’ above established
100-yr floodplain if applicable)
(11) Soil erosion and sediment control plan (NCDENR permit required for any site over 1.0
acres).
(12) Minimum building setback lines (front, side and rear)
(13) Public use sites
(14) Location of stop signs (and other traffic control devices as required)
(15) Two copies of pipe sizing, detention/retention sizing and other calculations required for
review of plan
(16) A 24-hour local contact person
(17) Site data:
(a) Acreage of property to be subdivided
(b) Acreage of public use sites
(c) Number of lots
(d) Average lot size
(e) Square feet of each irregularly shaped lot
(f) Lineal feet of streets
(18) A list of restrictive covenants (deed restrictions) to be applied to any or all lots in the
subdivision
(19) Following approval of the construction plans, provide ___ copies of the subdivision
layout or site plan only, and 4 copies of complete construction plans. One set will be
returned as “Approved”.
(20) Notes:
(a) “Contractor shall contact the Planning & Zoning Administrator (336-431-
2841) at least 48 hours prior to starting work on the project.”
(b) “All construction within state right-of-way shall conform to North Carolina
Department of Transportation specifications.”
(c) “Approval by City of Trinity is for the improvements shown in the Site Plan.
Any variation from the approved Site Plan must be approved by the Planning
& Zoning Administrator.”
(d) “A preconstruction conference shall be held with the Planning & Zoning
Administrator and his designated representative prior to beginning
construction.”
(e) “The cost of inspection by the City of Trinity before or after the normal
working hours, on Saturdays, Sundays or Legal Holidays, shall be paid for by
the individual requesting the inspection at a rate of 1 ½ times the regular
salary per hour of the inspector. Approval of the inspection outside normal
working hours shall be obtained from the Planning & Zoning Administrator
48 hours in advance. Prior to commencement of work requiring inspection
outside of normal working hours, the individual requesting the inspection
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -17
shall sign a form, furnished by the Planning Department, agreeing to pay the
overtime. The individual requesting the inspection will be billed by the
Planning Department for payment.”
Engineers/Developers/Owners submitting plans that include water line design for approval shall comply
with the submittal requirements set forth in Davidson Water, Inc.’s Subdivision Specifications. Plans must
receive approval from Davidson Water, Inc. prior to approval by City of Trinity.
Where the preliminary plat submitted covers only a part of the subdivider’s tract, a sketch shall be
submitted showing the prospective future street system and other features for ultimate development of the
entire tract.
Appendix B
Specification for Final Plat
The final plat (three copies, one mylar) shall be submitted on 18” x 24” sheets to a scale of not less than 50
feet to the inch. If more than two sheets are required an index sheet of the same dimensions shall be
provided. The final plat shall contain the following information:
(A) Title Data
(1) Date of submission
(2) Name and address of owner(s)
(3) Name of subdivision
(4) Location designation (township, county, school district, state)
(5) Name and address of engineer or surveyor
(6) Scale in figures and bar graph
(7) North arrow
(8) “Final Plat” notation
(9) Certificates (Reference Appendix F)
(B) Surrounding Properties Information
(1) Property lines, property owners and subdivisions
(2) Rights-of-way, easements, reservations and public use sites located and identified
(C) Property Being Subdivided
(1) Street rights-of-way, widths of pavements and names of streets as posted on site
(2) Property boundary lines including bearings and distances as determined by survey
(3) Block and lot line with dimensions, block and lot numbers
(4) Minimum building setback lines
(5) Identification and dimensions of easements, reservations and dedicated area
(6) Location, extend and identification of flood plain, watershed, water critical area or other
restricted land
(7) Sufficient data of monuments and markers to determine readily and reproduce on the
ground, the location, bearing and length of all the above items
(8) A list of restrictive covenants (deed restrictions) to be applied to any or all lots in the
subdivision
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -18
Appendix C
Specifications for Minor Subdivision Plat
Two copies of a minor subdivision plat shall be submitted on 18” x 24” sheets to a scale of not less than
200 feet to the inch. The following information shall be included:
(A) Date of submission
(B) Name and address of owners
(C) Location designation (township, county, zoning district)
(D) Name and address of surveyor
(E) Scale
(F) North arrow
(G) Property lines, property owners and subdivisions of surrounding property owners
(H) Surveyed lots with all dimensions, easements, reservations, etc.
(I) Sufficient data of monuments and markers to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the
location, bearing and length of all above items.
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -19
Appendix D
Design Standards for Private Streets
(A) Private streets or roads (except as noted in B and C below) shall be constructed to the North
Carolina Department of Transportation, Division of Highways minimum standards.
The most recent edition of the pamphlet “Subdivision Roads, Minimum Construction Standards”
can be used as a guide with the following exceptions:
(1) The roads will not have to be paved, or
(2) The base can be reduced to four (4) inches of stabilized material
All roads shall have a minimum of 45 feet right-of-way with a minimum of 4 inches of stabilized
material.
(B) Private roads in subdivisions under unified control (e.g. homeowners association), such as
Planned Unit Developments or Cluster Developments shall be paved according to State
Department of Transportation specifications. However, a registered engineer may reduce the
pavement and right-of-way width from DOT standards upon submission to the City Council of
roadway, shoulder and ditch design specifications.
(C) Private roads in subdivisions of five-acre tracts or greater are not required to meet North Carolina
Department of Transportation minimum construction standards. However, private roads in such
subdivisions shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 45 feet and shall be graveled with a
minimum of four (4) inches of gravel.
(D) The developer shall comply with all applicable provisions of G.S. 136-102.6 relative to
subdivision street disclosure information.
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -20
Appendix E
Approval of Water Supply and Waste Treatment Systems
(A) Water Supply Systems – In areas were public water is not available
(1) Water supply systems planned to serve 15 or more connections or at least 25 permanent
residents are classified as community public water supplies by the State of North
Carolina. Plans and specifications for such systems must be prepared by a professional
engineer registered in North Carolina and submitted to the City of Trinity and the Public
Water Supply Branch, (Regional Office) Department of Human Resources for approval.
(2) Water supply systems planned to serve 14 or fewer connections of less that 25 permanent
residents are regulated by the Randolph County Health Department. Plans and
specifications must be submitted to the City of Trinity and the County Health Department
for approval.
(3) Individual water supplies (wells) are regulated by the Randolph County Health
Department and should be located, constructed and operated in accordance with county
and state regulations administered through the county Health Department.
(B) Waste Treatment – In areas where the extension of public sewer I cost prohibitive (as determined
by the City of Trinity)
Plans for waste treatment must first be presented to the City of Trinity and the Randolph County
Health Department. Whenever possible non-discharging septic tanks will be required with
location, lot size and installation regulated by the county Health Department. If septic treatment
(or hook-up to a municipal sewer system) is not possible, a letter must be obtained from the
county health department to this effect. Thereafter, the developer may apply to the Division of
Environmental Management, (Regional Office) Department of Natural Resources and Community
Development for a permit to install a community sewer system. The number of hook-ups
approved for treatment and the level of treatment required is regulated by the permit process of the
Division of Environmental Management.
All private sewage treatment plants are required to be enclosed with a chain-link fence a minimum
of 7 feet in height and locked when the plant is unattended. This requirement is applicable to all
existing and new private sewage treatment plants.
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -21
Appendix F
Required Certifications
(1) Certificate of Exemption (Subdivision not Subject to Regulations of this Ordinance)
I (we) hereby certify that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown and described hereon, which
was conveyed to me (us) by deed recorded in Book _______, Page ______ and that the subdivision of the
property shown on this plat is an exception to the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Trinity, North
Carolina under Article V, Section 2.
____________________ ________________________
Owner(s) Date
_____________________ ________________________
Subdivision Administrator Date
(2) Certificate of Approval for Recording, Minor Subdivision
I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to comply with the Subdivision
Regulations for the City of Trinity, North Carolina, and that such plat has been approved according to the
procedures for approval of minor subdivisions.
_____________________ ________________________________________
Date Subdivision Administrator
(3) Certificate of Disclosure, Private Roads
I (we), the developer(s) of __________________ Subdivision hereby state that the subdivision roads, in
_______________ Subdivision are private roads, ownership and maintenance of the private roads is the
responsibility of __________________. Right of access to private roads within said subdivision is
guaranteed to all lots served by such roads. I (we), as the developers, further state that all ownership and
maintenance agreements for the private roads have been approved by the City of Trinity City Attorney and
the City of Trinity City Council.
_________________________ ________________________
Developer Date
__________________________ ________________________
Developer Date
Attest: _______________________
City of Trinity City Clerk
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -22
(4) Certificate of Ownership and Dedication
I hereby certify that I (we) am (are) the owner(s) of the property shown and described hereon, which is
located in the subdivision jurisdiction of the City of Trinity and that I hereby adopt this plan of subdivision
with my (our) free consent, establish minimum building setback lines and dedicate all streets, alleys, walks,
sewer lines, water lines, parks and other sites and easements to public or private use as noted.
_____________________ _______________________________________________
Date Owner(s)
_______________ County, North Carolina
(5) Certificate of Disclosure of Public Purchase
I hereby certify that land identified within the subdivision plat shown hereon lies within the area of a
designated proposed public water supply and may be subject to public purchase at a future date.
__________________________________________ __________________
Subdivision Administrator Date
(6) Certificate of Accuracy
I, __________________, certify that under my direction and supervision this Map was drawn from an
actual field land survey; that the Error of Closure is calculated by latitudes and departures is 1: _; that the
boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken lines plotted from information in Book ____________, Page
______, that this Map was prepared in accordance with G.S. 47-30 as amended.
WITNESS my hand and Seal this _____ day of ___________, 20__.
Signature ________________________________________________
Engineering or Land Surveyor
Registration Number __________
(7) Certificate of Approval, Major Subdivision
This subdivision plat has been found to comply with the provisions of the Subdivision Ordinance of the
City of Trinity and provided that it is recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds within 60 days of final
approval by the Subdivision Administrator.
___________________________________
Subdivision Administrator
(8) Certificate of Warranty
I hereby certify that I know of no defects from any cause and will fully warrant all improvements, which
have been installed to be free from defects in material and workmanship for a period of one (1) year from
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -23
this date. Any improvements yet to be installed, I shall fully warrant in the same manner for a period of
one (1) year from the date of the release of guarantees. In the event that facets are discovered in any such
improvements during the warranty period, I shall replace and/or repair the defective improvement at my
own expense.
_________________________________________________ __________________
Subdivider date
(9) Certificate of Approval for Recording, Stormwater
I hereby certify that the plat shown hereon has been found to comply with the Stormwater Regulations for
the City of Trinity, North Carolina, and that such plat has been approved according to the procedures from
Environmental Management Commission there under; Session Law 2006-246.
_____________________ ________________________________________
Date Stormwater Administrator
City of Trinity Subdivision Ordinance -24
Approved: 1997
Amended: January 18, 2005
March 3, 2005
October 18, 2005
March 21, 2006
April 16, 2006
September 14, 2015
UTILITY RIGHT-OF-WAY ORDINANCE
ARTICLE 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 1-1. – Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the proper management of the public rights-ofway
to preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. Specifically, this article is
intended to provide for the reasonable regulation of the owners of public and private utility facilities
located in the public rights-of-way, and the time, place and manner in which such utility facilities are
located and worked upon.
Sec. 1-2. – Definitions.
Utility means a company that owns and provides services to customers through utility facilities
located in the right-of-way. This definition shall include the city for purposes of the city’s ownership of
streets, waste water, and stromwater utility facilities.
Utility facility means a pole, tower, water main or line, sanitary sewer pipe or line, stormwater
pipe or structure, gas pipe or gas line, telecommunications line or equipment power line, conduit, or any
like structure.
ARTICLE 2. – STANDARDS AND PERMITS
Sec. 2-1. – Utility right-of-way permit required.
(a) It shall be unlawful to own any utility facility located in, on, under, or above the right-of-way
without a valid and un-expired utility right-of-way permit issued by the city. A utility right-ofway
permit shall among other things:
(1) Grant to the holder of the permit the general right to have utility facilities in the right-of-way
provided, however, that the master permit does not constitute a permit for any installation,
maintenance, repair, or removal of a utility facility.
(2) Specify the term of the permit (which term shall typically be for the one-year period, or
portion of a one-year period, that expires on June 30);
(3) Provide for the removal of abandoned utility facilities.
(4) Acknowledge the city’s right to require the removal or relocation of utility facilities when
necessitated by a public need;
(5) Require proof of suitable levels of insurance coverage;
(6) State the rights, if any, to assign or transfer rights or obligations without the prior consent of
the city;
(7) Acknowledge the city’s full retention of its police power;
(8) Provide for the registration of all contractors who work in the right-of-way on behalf of the
owner; and
(9) Provide for the preparation, maintenance and maps of utility facilities located within the
city.
(b) Exceptions. The holder of an unrevoked and unexpired franchise issued by the city shall not be
required to obtain a utility right-of-way permit for purposes of the utility facilities located in the
rights-of-way that are used for the purpose authorized by the franchise. This section shall not
apply to the city.
Sec. 2-2. - Powers reserved.
A utility right-of-way permit does not constitute a grant of all governmental approval
necessary for the use and enjoyment of utility facilities located in the rights-of-way. A utility right-ofway
permit is not a franchise. With respect to the holder of a utility right-of-way permit, the city fully
retains its franchising and police power authority and the holder of a utility right-of-way permit is not
relieved of its obligation to obtain all necessary franchises and permits and to comply with all other legal
requirements.
Sec. 2-3 - Utility facility installation, maintenance, repair, and removal.
(a) The City Manager or Utility Director is authorized to adopt, amend, and repeal standards and
provisions governing the installation, maintenance, repair, and removal of utility facilities in, on, under,
and over the rights-of-way. The standards and provisions shall, among other things, specify those types
of activities that:
(1) Require a utility work permit.
(2) Do not require a utility work permit but must be done in accordance with the standards set
forth in the standards and provisions of this ordinance; and
(3) Are exempt.
The standards and provisions shall also address emergency situations and activities.
(b) It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, repair, or remove any utility facility in the right-of-way in
violation of the standards and provisions adopted pursuant to subsection.
(c) It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, repair, or remove any utility facility in the right-of-way
without a utility work permit if the standards and provisions adopted pursuant to subsection require a
utility work permit for such activities.
(d) Any owner of utility facilities located in the right-of-way shall maintain a map of such facilities.
Sec. 2-4. – Utility pavement/sidewalk cuts.
(a) The Utility Director is authorized to adopt, amend, and repeal standards and provisions
governing the making, excavation, filling, repair, and closing of a utility pavement/sidewalk cut.
The standards and provisions may provide that certain activities may be undertaken only in
accordance with a utility work permit issued pursuant to such standards and provisions. The
standards and provisions shall also address emergency situations and activities.
(b) It shall be unlawful to make, excavate, fill, repair, or close a utility pavement cut in violation of
the standards and provisions adopted pursuant to subsection (a).
(c) It shall be unlawful to make, excavate, fill, repair, or close a utility pavement cut without a utility
work permit if the standards and provisions adopted pursuant to subsection (a) require a permit
for such activities.
Sec. 2-5. – Lane closure/traffic control.
(a) The Utility Director is authorized to adopt, amend, and repeal standards and provisions
governing the closing of any portion of the right-of-way to vehicular, pedestrian or other traffic,
including standards and requirements for warning and controlling traffic including, but not
limited to, development and enforcement of a Work Area Traffic Control Handbook (WATCH).
The standards and provisions may provide that certain closings or traffic warning and control
activities may be undertaken only in accordance with a utility work permit issued pursuant to
such standards and provisions. The standards and provisions shall also address emergency
situations and activities.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to close any portion of the right-of-way to vehicular,
pedestrian, or other traffic in violation of the standards and provisions adopted pursuant to
subsection (a).
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to close any portion of the right-of-way to vehicular,
pedestrian, or other traffic without a utility work permit if the standards and provisions adopted
pursuant to subsection (a) require a utility permit for such closing.
Sec. 2-6. – New Street Designs
(a) Minimum pavement width of new city streets is 22 feet. If curb and gutter is required, then
minimum width is 26’.
(b) Minimum thickness of roads in a residential subdivision is 8” aggregate base course and 2”
asphalt pavement surface.
(c) Minimum thickness of roads in a non-residential subdivision is 12” aggregate base course and 3”
asphalt pavement surface.
(d) All other aspects of street designs shall meet minimum NCDOT standards.
Sec. 2-7. – Curb and Gutter
(a) Curb and gutter is required in these scenarios.
a. Impervious percentage of development is greater than 24%.
b. Property being developed is zoned RM (Residential Mixed) or RM-U (Residential Mixed-
Urban).
c. Average lot width is less than 70 feet.
d. If required by Stormwater Administrator or Engineer.
(b) Mountable curb is the type of curb preferred by the City of Trinity.
Sec. 2-8. – Minimum Distance between Light Poles in New Subdivisions
(a) A new light pole should be located at every intersection and at the end of every road.
(b) If a road is greater than 400 feet long without an intersection or dead end, then a light pole
should be located at the mid-point.
(c) Customized light poles shall be maintained by the Home Owners Association.
Sec. 2-9. – Application for Support Structures/Poles
(a) Application Required: An Application must be filed with the Planning Department for any work
other than normal maintenance on any pole or other support structure, including modification,
change or replacement of equipment that would be different in size, weight or appearance than
the existing equipment.
(b) An Application to Modify or replace a Facility shall contain a copy of the last
(c) False or Misleading Statements. During the application process, or in an application, an
Applicant may not make statements verbally or in writing that are fraudulent, misleading or that
cause or are intended to cause a reasonable probability of confusion or misunderstanding as to
the legal rights, obligations, or options of the City, nor fail to inform the City of a relevant fact
material to the application that is known or should be known by the Applicant, the omission of
which is deceptive or misleading and was intended to be relied upon by the City.
(d) Urgency of work. An Applicant shall not misrepresent the urgency of the work represented in an
Application, including any asserted deadline by which action by the City on the Application is
needed.
(e) Processing Urgent Requests. The City shall attempt to process urgent requests sooner than the
required maximum time allowed by State or federal law. Notwithstanding the preceding,
because of having to re-allocate human resources to accommodate such requests, an Applicant
shall not misrepresent the urgency of the situation to have a Facility(s) permitted or authorized.
It shall be a condition of all Authorizations for an application requesting urgent treatment that
the work shall be completed within ninety (90) calendar days of the issuance of the
Authorization or pay a penalty of $100 per day per Facility until the final inspection is requested,
force majeure situations and situations not reasonably within the control of the Applicant
excepted.
(f) Warehousing of Authorizations and permit(s) not allowed. To prevent Warehousing of
Authorizations and/or permit(s) for new structures in the severely limited and scarce space of
the right-of-way, thereby preventing another person or entity from using a given location(s) and
space because the proposed structure at the location was not built expeditiously, an application
shall contain a proposed date for the completion of the construction or Modification of any
structure, including the placement of equipment attached to or associated with the structure.
The completion date shall not be more than one-hundred-eighty (180) days after the issuance of
a building permit to occupy a given location and space.
(g) Site Visit: Prior to the submittal of an application and following payment of any required expert
assistance fee(s), a site visit to each Facility proposed to be Modified or proposed location of a
new Facility, shall be conducted to determine i) the physical condition of the Facility or
proposed location; and ii) to identify issues of concern, non-compliance with applicable laws,
rules and regulations, including but not limited to any safety-related issues or concerns and
other matters contained in this Ordinance.
(h) Number of Facilities Applied for by a given person or entity: To prevent forced de facto proforma
rubber-stamping approval of an application without meaningful review for compliance
with applicable federal, State and local regulations, and to prevent inadvertent non-compliance
by the City with any federal or state-imposed time requirements for reviewing an application, no
person or entity may make application for more than ten (10) Facilities or locations under this
Ordinance within any thirty (30) consecutive calendar day period.
(i) Facilitating Applications and Mitigating Applicant Costs:
(1) To facilitate the preparation and submittal of an application in compliance with this
Ordinance, and thereby expedite the review and permitting of an application, a preapplication
meeting shall be held, the City’s costs for such being paid for by the Applicant.
(2) To facilitate the application process and to mitigate application-related costs for
Applicants, depending upon the scope of the proposed work and its impact, both visual
and physical as determined by the Department, applications not involving new support
structures may be submitted in groups of up to three (3) Facilities in a single consolidated
application and be subject to only one (1) application fee. Notwithstanding this, no
Application for a new or replacement pole or other support structure shall contain more
than a single location or Facility.
(j) No Unidentified Facilities: No Authorization shall be granted for new support structures, new
equipment or a new Facility that is not expressly and individually identified at the time the
application is filed, including the specific location and design characteristics of each Facility.
(k) No Taxpayer Subsidization: Subscriber rates for services provided using the right-of-way are
assumed to reflect permitting costs. Therefore, City funds shall not directly or indirectly be used
subsidize an Applicant’s reasonable application-related review and permitting costs.
(l) Application Fee: To prevent taxpayer subsidization of application-related costs, an Application
Fee shall be required of all applications involving i) a new or replacement pole(s) or support
structure(s); or ii) any modification or change of existing equipment attached to an existing
pole(s) or support structure(s) that is visually discernable, changes the appearance of the
Facility, changes the structural loading on the support structure or involves compliance with an
aspect of the National Electrical Safety Code (NESC), the National Electrical Code (NEC) or TIA
ANSI 222 not previously applicable to that Facility. The amount of the appropriate Application
Fee shall be as set forth in the City’s Schedule of Fees.
(m) Payment for Legal and/or Expert Assistance: To prevent taxpayer subsidization of applicationrelated
costs as determined to be appropriate and necessary by the Department, Applicants
may be required to place on deposit with the City an amount estimated to be sufficient to pay
for reasonable legal and/or expert assistance costs of the City attributable to the Application.
The minimum amount(s) required shall be as set forth in the City’s Schedule of Fees.
(n) Maximum Permitted Height: Absent a showing by clear and convincing technical or safetyrelated
evidence of the need for a greater specific height for reasons of technical necessity,
technical impracticability, or compliance with applicable safety codes; the maximum permitted
height for new or replacement poles or other support structures in the right-of-way, including
any increases in height of existing structures and poles, shall be forty feet (40’) above preconstruction
ground level. Forty feet is not as-of-right, but is the maximum permitted height,
and shorter, minimally impactful and intrusive poles and support structures shall be preferred.
(o) Minimum Distance Between Poles or other support structures: Absent a showing by clear and
convincing technical evidence of the technical Need for a greater distance between poles or
other support structures in the right-of-way, the minimum distance between poles or other
support structures on the same side of a street as measured in any direction shall be one
hundred feet (100’). This minimum distance shall not be applicable for poles or support
structures that support lines or cables crossing a street or other man-made or natural barrier.
(p) Least Visual Impact. Any equipment attached to a utility pole or other support structure shall be
of a size and be located and constructed to create the least visual impact on the immediate
surrounding area and the least physical intrusion and impact on the limited space in the right-ofway,
including occupying both the least amount of vertical and/or horizontal space reasonably
possible. Absent the demonstration by verifiable clear and convincing technical evidence of the
inability for smaller equipment to be used, no equipment attached to a utility pole or other
support structure of a size large enough to require an Environmental Assessment Analysis and
Report under any federal or State law or rule shall be allowed in the right-of-way.
(1) Excluding cables used to distribute wireline communications service(s) under Title II or
Title IV of 47 U.S.C, unless technologically impracticable, or unless doing so would
prevent compliance with applicable safety codes, any pole-mounted communications
equipment shall be placed inside the pole or support structure, unless such equipment
is able to be attached mid-span to the transmission cable.
(2) If placement inside a pole is physically or technologically impracticable, then, as
determined most appropriate under the facts and circumstances by the Department,
the pole shall i) be replaced in compliance with Section 2-7 of this Section, or ii) the
equipment shall be stealthed or camouflaged to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Department. If a pole is to be attached to, replacement of poles in compliance with (q)
of this Section shall be preferred to stealthing or camouflaging.
(3) New equipment being attached to an existing, otherwise grandfathered pole by a third
party, such shall require the replacement of the pole with an approved type of
structure/pole as set forth in Section 2 of this Ordinance.
(4) Excluding cable, the maximum size of any piece of equipment, such as but not limited to
electric transformers, amplifiers, antennas or other transceivers attached to a pole or
other support structure, shall not exceed three (3) cubic feet in total cumulative volume,
measured as if all components of the equipment were grouped tightly together with no
space between the components.
(5) New & Replacement Poles or Support Structures: An application for a new or
replacement pole or support structure, in addition to all other information required,
must include detailed design characteristics, including material composition, aesthetic
appearance, a detailed site plan and a structural analysis with calculations which must
be certified by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State and be able to be
independently verified using the information submitted by the Applicant. Depending
upon the situation and circumstances involved, to scale photo simulations showing the
Facility as it will appear upon completion showing the Facility from four (4) directions,
each with ninety degrees (90°) azimuth separations may be required.
(6) Lateral Extensions: No lateral equipment extensions parallel to the right-of-way from a
pole or other support structure in the right-of-way, such as but not limited to
equipment standoffs, shall exceed three (3) feet in length.
(7) Riser Cable: All exterior riser or other vertically run cable attached to the exterior of a
pole or other support structure shall be protected with non-conductive, non-degradable
material and shall be of a color that matches the color of the pole or other support
structure as closely as is reasonably possible.
(8) Ground-mounted Equipment and Equipment Enclosures: Absent a showing by clear and
convincing technical evidence of the technical Need for a greater size, nothing larger in
size than seventeen (17) cubic foot enclosure may be placed above-ground in the right-ofway.
(9) Compliance with NESC and NEC: All attachments to poles or other structures in the rightof-
way, and all underground work and Facilities placed underground, shall at all times be
in compliance with the edition of the National Electrical Safety Code (NESC), the National
Electrical Code (NEC), the State Building Code and the Office of Safety Administration
(OSHA) regulations in effect at the later of i) the time the Facility was constructed; ii) the
time of the last modification of equipment on the pole or other support structure; or the
edition in effect at the time of the current application.
(q) New and Replacement Pole Standards:
a. New and replacement poles shall be of a type and style consistent throughout the
City limits, unless, in a given instance, such is demonstrated to be technologically
or Commercially Impracticable by verifiable clear and convincing evidence;
b. When feasible, and in lieu of installing new poles, new installations of equipment
shall precipitate replacing an existing distribution pole, secondary pole or
streetlight with a pole that meets the standards set forth in this §(s) as follow;
c. Installations shall be on non-conductive poles;
d. All antennas must be inside a hollow pole or camouflaged to be indiscernible as
antennas by the average person from 250 feet away;
e. Unless technologically impracticable, equipment attached to poles or other
support structures should utilize a “concealed” design with components and
cabling inside a hollow pole;
f. All radios, network equipment and batteries shall be i) enclosed in a pedestal
cabinet near the pole; ii) in a pole-mounted cabinet; or iii) under a pole-mounted
shroud, all of which must be acceptable to the Department;
g. When feasible and in lieu of installing new poles, new installations shall
precipitate replacing an existing distribution pole, secondary pole or streetlight
with a pole that meets the standards set forth in this Section
h. Equipment installations shall be on poles that meet or exceed current NESC
standards and wind and ice loading requirements of the latest edition of TIA 222;
i. Any new poles installed should be “green” and not leach any volatile organic
compounds or toxic materials into the ground; and
j. To avoid unsightly and unsafe rust and corrosion, any new pole installed shall not
be metal or reinforced concrete.
k. The color of replacement poles throughout the City shall be of a color determined
appropriate by the Department and consistent throughout the City.
Sec 2-10. – Required Design Characteristics within Right-Of-Way
(a) New and replacement installations of a given type shall be consistent throughout the City limits,
and any extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) where this ordinance is of effect;
(b) All new or replacement poles shall be of non-wooden, non-conductive and non-corrodable
materials;
(c) New antennas shall be of a type that disguises the fact that they are antennas, unless for reasons
of proven by verifiable clear and convincing evidence that to do so is technologically
impracticable, in which case a Best-Case type of camouflaging shall be used;
(d) Where not Commercially Impracticable, equipment attached to poles in the PROW shall utilize a
“concealed” design, including all cabling being inside a hollow pole;
(e) Any ground-mounted enclosures shall be i) no larger than is technologically Necessary, but in no
case larger than eighteen(18) cubic feet in volume; ii) of a color determined by the Department
to be harmonious with the particular area; iii) located as near the pole as applicable safety codes
allow; and v) screened with evergreen shrubbery of sufficient size to hide the equipment shelter
and, if the PROW is landscaped with decorative vegetation, of the same species, color, size and
shape as is used to landscape the PROW in the neighborhood of the pole;
(f) pole-mounted cabinets shall be as small as possible, but no larger than is technologically
Necessary and reasonably possible, and shall be shielded from view in both directions parallel to
the PROW by decorative, non-commercial banners or under a pole-mounted shroud;
(g) Unless proven unfeasible or commercially impracticable by clear and convincing evidence, any
proposed new attachment to an existing wooden distribution pole, secondary electrical pole or
streetlight in the PROW shall, instead, replace the existing pole with a pole as described in this
subsection;
(h) All new poles shall meet or exceed current NESC standards and wind and ice loading
requirements of the latest version of ANSI 222 Version G;
(i) Any new poles installed shall be “green”, not of wood, and not leach any volatile organic
compounds or toxic materials into the ground; and
(j) To avoid unsightly rust and corrosion, any new pole installed shall not be metal or reinforced
concrete.
Sec. 2-11. – Additional violations.
(a) Except in an emergency, it shall be unlawful to authorize a contractor to perform work regulated
by this article without first registering such contractor with the city.
(b) If a contractor is performing work on a utility facility in the right-of-way, it shall be unlawful for
the contractor to fail or refuse to properly identify the Utility on whose behalf the contractor is
performing the work when requested to do so by the director/engineer.
(c) If a subcontractor is performing work on a utility facility in the right-of-way, it shall be unlawful
for the subcontractor to fail or refuse to properly identify the contractor on whose behalf the
subcontractor is performing the work when requested to do so by the director/engineer.
Sec. 2-12. – Restoration of Surrounding Areas.
(a) Obligation to restore disturbed areas. A person or User that conducts excavation or other activities
that disturb the right-of-way or Facilities within the right-of-way, shall restore the right-of-way to a
condition equivalent to that prior to the disturbance. The restoration shall include, but is not limited
to, installation of pavement, resurfacing nearby or adjacent areas, grading any disturbed unpaved
surface areas, restoring below ground Facilities, planting and landscaping, replacing curb ramps to
current standards, and repairing improvements and Facilities. Restoration shall meet the standards
set by the Utility Department. To maintain the nature and character of the area prior to the person's
or User's work, the Utility Department may also require restoration of areas that have not been
disturbed if it is necessary to restore the disturbed areas to a similar condition and appearance as
existed prior to the person's or User's work.
(b) Timetable for Restoration. The Utility Department shall determine the time period during which
restoration must be accomplished on an individual case-by-case basis and such time period shall
take into account the extent of the restoration work required.
(c) Reimbursement to City of costs of restoration. If a User or other person responsible for damage to
the right-of-way does not complete required restoration during the period required by the Utility
Department, the City may complete the restoration. The costs shall be promptly reimbursed by the
User or the person directing the original work that required restoration of the right-of-way.
Sec. 2-13. – Fees and deposits.
Permit and other regulatory and nonregulatory use fees, including but not limited to utility rightof-
way permit fee, utility work permit fees, street cut patch fees, and pavement degradation fees, to be
charged for the governmental activities undertaken pursuant to this division shall be established and
revised in accordance with section 2-1.
A cash deposit, letter of credit or warranty bond may be required in an amount prescribed by
the city to guarantee the completion of work in accordance with all rules and regulations.
ARTICLE 3. – ENFORCEMENT AND APPEALS
Sec. 3-1. – Administration and enforcement.
(a) This article shall be administered and enforced by the director/engineer.
(b) A violation of this article shall not constitute a misdemeanor or infraction punishable under
G.S. 14-4. Any person who violates this article may be subject to all civil and equitable
remedies stated in G.S. 160A-175. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the violation of a stop work
order issued pursuant to section 19-338 shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable under
G.S. 14-4.
Sec. 3-2. – Civil penalties.
The following civil penalties are established:
(1) Violation of subsection 2-3(b)…. $ 100.00
(2) Violation of subsection 2-3(c)…. $ 1,000.00
(3) Violation of subsection 2-4(b)…. $ 100.00
(4) Violation of subsection 2-4(c)…. $ 1000.00
(5) Violation of subsection 2-5(b)…. $ 100.00
(6) Violation of subsection 2-5(c)…. $ 1,000.00
Civil penalties authorized by this section may be assessed against the utility on whose behalf
work is being performed and against the contractor or subcontractor who is performing a such work.
Billings not paid within 30 days will be assessed a late fee of one percent of the unpaid balance
Per month.
Sec. 3-3. – Administrative enforcement.
(a) Stop work orders. A stop work order shall be in writing, state the work to be stopped, state the
reasons therefore, and state the conditions under which the work may be resumed. A stop
work order may be issued for:
(1) Working in the right-of-way without a valid and unexpired utility right-of-way master
permit or unrevoked and unexpired franchise issued by the city as required by section 2-
1;
(2) Use of a contractor that has not been registered with the city other than in an
emergency;
(3) Violation of Section 2-4 through 2-11.
(5) Failure to comply with subsection 2-3(b) within a reasonable period after notification of
such non-compliance;
(6) Failure to comply with subsection 2-5(b) within a reasonable period after notification of
such non-compliance;
(b) Permit denials. The city may refuse to issue utility work permits required by this article to a
utility that does not possess a valid and unexpired utility right-of-way permit or unrevoked and
unexpired franchise as required by ARTICLE 2 or to a utility that is in violation of the terms and
conditions of a utility right-of-way permit or franchise.
The city may refuse to issue utility work permits required by this article in a utility that has not
paid civil penalties within 45 days after the date the penalties were assessed if the company has not
appealed the assessment, or within 45 days of a final decision on appeal.
The city may refuse to issue utility work permits required by this article to a utility that has not
paid costs assessed pursuant to subsection (c) within 45 days of the assessment.
(c) Cost of remediation. In the event that a utility fails to properly repair and restore the right-ofway
as required by this article, the city may provide of the repair and restoration and charge the
cost to the utility.
Sec. 3-4 - Appeals.
(a) Any person whose utility work permit application has been denied or who has been assessed a
civil penalty may appeal such decision within ten days after notice of such denial or civil penalty
assessment. A utility that has been charged repair and restoration costs pursuant to subsection
2-3(c) may appeal such decision within ten days after the city invoices such charge. Appeals
shall be heard by the city manager or the city manager’s designee who shall not be an employee
of the utility department. The appellant shall have the right to present evidence at said hearing.
(b) Any person may appeal the decision by the City Manager to the City of Trinity City Council. The
appellant shall have the right to present evidence at said hearing
(c) A ruling on appeal is subject to review in the Superior Court of Randolph County by proceedings
in the nature of certiorari. Any petition for writ of certiorari for review shall be filled with the
clerk of superior court within 30 days after notice of the decision has been sent to the appellant.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Table of Contents i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(As Amended: 6.11.18)
Trinity Zoning Ordinance
Page
Article I Short Title, Authority, and Effective Date ................................................... 1-1
Sec. 1-1 Short Title ....................................................................................................... 1-1
Sec. 1-2 Authority ......................................................................................................... 1-1
Sec. 1-3 Effective Date ................................................................................................ 1-1
Article II Jurisdiction ..................................................................................................... 2-1
Sec. 2-1 Territorial Application .................................................................................... 2-1
Sec. 2-2 Bona Fide Farm Uses Exempt ........................................................................ 2-1
Article III Interpretation of Words and Terms ........................................................... 3-1
Sec. 3-1 Interpretation of Commonly used Words and Terms ..................................... 3-1
Article IV Definitions ..................................................................................................... 4-1
Article V Application of Regulations .......................................................................... 5-1
Sec. 5-1 Zoning Affects Every Building and Use ......................................................... 5-1
Sec. 5-2 Reduction of Lot and Yard Areas Prohibited ................................................. 5-1
Sec. 5-3 Lot of Record .................................................................................................. 5-1
Sec. 5-4 Relationship of Building to Lot ...................................................................... 5-1
Sec. 5-5 Required Open Space Not Used for Other Building ....................................... 5-1
Sec. 5-6 Road Access .................................................................................................... 5-1
Sec. 5-7 Buildings and Land Used for Permitted Uses ................................................. 5-2
Article VI Establishment of Districts and District Boundaries................................... 6-1
Sec. 6-1 Use District Names ......................................................................................... 6-1
Sec. 6-2 District Boundaries Shown on Zoning Map ................................................... 6-1
Sec. 6-3 Due Consideration Given to District Boundaries ........................................... 6-1
Sec. 6-4 Rules Governing Interpretation of District Boundaries .................................. 6-1
Article VII Description and Purposes of Districts ......................................................... 7-1
Sec. 7-1 RA Residential Agricultural District .............................................................. 7-1
Sec. 7-2 R-40 Residential District ................................................................................ 7-2
Sec. 7-3 R-20 Residential District ................................................................................ 7-3
Sec. 7-4 R-12 Residential District ................................................................................ 7-4
Sec. 7-5 R-10 Residential District …………………………………………………….7-5
Sec. 7-6 Mixed Residential District .............................................................................. 7-6
Sec. 7-7 Residential Mixed - Urban .............................................................................. 7-7
Sec. 7-8 O&I Office and Institutional District………………………………………..7-8
Sec. 7-9 HC Highway Commercial .............................................................................. 7-9
Sec. 7-10 M-1 Heavy Manufacturing District .............................................................. 7-10
Sec. 7-11 M-2 Light Manufacturing District ................................................................ 7-11
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Table of Contents ii
Sec. 7-12 Overlay District – Establishment and Requirements .................................... 7-12
A. MHO Manufactured home Overlay District for
Manufactured Home Subdivisions ......................................................... 7-12
Sec. 7-13 Conditional Zoning ....................................................................................... 7-13
Sec. 7-14 Permitted Uses in Zoning Districts ............................................................... 7-14
Table of Permitted Uses ................................................................................ 7-14
Sec. 7-15 Development Standards for Particular Uses – Notes
To Table of Permitted Uses .......................................................................... 7-22
Article VIII Special Uses ................................................................................................... 8-1
Sec. 8-1 Objectives and Purposes .................................................................................. 8-1
Sec. 8-2 Application ..................................................................................................... 8-1
Sec. 8-3 Planning Board Review, Notice, Recommendations ...................................... 8-1
Sec. 8-4 City Council Hearing; Notice; Action ............................................................ 8-3
Sec. 8-5 Appeal of Decisions ........................................................................................ 8-3
Sec. 8-6 Failure to Comply with Plans or Conditions ................................................... 8-3
Sec. 8-7 Regulations for Special Use Permits............................................................... 8-3
Adult Establishments ......................................................................... 8-5
Apartments ......................................................................................... 8-7
Athletic Fields, Swim and Tennis Clubs,
Community Centers, Parks and Playgrounds, Campgrounds ............ 8-9
Automobile Car Wash ..................................................................... 8-10
Bed and Breakfast, Rooming House ................................................ 8-11
Cemeteries (as a principal use) ........................................................ 8-12
Churches and Religious Congregations with Their
Customary Accessory Uses ............................................................. 8-13
Condominiums ................................................................................. 8-14
Day Care Child or Adult, as Principal Use ...................................... 8-19
Electronic Gaming Operations…………………………………….8-20
Emergency Services ......................................................................... 8-22
Fairs and Carnivals (including community and nonprofit) .............. 8-23
Golf Courses .................................................................................... 8-24
Group Care Facility (Group Home) ................................................. 8-25
Junkyards ......................................................................................... 8-26
Land Clearing & Inert Debris Landfill (Minor) ............................... 8-27
Land Clearing & Inert Debris Landfill (Major) ............................... 8-28
Manufactured Home Parks .............................................................. 8-29
Requirements Applicable to All Manufactured Home
Park Owners and Criteria Applicable to All Homes in
Manufactured Home Parks .............................................................. 8-34
Manufactured Home, Boat, Travel Trailer, Camper
And Recreational Vehicle Sales and Service ................................... 8-36
Mini Warehouses ............................................................................. 8-37
Nursing Homes, Assisted Living ..................................................... 8-38
Planned Building Groups, Commercial or Industrial ...................... 8-39
Public Utility Facilities and Substations .......................................... 8-40
Radio Controlled Race Car Tracks .................................................. 8-41
Reception Facility ............................................................................ 8-42
Recycling Convenience Site ............................................................ 8-43
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Table of Contents iii
Retail and Membership Warehouses Over 25,000
Square feet ....................................................................................... 8-44
Service Stations, Convenience Stores with Gas Pumps ................... 8-45
Schools, Elementary or Secondary .................................................. 8-46
Shooting Range (Outdoor) ............................................................... 8-47
Solar Energy Systems Level 2 (Solar Farms)……………………...8-48
Storage of Above Ground Bulk Oil or Petroleum
For Wholesale or Retail Distribution ............................................... 8-50
Telecommunications Towers, Radio or Television Towers ............ 8-51
Townhouse Development ................................................................ 8-52
Veterinary Clinic and Kennels with Outdoor Runs ......................... 8-55
Article IX Nonconformities ............................................................................................ 9-1
Sec. 9-1 Purpose and Intent .......................................................................................... 9-1
Sec. 9-2 Nonconforming Lots of Record ...................................................................... 9-1
Sec. 9-3 Nonconforming Uses of Land ......................................................................... 9-1
Sec. 9-4 Nonconforming uses of Structures ................................................................. 9-2
Sec. 9-5 Nonconforming Structures .............................................................................. 9-3
Sec. 9-6 Repairs and Maintenance ................................................................................ 9-3
Sec. 9-7 Nonconformities Created by Changes in Zoning
Boundaries or Regulations ............................................................................. 9-3
Sec. 9-8 Nonconforming Signs………………………………………………………..9-3
Article X Zoning Vested Rights.................................................................................. 10-1
Sec. 10-1 Vested right Conferred .................................................................................. 10-1
Sec. 10-2 Obtaining A Vested Right ............................................................................. 10-1
Sec. 10-3 Term ......................................................................................................... 10-1
Sec. 10-4 Zoning Permit Required ................................................................................ 10-1
Sec. 10-5 Application for a Zoning Permit with vested Rights .................................... 10-1
Sec. 10-6 Action by City Council ................................................................................. 10-2
Sec. 10-7 Violations ...................................................................................................... 10-3
Sec. 10-8 Other Ordinances Apply ............................................................................... 10-3
Sec. 10-9 Changes or Amendments .............................................................................. 10-3
Sec. 10-10 Status at Expiration of Term ......................................................................... 10-3
Sec. 10-11 Annexation Declaration ................................................................................ 10-3
Article X1 Signs ......................................................................................................... 11-1
Sec. 11-1 Intent ......................................................................................................... 11-1
Sec. 11-2 General Limitations on All Signs ................................................................. 11-2
Sec. 11-3 Prohibited Signs ............................................................................................ 11-2
Sec. 11-4 Signs Not Authorized in All Zoning Districts .............................................. 11-3
Sec. 11-5 Signs Requiring A Permit ............................................................................ 11-4
Sec. 11-6 Permit Application ........................................................................................ 11-4
Sec. 11-7 Signs Permitted in Agricultural and Residential Districts ............................ 11-5
Sec. 11-8 Signs Permitted in O-I, HC, RM-U, M-1 and M-2 ....................................... 11-6
Sec. 11-9 Temporary Signs ........................................................................................... 11-8
Sec.11-10 Sign Area and Height Limitations .............................................................. 11-10
Sec. 11-11 Calculating Area and Number .................................................................... 11-10
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Table of Contents iv
Article XII Area, Yard and Height Requirements ...................................................... 12-1
Sec. 12-1 Front yard Averaging .................................................................................... 12-1
Sec. 12-2 Height Limitations ........................................................................................ 12-2
Sec. 12-3 Visibility at Intersections .............................................................................. 12-1
Sec. 12-4 Table of Area, Yard and Height Requirements ............................................ 12-2
Article XIII Parking and Transportation ...................................................................... 13-1
Sec. 13-1 General Off-Street Parking. Requirements ................................................... 13-1
Sec. 13–2 Parking for Unlisted Uses ............................................................................. 13-1
Sec. 13-3 Parking Requirements for Change in Use ..................................................... 13-1
Sec. 13-4 Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements ................................................. 13-2
Table 13.4 Off-Street Parking Requirements ................................................ 13-2
Sec. 13-5 Off-Street Loading and Unloading Space ..................................................... 13-5
Sec. 13-6 Design Standards for Parking Stacking and Loading ................................... 13-5
Table 13-6 Parking Spaces Geometric Design Standards ............................. 13-7
Sec. 13-7 Alternatives and Incentives ........................................................................... 13-8
Sec. 13-8 Sidewalks, Multi-Use Paths, Bike Lanes .................................................... 13-10
Sec. 13-9 Traffic Analysis .......................................................................................... 13-11
Sec 13-10 Curb and Gutter .......................................................................................... 13-11
Sec. 13-11 General Parking Requirements .................................................................. 13-11
Article XIV Buffering and Landscaping Requirements ............................................... 14-1
Sec. 14-1 Purpose of Buffering Requirements.............................................................. 14-1
Sec. 14-2 Buffering Between Zoning Districts and/or Uses ......................................... 14-1
Sec. 14-3 Landscaping for the Business District .......................................................... 14-2
Sec. 14-4 Buffering Between Single Family Housing and
Planned Developments ................................................................................. 14-2
Sec. 14-5 Buffering for Off-Street Parking Areas ........................................................ 14-2
Sec. 14-6 Protection of Existing Trees and Required Buffer Strips ............................. 14-2
Sec. 14-7 Maintenance of Buffering ............................................................................. 14-3
Sec. 14-8 Documentation and Variances ...................................................................... 14-3
Article XV Zoning Administrator, Permits Required and
Enforcement ................................................................................................ 15-1
Sec. 15-1 Zoning Administrator ................................................................................... 15-1
Sec. 15-2 Duties of Zoning Administrator .................................................................... 15-1
Sec. 15-3 Questions of Enforcement and Interpretation ............................................... 15-1
Sec. 15-4 Permits and Required Submissions ............................................................... 15-2
Sec. 15-5 Violations ...................................................................................................... 15-2
Sec. 15-6 Enforcement Procedure ................................................................................. 15-3
Article XVI Planning Board, Board of Adjustment and
Role of the City Council in Planning ......................................................... 16-1
Sec. 16-1 Planning Board ............................................................................................. 16-1
Sec. 16-2 Board of Adjustment Created ....................................................................... 16-1
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Table of Contents v
Sec. 16-3 Voting ......................................................................................................... 16-2
Sec. 16-4 Procedures of the Board of Adjustment ........................................................ 16-2
Sec. 16-5 Appeals from Decisions of the Zoning Administrator ................................. 16-2
Sec. 16-6 Appeal Stays All Proceedings ....................................................................... 16-3
Sec. 16-7 Powers and Duties of the Board of Adjustment ............................................ 16-3
Sec. 16-8 Variances – Determinations and Findings .................................................... 16-3
Sec. 16-9 Rehearings .................................................................................................... 16-4
Sec. 16-10 Review by Certiorari ..................................................................................... 16-4
Sec. 16-11 Decisions of the Board of Adjustment .......................................................... 16-4
Sec. 16-12 Role of City Council in Planning .................................................................. 16-4
Article XVII Amendments and Changes ......................................................................... 17-1
Sec. 17-1 Motion to Amend .......................................................................................... 17-1
Sec. 17-2 Protest Against Amendment ......................................................................... 17-2
Article XVIII Legal Provisions .......................................................................................... 18-1
Sec. 18-1 Interpretation, Purpose and Conflict ............................................................. 18-1
Sec. 18-2 Validity ......................................................................................................... 18-1
Sec. 18-3 Remedies ....................................................................................................... 18-1
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 1-1
ARTICLE I
SHORT TITLE, AUTHORITY AND EFFECTIVE DATE
Section 1-1. Short Title.
This ordinance shall be known as “The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Trinity, North Carolina,” and the
map referred to which is identified by the title “Official Zoning Map, Trinity, North Carolina,” shall be
known as the “Zoning Map.”
Section 1-2 Authority
Pursuant to authority granted by Article 19, Chapter 160A of the General Statutes of North Carolina, and
for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals and general welfare; promoting the orderly
development of the community; lessening congestion in the roads and streets; securing safety from fire,
panic, and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land; avoiding
undue concentration of population; and facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements, all in accordance with a well considered
comprehensive plan.
Section 1-3. Effective Date.
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and adoption and repeals all
prior ordinances or portions of ordinances in conflict herewith.
Duly adopted by the City Council of the City of Trinity, State of North Carolina, on this the _____ day of
__________, ______.
ATTEST:
_______________________________________
_
City Clerk
_________________________________________
_
Mayor
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 2-1
ARTICLE II
JURISDICTION
Section 2-1. Territorial Application.
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply within the corporate limits of the City of Trinity and within
any area adjacent to the City limits within which the City may exercise extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Section 2-2. Bona Fide Farm Uses Exempt.
The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to bona fide farm uses. Bona fide farm purposes
include production and activities relating to or incidental to production of crops, fruits, vegetables,
ornamental and flowering plants, dairy, livestock, poultry and all other forms of agricultural products
having a domestic or foreign market. (See G.S.153A-340(b)).
This ordinance does not exercise any controls over crop lands, timber lands, pasture lands, idle or other
farm lands, nor over any farm house, barn, poultry house, or other farm buildings, including tenant or
other houses for persons working on said farms, as long as such houses shall be in the same ownership as
the farm and located on the farm.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 3-1
ARTICLE III
INTERPRETATION OF WORDS AND TERMS
For the purpose of interpreting this Ordinance, certain words and terms are herein defined. The following
words shall, for the purpose of this Ordinance have the meaning herein indicated.
Section 3-1. Interpretation of Commonly Uses Terms & Words.
A) Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
B) Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural number include
the singular, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise.
C) The word “person” includes a firm, association, corporation, trust and company, as well as an
individual.
D) The words “used for” shall include the meaning “designed for.”
E) The word “structure” shall include the word “buildings” and the word “sign.”
F) The word “lot” shall include the words “plot,” “parcel,” or “tract.”
G) The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 4-1
ARTICLE IV
DEFINITIONS
NOTE: Definitions in the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance are not included in this section, as they
are defined in the Code of Federal Regulations and may vary from these definitions adopted by the
Trinity City Council for interpretation of the zoning, subdivision and storm water ordinances.
Access Lot: A lot having lake or river frontage and road frontage which offers lake frontage and/or lake
access to those lots not having direct lake frontage within a lake front subdivision.
Access Corridors: A strip of land lying between the side lot boundary lines of lake front lots offering
access to lots one lot depth away from the water's edge.
Accessory Use: A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and location
on the same lot with such principal use or building. Accessory buildings are not permitted on lots absent a
principal structure.
Adult Day Care: Relating to or providing supervision and facilities for senior adult persons primarily
during the day. Care may include, but not be limited to, recreational activities, food preparation/dining,
orthopedic exercise and physical therapy.
Adult Establishment: The definition of "adult establishments" for purposes of this ordinance shall be
consistent with Chapter 14, Article 26A of the N.C. General Statutes as currently written or hereafter
amended. Adult establishments include adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini motion
pictures, adult live entertainment business and massage businesses as those terms are defined by G.S.14-
202.10, and adult motels and adult cabarets.
"Adult motel" is defined as a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that: (a) offers
accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit
television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions that depict or describe "specified sexual activities," or "specified anatomical areas"
as one of its principal business purposes; or (b) offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of
time that is less than ten hours; or (c) allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subagent
the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.
"Adult Cabaret" is defined as a nightclub, bar, restaurant or other commercial establishment
that regularly features, exhibits or displays as one of its principal business purposes: (a) persons
who appear nude or semi-nude, or (b) live performances which are characterized by the exposure
of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities," or (c) films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which depict or describe "specified
anatomical areas."
Adult Motion Picture Theater: An enclosed building or outdoor premises used for presenting
motion pictures, a preponderance of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to sexual activities or anatomical areas. Adult Video/Book
Store: A video/book store: a. which receives a majority of its gross income during any calendar
year from the sale or rental of publications which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to sexual activities or anatomical area, or b.
having a preponderance of its publications, books, magazines and other periodicals which are
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 4-2
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting or relating to sexual
activities or anatomical areas.
Alley: A roadway which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting properly.
Alterations: The word "alteration" shall include any of the following:
a. Any addition to the height or depth of a building;
b. Any change in the location of any of the exterior walls of a building;
c. Any increase in the interior accommodations of a building.
Animated Signs: Any sign that uses or light or any other material to make it appear to move or have life
in the display.
Apartment: A room or suite of one (1) or more rooms in a multi-family residence (three or more
dwelling units) intended for use as a place of residence of a single-family or a group of individuals living
together as a single housekeeping unit.
Automobile Service Station: A building or structure or where gasoline or other fuel, stored in tanks, is
dispensed directly to motor vehicle users. The following activities are included as accessory uses to a
service station: dispensing oil, grease, antifreeze, tires, batteries, and automobile accessories directly to
motor vehicle users; tuning motors, minor wheel and brake adjustment, waxing and polishing and other
minor servicing and repair to the extent of installation of the items listed above; and washing of
automobiles. All other activities shall be prohibited, including, but not limited to, upholstering work, auto
glass work, painting, welding, tire recapping, storage of automobiles not in operating condition, auto
dismantling and auto sales.
Banners: A long strip of flexible material displaying a slogan, advertisement, etc. The material is
suspended in the air by 2 to 4 points. A banner shall have no tears, be folded, or touching the ground.
Bed and Breakfast (Tourist Home): Any dwelling occupied by the owner or operator in which rooms
are rented for lodging of travelers for compensation.
Board of Adjustment: The City Council will act as a quasi-judicial board empowered to hear appeals from
decisions of the Zoning Administrator and grant variances under the Zoning Ordinance, and to grant
minor variances from provisions of the Stormwater Ordinance.
Bona Fide Farm -Bona fide farm purposes include production and activities relating to or incidental to
production of crops, fruits, vegetables, ornamental and flowering plants, dairy, livestock, poultry and all
other forms of agricultural products having a domestic or foreign market.
Buffer (and screen): A horizontal distance between uses that provides a functional and visual separation.
Buffer strip: A solid fence or wall, or a planted strip at least ten (10) feet in width composed of living
deciduous and/or evergreen trees spaced not more than ten (10) feet apart, and not less than one (1) row of
dense, living evergreen shrubs spaced not more than five (5) feet apart, which shall be established and
maintained in perpetuity by the owner of property when a buffer is required under this ordinance.
Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls; and intended for shelter, housing or
enclosure of animals.
Building
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 4-3
Accessory: A subordinate building, whose use is incidental to that of a principal building on the
same lot.
Principal: The building in which the lot’s principal use is conducted.
Building Setback Line: A line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the main portion of
any building and the street or highway right-of-way line when measured perpendicularly thereto. Covered
porches, patios and carports, whether enclosed or unenclosed, shall be considered as a part of the main
building and shall not project into the required yard.
Cemetery: A place for burial of the dead. A cemetery can be a combination of one or more of the
following, in a place used or to be used and dedicated or designated for such purposes:
a) a burial park for earth interment;
b) a mausoleum for burial above the ground;
c) a columbarium, a structure substantially above the ground, for interment of the cremated
remains of a deceased person.
Certificate of Occupancy: A statement, signed by an administrative officer, setting forth that the
building, structure or use compiles with this ordinance and that the same may be used for the purposes
stated therein.
Clerk of Superior Court: Clerk of Superior Court of Randolph County, North Carolina.
Concrete Monuments: Concrete monuments shall be as described on page 20 of the Manual of Practice
for Land Surveying, with the exception that they may have a 611 center steel pin extending 1/21' above
the surface of the top of the monument. At least one monument in the boundary of each subdivision
should contain a metal plat.
Condominium Development: Two or more single units in a multi-unit structure with common areas and
facilities on one tract of land. Unit owners own only the interior portion or their unit and accessory space,
and have an undivided interest in the common areas and facilities. Residential condominiums are
considered multi-family developments.
Dedication: A gift, by the owner, of his property to another party without any consideration being given
for the transfer. Since a transfer of property is involved, the dedication is made by written instrument and
is completed with an acceptance.
Driveway: An access, with no specified development standards, to a single lot from either a public or
private roadway.
Dwelling Unit: A room or group of rooms forming a single independent habitable unit with facilities used
or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating by one family; for owner occupancy or for
rental, lease or other occupancy on a weekly or longer basis, and containing independent cooking,
sanitary and sleeping facilities.
Dwelling, Single Family: A detached building containing one dwelling unit. There is a
minimum square footage for these homes depending which zone they are in. For more detail, go
to Section 7-1 through 7-7. This square footage is only for primary homes, accessory homes are
regulated in Section 7-14.
Dwelling, Two Family: A detached building containing two dwelling units.
Dwelling, Multi-Family: A building containing three or more dwelling units.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 4-4
Electronic Changeable Copy Sign: Any sign on which the copy changes automatically on a lampbank,
such that the message or display does not run continuously in the travel mode and any message or display
remains stationary for a minimum of five seconds. Any sign on which the message or display runs
continuously in the travel mode and/or on which any message or display does not remain stationary for a
minimum of five seconds shall be considered a flashing sign.
Electronic Gaming Operations: Any business enterprise, as a principle use, where persons
utilize electronic machines, including, but not limited to computers and gaming terminals, to
conduct games including but not limited to sweepstakes, and where cash, merchandise, or other
items of value are redeemed or otherwise distributed, whether or not the value of such
distribution is determined by electronic games or by predetermined odds. Electronic gaming
operations may include, but are not limited to, internet cafés, internet sweepstakes, electronic
gaming/machine operations, or cybercafés otherwise meeting the preceding definition. This
definition does not include any lottery endorsed, approved, or sponsored by the State of North
Carolina.
Family: Any number of related persons living together as a single housekeeping unit.
Family Care Home: A home defined and described in Article 3 of GS 168 as having support and
supervisory personnel, that provides room and board, personal care and habitation services in a family
environment for not more than six resident handicapped persons. A handicapped person is defined as
person with a temporary or permanent physical emotional or mental disability including but not limited to
mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, hearing and sight impairments, emotional
disturbances and orthopedic impairments but not including mentally ill persons who are dangerous to
others as defined in GS 122-58.2(l)(b).
Fence: An outdoor structure placed around all or part of a parcel of land constructed of masonry, metal,
plastic or wood which provides either a physical barrier or visual screen.
Fence, Temporary: Any temporary fencing on, in, or around a construction site shall be installed
to keep erosion from leaving the site. Temporary fencing shall not remain in place longer than is
necessary to perform its function. Common forms of temporary fencing include plastic silt
fences, panels constructed steel or wire, or any fence deemed temporary by the City of Trinity
Planning Director. If no construction is being performed on the site after 15 days, the temporary
fence shall be removed. Temporary fencing is not permitted as permanent fencing.
Flashing Sign: Any sign which gives off light in intermittent bursts at a rate that is faster than 5 seconds.
Flea Market: Sales area (indoors or outdoors) in which space is set aside or rented, and which is intended
for use by one or more individuals to sell a variety of articles such as those which are either homemade,
handcrafted, used, old or obsolete.
Foot-candle: A quantitative unit measuring the amount of light cast onto a given point, measured as one
(1) lumen per square foot.
Frontage: All the property abutting on one (1) side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets,
measured along the street line.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 4-5
Garage, Private: An accessory structure used for storage, primarily of motor vehicles.
Garage, Repair: A garage in which machinery operated by mechanical power is installed which is
designed for making major repairs to motor vehicles.
Governmental Services:
1. City Owned and/or Operated Facilities and Services: Land, government offices, buildings,
structures and other facilities owned and/or operated by the City for providing typical and
customary governmental services. Such services may or may not be delivered directly at the
same site on which the buildings and facilities are located. Related activities and structures
(above or below ground) typically associated with these uses and accessory to their operation
include, but are not to, offices, utility facilities, indoor/outdoor storage and parking.
Greenways: A series of independent and interconnected paths, officially designated by the City, that will
allow bikers, walkers, joggers, etc., to go from one area of the City to another without driving their car or
using City roads or streets.
Gross Floor Area: The interior floor area of a building exclusive of stairways, storage, closets, and
elevators shafts.
Group Home: A residential facility for not more than 12 persons licensed by the State of North Carolina,
by whatever name it is called (e.g. domiciliary home, home for the aged, rest home, etc.) other than a
"family care home" as defined by this ordinance, which has support and supervisory personnel and which
provides room, board and personal care in a family or group setting. Refer to GS 131 D-2.
Guest Home (Tourist Home): Any dwelling occupied by the owner or operator in which rooms are
rented for lodging or transients and travelers for compensation.
Home Occupation: Any use conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the occupants thereof
which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does
not change the character thereof, and in connection with which there is no display and no more than one
(1) person, not a resident on the premises, is employed specifically in connection with the home
occupation. A home occupation shall comply with the following criteria:
• It shall occupy no more than 25% percent of the gross floor area of a dwelling unit.
• No outside storage or display of items associated with the home occupation is permitted.
• Signage identifying a home occupation may not be illuminated is limited to one wall or
one freestanding sign per zoning lot and a maximum display surface of four (4) square
feet. A permit is required as provided by Article 11 Signs.
• The home occupation must be conducted entirely within a dwelling unit.
• Only one person may be employed who is not an occupant of the residence.
• Activities shall not generate traffic, parking, noise, odors, or electrical interference
beyond what normally occurs in the zoning district.
• Instruction in music, dancing, art or similar subjects shall be limited to no more than five
(5) students at one time.
• Permitted home occupations include, but are not limited to: typing services, telephone
sales, barber/beauty services, doctor/dentist office, architects, accountants, music and art
lessons, state licensed family day care (5 or fewer persons), food catering, and
handcrafting, etc.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 4-6
Hotel and Motel: A building, or other structure which is used, kept maintained, advertised as or held out
to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are supplied for pay to transient or permanent
guests or tenants, in which ten (10) or more rooms are furnished for the accommodation of such guests;
and having or not having one (1) or more dining rooms, restaurants, or cafes where meals or lunches are
served to such transients or permanent guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms,
restaurants, or cafes, if existing, being conducted in the same building or buildings in connection
therewith.
Impervious Area: Is a surface composed of any material that impedes or prevents natural infiltration of
water into the soil. Impervious surfaces may include, but are not limited to roofs, streets, parking areas,
tennis courts, driveways, patios, sidewalks, or any concrete, asphalt or compacted gravel surface. Public
roads are excluded from computations of impervious area.
Indoor Shooting Range: Facility that’s primary reason is the shooting of firearms, bows, and cross-bows
at, or in conjunction with, both for-profit and non-profit facilities. It does not include incidental target
practice by individuals on private property.
• Shall conform to NRA Guidelines, The National Institute of Building Sciences for Firing
Ranges, and the Department of Energy Range Design Criteria.
Junked Motor Vehicle: A motor vehicle that is partially dismantled or wrecked cannot be self-propelled
or moved in the manner originally intended and does not display a current license plate.
Junkyard: The use of more than six-hundred (600) square feet of any lot for the storage of junk (as
defined below) for more than 15 days, including scrap metals or other scrap materials or the dismantling
or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery.
“Junkyard” shall also include the term “automobile graveyard” as defined in G.S.136-143(1) or hereafter
amended: Any establishment or place of business which is maintained, used, or operated for storing,
keeping, buying or selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle
parts. Any establishment or place of business upon which six (6) or more unlicensed, used motor vehicles
which cannot be operated under their own power are kept or stored for a period of fifteen days or more.
The term “junk” shall mean old scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste,
or junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, or parts thereof, iron, steel, and other old scrap ferrous or
nonferrous material.
Landfill-Land Clearing and Inert Debris (LCID): A disposal site for stumps, limbs, leaves, concrete,
brick, untreated wood and uncontaminated earth. Disposal of any other types of wastes must be approved
by the State Division of Solid Waste Management.
Land Development Plan: A long range plan for the desirable use of land in Trinity which has been
adopted by the Trinity City Council. The purpose of the plan is to serve as a guide in the zoning of land,
in the subdividing and use of undeveloped land, and in the acquisition of rights-of-way or sites for public
purposes such as parks, public buildings, streets.
Landfill, Sanitary: A place where trash and garbage are disposed of by compacting and covering with
earth at the end of each day of operation.
Lot: A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted
to a common use, together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same and
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 4-7
which is intended as a unit for transfer of ownership. The word "lot" includes the words "peat" or
"parcel."
Corner Lot: A lot abutting upon two streets at their intersections. The street line forming
the least frontage shall be deemed the front of the lot.
Double-Frontage Lot: A continuous (through) lot which is accessible from both of the
parallel street upon which it fronts.
Lot Depth: The depth of a lot is the mean distance of the lines of the lot measured from the
midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line.
Lot Front: That part of the lot adjacent to the street or land access.
Lot of Record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the
office of the Register of Deeds of Randolph County, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the
description of which has been so recorded.
Lot Width: The distance between side lot lines measures at the building setback line.
Reverse Frontage Lot: A continuous (through) lot which is accessible from only one of the
parallel streets upon which it fronts.
Major Arterials, Roads, and Highways: Major arterials, roads, and highways are those public streets
and highways designated, or hereafter designated, as major streets and highways on a major Thoroughfare
Plan for the County, approved by the North Carolina Department of Transportation, or that may hereafter
be approved by the North Carolina Department of Transportation.
Manufactured Home (also known as a mobile home): A residential dwelling unit, built to HUD
Standards, designed for transportation after fabrication on its own wheels or on flatbeds, or other trailers,
and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling unit complete and ready for occupancy
except for minor unpacking and assembly operations. Travel trailers and campers shall not be considered
mobile homes.
Manufactured Home, Class A: A manufactured home constructed after July 1, 1976, that meets
or exceeds the construction standards promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and,
Urban Development that were in effect at the time of construction and that satisfies the following
additional criteria:
(a) The manufactured home has a length not exceeding four times its width (e.g. a
“doublewide” unit); and
(b) The pitch of the manufactured home's roof has a minimum vertical rise of two and two
tenths feet for each twelve feet of horizontal run (2.2 ft: 12 ft) and the roof is finished
with shingles; and
(c) The exterior siding consists predominately of vinyl or aluminum horizontal lap siding,
wood or hardboard; and
(d) A continuous, permanent masonry foundation, unpierced except for ventilation and
access is installed under the manufactured home; and
(e) The tongue, axles, removable towing apparatus, and transporting lights are removed after
final placement on the site;
(f) A minimum of 1,200 square feet of interior space.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 4-8
Manufactured Home, Class B: A manufactured home' constructed after July 1, 1976, that meets
or exceeds the standards promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development that were in effect at the time of construction, but which does not meet the
definition of a Class A manufactured home.
Manufactured Home, Class C: A manufactured home that does not meet the definition of either
a Class A or a Class B manufactured home.
Manufactured Home Park: A plot of ground, under unified control, which has been planned or
improved for the placement of three or more manufactured homes for dwelling or sleeping purposes,
regardless of whether or not a charge is made for the unit or the land. This definition shall not include
manufactured home sales lots.
Manufactured Home Space: The land in a manufactured home park allotted to or designed for
accommodation of one (1) manufactured home.
Modular Home. - A factory-built structure that is designed to be used as a dwelling, is manufactured in
accordance with the specifications for modular homes under the North Carolina State Residential
Building Code, and bears a seal or label issued by the Department of Insurance pursuant to G.S. 143-
139.1.
To qualify for a North Carolina State Residential Building Code label or seal, a single-family modular
home must meet or exceed the following construction and design standards identified in G.S.143-139.1,
or as hereafter amended:
1. Roof pitch. - For homes with a single predominant roofline, the pitch of the roof shall be
no less than five feet rise for every 12 feet of run.
2. Eave projection. - The eave projections of the roof shall be no less than 10 nches, which
may not include a gutter around the perimeter of the home, unless the roof pitch is 8/12
or greater.
3. Exterior wall. - The minimum height of the exterior wall shall be at least seven feet six
inches for the first story.
4. Siding and roofing materials. - The materials and texture for the exterior materials shall
be compatible in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior materials
commonly used in standard residential construction.
5. Foundations. - The home shall be designed to require foundation supports around the
perimeter. The supports may be in the form of piers, pier and curtain wall, piling
foundations, a perimeter wall, or other approved perimeter supports.
Modular Home, Conventional: A factory built structure which is constructed in accordance with
the North Carolina State Building Code with wood frame construction and set-up on a brick
foundation.
Modular Home, On-Frame: A factory built structure which is constructed in accordance with
the North Carolina State Building Code on a metal frame and is set-up on block piers with brick
underpinning.
NPDES Phase II Stormwater Program – The storm water program implemented by the City of Trinity
in compliance with the City of Trinity’s “PERMIT NO. NCS000502 TO DISCHARGE STORMWATER
UNDER THE NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM”, as issued by the
State of North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources, Division of Water Quality,
effective October 1, 2005, as may be re-issued from time to time.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 4-9
Nonconforming Use: A structure or land lawfully occupied by an existing use which does not conform
with the permitted uses for the zoning district in which it is situated, either at the effective date of this
ordinance, or as a result of subsequent amendments to this ordinance.
Obstruction: Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting
height set forth in this Ordinance.
Open Space: The land used for passive recreation, natural resource protection, amenities and/or buffer
yards. Open space may include, but is not limited to, walkways, passive recreation areas, playgrounds,
wooded areas, greenways and water courses.
Parking Space: A surfaced area not less than nine (9) feet wide and eighteen (18) feet long either within
a structure or in the open, exclusive of driveways or access drives.
Planned Building Group: An area of land under unified control; developed for business, commercial or
industrial uses; consisting of one or more principal structures or buildings and accessory structures or
buildings on a plot not subdivided into customary streets or lots.
Planned Unit Development: An unconventional subdivision of land not subsequently subdivided into
conventional streets and lots and designated for ownership by separate property owners. A PUD may
include within it a variety of forms of residential occupancy and ownership such as single-family
detached housing, single family attached housing and some multifamily units. Significant areas of
common properties which may include open space or private streets are owned and maintained by private
ownership associations.
Planning Board: The City of Trinity Planning Board appointed by the City Council to carry out the
duties set forth in GS 160A-361.
Residence: Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed for living and/or sleeping purposes. The
term "residence" shall not be deemed to include a hotel, motel, tourist home, or other building designed
for transient residence. Neither shall it include travel trailers, campers, motor homes, nor other vehicles
designed for transient residence. The term "residence" shall include the term "dwelling unit."
Road, Private: A vehicular right-of-way indicated on an approved survey plat and recorded in the Office
of the Register of Deeds intended to serve residential subdivision of lots or tracts and not offered for
dedication as a public road. Private roads shall require a subdivision road disclosure statement in
accordance with G.S. 136-102.6, shall be privately maintained and meet the design standards for private
roads in the Trinity Subdivision Ordinance.
Reception House: A single family dwelling where a portion of the dwelling is available for receptions
and other similar private functions. Meals may only be served to guests of receptions and other private
functions. For purposes of this definition a private function means a pre=planned, organized social event
for which one host of hostess is responsible. It has a defined beginning and ending times and is a
celebration of a specific event such as a wedding, high school or college graduation, corporate event or a
reception honoring a special person.
Recreational Vehicle Parks: Means any site, lot, field, or tract of land designed with facilities for shortterm
occupancy by recreational vehicles and or tiny homes only. Recreational vehicle parks and/or tiny
home parks are prohibited inside the City of Trinity municipal limits.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 4-10
Recycling Processing Facility: Includes uses engaged in the processing, sorting, assembly, breaking up,
temporary storage and distribution of recyclables or reusable scrap and waste materials. The dismantling
of junk vehicles or otherwise not capable of operating under their own power is not a permitted use. All
recycling, scrap, storage and dismantling must be within an enclosed building. This use does not include
landfills or other waste disposal sites.
Reservation: A reservation of land does not involve any transfer of property rights. It simply constitutes
an obligation to keep property free from development for a stated period of time.
Rooming House: A building which contains more than three (3), but fewer than ten (10) guest rooms
which are let to individuals for compensation.
Rotating Sign: Any sign or portion of a sign that turns around on an axis or center.
Scenic Corridor Plan: A site plan that describes unique qualities, conditions, boundaries and
requirements of a road corridor that creates a visually pleasing impression.
Septage: As defined by NCGS 130A-290a32 meaning solid waste that is a fluid mixture of untreated and
partially treated sewage solids, liquids, and sludge of human or domestic origin which is removed from a
septic tank system.
Septage Land Application Site: As regulated under the State requirements set forth in NCGS
130A-291.1; NC, Septage Management Rules, and meaning the area of land on which septage is
applied.
Sewage Disposal System: An approved sewage disposal system which, depending upon ownership
and/or capacity may be:
a. a municipal system
b. a "community" system designed for surface discharge and/or a 300+ gallon capacity (approved by
the authorized State agency)
c. a small capacity underground collection system (approved by the Randolph County Health
Department)
Shooting Range: The term “shooting range” shall mean an establishment or place either indoors or
outdoors, used for the discharge of firearms at targets that is available to the public, individual property
owners and their guests and/or law enforcement personnel and other governmental employees. An
establishment that is open to the public or private, used on a regular basis (12 or more times per year or
where operation continues for more than two (2) weeks) and operated for profit, private or non-profit use
shall be deemed to be a shooting range within the meaning of this Ordinance.
Sign: Any words, lettering, parts of letters, pictures, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems,
devices, design, names, trade names, trademarks, identification, description, display which is affixed to,
painted, or represented directly or indirectly, upon a building, or other outdoor surface, or surface visible
from outside of a building, which directs attention to or is designed or intended to direct attention to the
sign, sign face or to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business.
Signs located completely within an enclosed building, and not exposed to view from a street, are
not considered to be signs. Each display surface of a sign or sign face is a sign.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 4-11
Sign Area: The space enclosed within the extreme edges of the sign for each sign face, not
including the supporting structure or where attached directly to a building wall or surface,
the space within the outline is enclosing all the characters of the words, numbers or
design. In computing area, only one (1) side of a double-faced sign shall be considered.
Sign, Animated: Any sign that uses or light or any other material to make it appear to move,
flash or have life in the display, including signs on which the message or display runs
continuously in the travel mode and/or on which any message or display does not remain
stationary for a minimum of five seconds.
Sign, Announcement: Any sign that lets the public know a new residential subdivision or
commercial property has vacant land that has been approved by the City of Trinity to be built on.
Sign, Banner: A long strip of flexible material displaying a slogan, advertisement, etc. The
material is suspended in the air by 2 to 4 points. A banner shall have no tears, be folded, or
touching the ground.
Sign, Billboard: Signs regulated under N.C. Gen. Stat. Chapter 136 Transportation, Art. 11.
Outdoor Advertising Control Act including electronic changeable copy signs. These signs are
also known as outdoor advertising signs. N.C. Gen. Stat. Ann. § 136-128 (3) defines it this
way: ““Outdoor advertising” means any outdoor sign, display, light, device, figure,
painting, drawing, message, plaque, poster, billboard, or any other thing which is
designed, intended or used to advertise or inform, any part of the advertising or
information contents of which is visible from any place on the main-traveled way of the
interstate or primary system, whether the same be permanent or portable installation.”
Sign, Freestanding: a sign attached to, erected on, or supported by a freestanding frame, mast
pole or structure whose primary function is to support a sign and which is not itself attached to
any building and including ground-mounted or monument signs.
Sign, Government. A government sign is a sign that is constructed, placed or maintained
by the federal, state or local government or a sign that is required to be constructed,
placed or maintained by the federal, state or local government either directly or to enforce
a property owner’s rights.
Sign, Electronic Changeable Copy: Any sign on which the copy changes automatically on a
lamp bank, such that the message or display does not run continuously in the travel mode and any
message or display remains stationary for a minimum of five seconds. This definition includes
digital billboards.
Information Sign (in reference to a subdivision): An information sign for a subdivision helps
give guidance to the public on which parcels within a subdivision are still for sale and which have
not been built on. They can also contain general information for the entire subdivision such as
general cost for each lot, covenants, etc… These signs are usually placed at a model home.
Sign, Marquee/Awning: A sign attached to and hanging under a canopy, marquee or awning.
Sign, Off-Premise: A Sign that advertises goods, products or services which are not sold
manufactured or distributed on or from the premises or facilities on which the sign is located.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 4-12
Sign, Projecting: A sign attached to and supported by a building and extending beyond the
building to which it is attached at a right angle.
Sign, Political: Any sign that advocates for political action. This does not include a commercial
sign. (NC Gen Stat § 136-32 (c))
Sign, Sandwich: A temporary sign not secured or attached to the ground or any building or
structure, composed of a sign panel and supporting structure or one or more panels that form both
the structure and sign face, and that is intended to be placed in a sidewalk or pedestrian way.
Sign, Snipe means any small sign, generally of a temporary nature, made of any material,
when such sign is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise attached to trees,
poles, stakes, fences, or other objects not erected, owned and maintained by the owner of
the sign.
Sign, Temporary: A banner, poster, or advertising display constructed of paper, cloth, canvas,
plastic sheet, cardboard, wallboard, plywood, or other like materials and that is intended or
determined by a code official to be displayed for a limited amount of time.
Sign, Wall: A sign attached to or painted on a wall of a building, with the exposed display
surface of the sign in a plane parallel to the plan of the wall to which it is attached or painted, and
including signs affixed to or otherwise displayed on or through a facade window.
Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement that is
written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed
to any surface of public or private property by any graffiti implement, to the extent that the
graffiti was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the property, or, despite
advance authorization, is otherwise deemed a public nuisance by the City/County/Town. Graffiti
includes snipe signs.
Graffiti implement means an aerosol paint container, a broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint
stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or any other device capable of scarring or leaving
a visible mark on any natural or manmade surface.1
Holiday lights or mini lights mean light fixtures that use bulbs that are sized C6, C7, or C9 or
LED bulbs that are 8 mm or smaller.
Rope light means a light that has Holiday lights or mini lights inside of a PVC tube.
String lights means a lighting fixture that is composed of electrical wiring encased in plastic with
sockets for bulb placement.
Solar Energy System (SES): the components and subsystems required to convert solar energy into
electric or thermal energy suitable for use. The area of the system includes all the land inside the
perimeter of the system, which extends to any fencing. The term applies but is not limited to solar
photovoltaic (PV) systems, solar thermal systems, and solar hot water systems. A system fits into one of
three system types: Level 1 SES, Level 2 SES, and Level 3 SES.
1 I did not check to see if Trinity regulates, graffiti, but it might wish to consider doing so if it does not now.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 4-13
Level 1 Solar Energy Systems: Level I SESs include the following:
1. Roof mounted on any compliant structure.
2. Covering paved parking lot and other hardscape or impervious areas.
3. Building integrated solar (ex. Shingle, hanging solar canopy, etc…)
4. Ground mounted solar structures over softscape or pervious surface are not
allowed.
Level 2 Solar Energy Systems: Level 2 SESs are ground mounted systems not included in Level
1 that meet the area restriction listed below:
1. Zoning: Residential Agriculture greater than 25Acres
Level 3 Solar Energy Systems: Level 3 SESs are systems that do not satisfy the parameters for a
Level 1 or Level 2 SES.
Special Event: A sporting, cultural, business, or other type of unique activity, occurring for a limited or
fixed duration (one-time, annual). A special event cannot be done more than twice in a calendar year.
Rural Roads
Principal Arterial. A rural link in a network of continuous routes serving corridor movements
having trip length and travel density characteristics indicative of substantial statewide or interstate
travel and existing solely to serve traffic. This network would consist of interstate routes and
other routes designated as principal arterials.
Minor Arterial. A rural link in a network joining cities and larger Cities and providing intrastate
and intercounty service at relatively high (85 mph) overall travel speeds with minimum
interference to through movement. This network would primarily serve traffic.
Major Collector. A road which serves major intracounty travel corridors and traffic generators
and provides access to the arterial system.
Minor Collector. A road which provides service to small local communities and links the locally
important traffic generators with their rural hinterland.
Local Road. A local road primarily serves to provide access to adjacent land and for travel over
relatively short distances.
Major Thoroughfares. Major thoroughfares consist of Interstate, other freeway and expressway
links, and major streets that provide for the expeditious movement of high volumes of traffic
within and through urban areas.
Minor Thoroughfares. Minor thoroughfares are important streets in urban systems and perform
the function of collecting traffic from local access streets and carrying it to the major
thoroughfare system. Minor thoroughfares may be used to supplement the major thoroughfare
system by facilitating a minor through-traffic movement and may also serve abutting property.
Local Street. A local street is any link not a part of a higher-order urban system and serves
primarily to provide direct access to abutting land and access to higher systems. It offers the
lowest level of mobility and through traffic is usually deliberately discouraged.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 4-14
Specific Types of Rural and Urban Streets:
Cul-de-sac. A short street having but one end open to traffic and the other end being permanently
terminated and a vehicular turn-around provided.
Frontage Road. A local street or road that is parallel to a full or partial access controlled facility
and functions to provide access to adjacent land.
Alley. A strip of land, owned publicly or privately, set aside primarily for vehicular service access
to the back or site of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
Expressway. An expressway is a street or road usually with a median which serves through
traffic with full or partial control of access and generally with grade separations at intersections;
however, infrequent at-grade crossings may be permitted.
Freeway. A freeway is a divided street or road which serves through traffic with full control of
access and with grade separations at all intersections.
Public Street. A street located on a right-of-way dedication under the requirements of this
Ordinance.
Private Street. An undedicated private right-of-way which affords access to abutting properties
and requires a subdivision streets disclosure statement in accordance with GS 136-102. 6.
Emergency and other public services may not be provided over such private streets, and they shall
be privately maintained.
Subdivider: Any person, firm, corporation or official agent thereof, who subdivides or develops
any land deemed to be a subdivision.
Subdivision: A Subdivision shall include all divisions of a tract or parcel of-land into two or more lots,
building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building
development, and shall include all divisions of land involving the dediction of a new public street or a
change in existing public streets with certain exceptions referenced in State law and listed in the Trinity
Subdivision Ordinance.
Major Subdivision. A subdivision with four (4) or more owner occupied lots created for
the purpose of sale or building development.
Minor Subdivision. A subdivision with three (3) or fewer owner occupied lots created for the
purpose of sale or building development with all lots having access to an existing state
maintained road.
Technical Review Committee: A committee authorized to review and provide analysis of planning and
development projects. This committee shall include Trinity’s planning and zoning official, and may
include the city manager, and staff from appropriate county and state agencies.
Telecommunications Tower: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of
supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers or monopole
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 4-15
towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, personal communications service
towers (PCS), microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower
structures and the like. This definition does not include any structure erectly solely for a residential noncommercial
individual use, such as television antennas, satellite dishes or amateur radio antennas.
Townhouse: Two or more attached single family residences contained within one or more residential
structures with each unit located on a separate plot.
Use: The purpose for which land or a building or structure is arranged, designed or intended, or for which
either land or a building or structure is, or may be, occupied or maintained.
Use-Principal Permitted: A use which is permitted outright in a district for which a Zoning
Permit may be issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
Use-Special: A use which is permitted in a district only if a permit therefore is expressly
authorized by the Planning Board.
Variance: A modification of the dimensional requirements of the Zoning Ordinance by the Board of
Adjustment when strict enforcement of this Ordinance would cause undue hardship owing to
circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is granted.
Water Quality Critical Area (WQCA): Land located adjacent to the shoreline of a public water supply
reservoir, so designated by a Governmental authority, and is located from normal pool level extending
from ½ to 1 mile from the reservoir high water mark depending on the size of the watershed, and
specifically delineated on the official watershed map.
Water Supply System: An approved water supply system which, depending upon ownership
and/or number of hook-ups, may be:
a. a municipal system
b. a privately owned system serving an extended geographic area (extensions approved by the
Department of Human Resources, Division of Health Services)
c. a private well serving up to 14 hook-ups in a mobile home park (approved by the County
Health Department)
d. a "community" system with 15 or more connections (approved by the Department of
Human Resources, Division of Health Services)
Watershed: An area in which all water drains to a particular body of water.
Yard
a. Front: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the
full width of the lot and situated between the front line of the lot and the front line of the
building projected to the side lines of the lot. Where a lot abuts more than one street, the
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall determine the front yard for purposes of this Ordinance.
b. Rear: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full
width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building
projected to the side line of the lot.
c. Side: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, situated between
the building and the side lot line, and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the
front line of the rear yard.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 4-16
Zoning Administrator – The City of Trinity employee(s) responsible for enforcement of zoning,
subdivision, floodplain, erosion and sedimentation control and other planning related ordinances
authorized by Article 19 of G.S. 160A and adopted by the City of Trinity.
Zoning Lot: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land under single ownership containing sufficient land
area for the proposed development including well and septic tank repair area.
Zoning Permit: A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator which must be obtained prior to
establishment of a use within a zoning district.
Zoning Vested Right: A right pursuant to NCGS 160A-385.1 to undertake and complete the development
and use of property under the terms and conditions of an approved site development plan.
itions of an approved site development plan.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 5-1
ARTICLE V
APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
Section 5-1. Zoning Affects Every Building and Use.
No building or land shall hereafter be used, or its use changed, and no building or part thereof shall be
erected, moved or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in
which it is located.
Section 5-2. Reduction of Lot and Yard Areas Prohibited.
No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in size or area below the
minimum requirements set forth herein, except for street widening. Yards or lots created after the
effective date of this ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this
ordinance.
Section 5-3 Lot of Record
Single Lots of Record:
When a lot has an area or width which does not conform to the dimensional requirements of the district
where they are located, but such lot was of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance or any
subsequent amendment which renders such lot nonconforming, then such lot may be built upon if
compliance is achieved with regard to setback dimensions and other requirements, except lot area or
width. Lots that cannot meet the setback and buffering requirements of this Ordinance may seek a
variance from the Board of Adjustments.
Lots with Contiguous Frontage in One Ownership:
When two (2) or more adjoining lots with contiguous frontage are in one ownership and said lots
individually have area or width which does not conform to the dimensional requirements of the district
where located, but such lots were of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance or any subsequent
amendment which renders such lots nonconforming, for the purpose of development such lots must be
combined to form a parcel of no less than 20,000 square feet. All lots must comply with the setbacks
established for the zoning district in which they are located. Lots that can not meet the setback and
buffering requirements of this Ordinance may seek a variance from the Board of Adjustments.
Section 5-4. Relationship of Building to Lot.
Every building hereafter erected, moved or structurally altered shall be located on a lot and in no case
shall there be more than one (1) principal building and its customary accessory buildings on any lot,
except in the case of a specially designed complex of institutional, residential, church, commercial,
governmental services or industrial buildings in an appropriate zoning district, i.e., school campus,
shopping center, industrial park, and so forth, as permitted by this ordinance.
Section 5-5. Required Open Space Not Used for Other Building
No part of any yard, other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required for any building,
structure or other use shall be considered to be a part of a required yard, open space, off street parking or
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 5-2
loading space for any other buildings, structures or use unless explicitly provided to the contrary in this
Ordinance.
Section 5-6. Road Access
No building shall be erected on a new lot created after adoption of this amendment which does not have
access, directly or by easement, to a road whether publicly or privately maintained. All private roads
shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the specifications adopted by the City of Trinity.
Section 5-7 Buildings and Land Used for Permitted Uses
Within the districts indicated on the zoning map, no building or land shall be used, and no building shall
be erected or altered which is intended or designed to be used in whole or in part, for any use other than
those listed as permitted for the district in this Article.
..
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 6-1
ARTICLE VI
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
Section 6-1. Use District Names:
For the purpose of this ordinance, the City of Trinity is hereby divided into the following use districts
with the designation and purposes as listed below:
HC Highway Commercial District
M-1 Heavy Manufacturing District
M-2 Light Manufacturing District
O&I Office and Institutional
RA Residential Agricultural District
R-40 Residential District
R-20 Residential District
R-12 Residential District
RM Mixed Residential District
RM-U Residential Mixed – Urban
Overlay District Names:
MH-O Manufactured Home Overlay District
Section 6-2. District Boundaries Shown on Zoning Map.
The boundaries of the districts are shown on the map accompanying this ordinance and made a part
hereof entitled “Official Zoning Map, Trinity, North Carolina.” The zoning map and all the notations,
references, and amendments thereto, and other information shown thereon are hereby made a part of this
ordinance the same as if such information set forth on the map were all fully described and set out herein.
The zoning map properly attested is posted at the City Hall in Trinity and is available for inspection by
the public.
Section 6-3. Due Consideration Given to District Boundaries.
In the creation, by this ordinance, of the respective districts, careful consideration is given to the peculiar
suitability of each and every district for the particular uses and regulations applied thereto, and the
necessary and proper grouping and arrangement of various uses and densities of population in accordance
with a well-considered comprehensive plan for the physical development of the community.
Section 6-4. Rules Governing Interpretation of District Boundaries.
(a) Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the zoning
map, the following rules shall apply:
1. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines, such lot lines
shall be construed to be said boundaries.
2. Where such district boundaries are indicated as approximately following street, alley, or highway
lines, the centerline of said facilities shall be construed to be such boundaries.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 6-2
3. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the center line
of streets, alleys or highways, or the rights-of-way of same, such district boundaries shall be
construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance there from as indicated on the zoning
map.
4. Where a district boundary line divides a lot or tract in single ownership, the district
requirements for the least restricted portion of such lot or tract shall be deemed to apply
to the whole thereof, provided such extensions shall not include any part of a lot or tract
more than thirty-five (35) feet beyond the district boundary line. The term “least
restricted” shall refer to zoning restrictions.
(b) The Zoning Administrator or Planning Director shall determine boundary interpretations
based on the above criteria. Appeals from the decision of the Zoning Administrator or
Planning Director shall be made to the Board of Adjustment. Appeals from the decision of
the Board of Adjustment shall be made to Superior Court of Randolph County.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-1
ARTICLE VII
DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSES OF DISTRICTS
Section 7-1 RA Residential Agricultural District
At the time of adoption of Trinity’s initial Zoning Ordinance considerable land in Trinity is zoned
Residential Agricultural. This is a carryover from its Randolph County zoning classification. This
classification provides a place for agricultural operations and scattered non-farm residences on traditional
rural lots. Only minor conventional residential subdivisions (three or fewer lots) are allowed in this
district. Requests for higher intensity residential use or other uses, consistent with the Trinity Land
Development Plan, are handled through the rezoning process.
ZONING REQUIREMENTS
Topic Explanation See Pages
Exterior Building Meet NC Building Code
G.S. 143.139.1 or Section 7-
16.12 of the Zoning Ordinance
Minimum Square Footage
for Single-Family
Residential Homes.
If greater than 2.5 acres, then no
minimum square footage is required. If
less than 2.5 acres, 1,000 square foot
home is required.
Enclosed Facilities Depends on use.
See Section 8-8 or Article IV
Definitions.
Parking Requirements Depends on use.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement.
Paved Parking Depends See Section 13-6.3.l
Buffering Depends on use.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement.
Fencing
Depends on use. If a corner lot, visibility
instructions in Section 12-3.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement. For general
requirements, see Section 12-4.
Planting Area None
Curb & Gutter None
Setbacks & Lot Widths Varies Section 12-4
Sidewalks None
Signs Varies
See Section 11-4 (don't need a
permit) & 11-7 (need a permit).
Bona Fide Farm Uses Exempt See G.S. 153A-340(b)
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-2
Section 7-2 R-40 Residential District.
The R-40 Residential District is established for low density residential with some limited public, semipublic,
and recreational uses permitted when they are compatible to low density residential developments.
ZONING REQUIREMENTS
Topic Explanation See Pages
Exterior Building Meet NC Building Code
G.S. 143.139.1 or Section 7-
16.12 of the Zoning Ordinance
Minimum Square Footage
for Single-Family
Residential Homes. 1,100 square foot
Enclosed Facilities Depends on use.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement or in Article IV
Definitions.
Parking Requirements Depends on use.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement.
Paved Parking Depends See Section 13-6.3.l
Buffering Depends on use.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement.
Fencing
Depends on use. If a corner lot, visibility
instructions in Section 12-3.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement. For general
requirements, see Section 12-4.
Planting Area None
Curb & Gutter None
Setbacks & Lot Widths Varies Section 12-4
Sidewalks None
Signs Varies
See Section 11-4 (don't need a
permit) & 11-7 (need a permit).
Open Space None
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-3
Section 7-3 R-20 Residential District
The R-20 Residential District is established for medium density residential uses, some public, semipublic,
and recreational activities that are compatible with residential development. Public water and
sewer are a pre-requisite to development in this district.
ZONING REQUIREMENTS
Topic Explanation See Pages
Exterior Building Meet NC Building Code
G.S. 143.139.1 or Section 7-
16.12 of the Zoning Ordinance
Minimum Square Footage
for Single-Family
Residential Homes. 1,200 square foot
Enclosed Facilities Depends on use.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement or in Article IV
Definitions.
Parking Requirements Depends on use.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement.
Paved Parking Depends See Section 13-6.3.l
Buffering Depends on use.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement.
Fencing
Depends on use. If a corner lot, visibility
instructions in Section 12-3.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement. For general
requirements, see Section 12-4.
Planting Area None
Curb & Gutter None
Setbacks & Lot Widths Varies Section 12-4
Sidewalks None
Signs Varies
See Section 11-4 (don't need a
permit) & 11-7 (need a permit).
Open Space None
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-4
Section 7-4 R-12 Residential District
The R-12 Residential District is established for medium-to-high density residential uses with lot sizes a
minimum of 12,000 square feet, some public, semi-public and recreational activities that are compatible
with residential development. Public water and sewer are a prerequisite to development in this district.
ZONING REQUIREMENTS
Topic Explanation See Pages
Exterior Building Meet NC Building Code
G.S. 143.139.1 or Section 7-
16.12 of the Zoning Ordinance
Minimum Square Footage
for Single-Family
Residential Homes. 1,200 square foot
Enclosed Facilities Depends on use.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement or in Article IV
Definitions.
Parking Requirements Depends on use.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement.
Paved Parking Required See Section 13-6.3.l
Buffering Depends on use.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement.
Fencing
Depends on use. If a corner lot, visibility
instructions in Section 12-3.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement. For general
requirements, see Section 12-4.
Planting Area None
Curb & Gutter
No, as long as impervious percentage is
less than 24%. The storm water
administrator’s calculation is the final
calculation. If greater than 24%, curb
and gutter is required.
Setbacks & Lot Widths
Front: 30 Ft; Side: 10 Ft; Rear: 25 Ft; Lot
Width: 75 Ft. Section 12-4
Sidewalks None
Signs Varies
See Section 11-4 (don't need a
permit) & 11-7 (need a permit).
Open Space None
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-5
Section 7-5 R-10 Residential District
The R-10 Residential District is established for high density residential uses with lot sizes a minimum of
10,000 square feet, some public, semi-public and recreational activities that are compatible with
residential development. Public water and sewer are a prerequisite to development in this district.
ZONING REQUIREMENTS
Topic Explanation See Pages
Exterior Building Meet NC Building Code
G.S. 143.139.1 or Section 7-
16.12 of the Zoning Ordinance
Minimum Square Footage
for Single-Family
Residential Homes. 1,200 square foot
Enclosed Facilities Depends on use.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement or in Article IV
Definitions.
Parking Requirements Depends on use.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement.
Paved Parking Required See Section 13-6.3.l
Buffering Depends on use.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement.
Fencing
Depends on use. If a corner lot, visibility
instructions in Section 12-3.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement. For general
requirements, see Section 12-4.
Planting Area None
Curb & Gutter
No, as long as impervious percentage is
less than 24%. The storm water
administrator’s calculation is the final
calculation. If greater than 24%, curb
and gutter is required. Section 13-10
Setbacks & Lot Widths
Front: 30 Ft; Side: 10 Ft; Rear: 25 Ft; Lot
Width: 60 Ft. Section 12-4
Sidewalks None
Signs Varies
See Section 11-4 (don't need a
permit) & 11-7 (need a permit).
Open Space None
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-6
Section 7-6 Mixed Residential District.
The purpose of this district is to provide a place for residential uses of all types (single family residences;
multi-family dwellings. R-10 or less density development is permitted provided that water and sewer
systems are made available and approved by the appropriate authorities.
ZONING REQUIREMENTS
Topic Explanation See Pages
Exterior Building
If denser than R-10 residential development
then all common building materials, aside from
metal and cinderblock sidings, are acceptable
except vinyl use is limited to no more than 30%
of the front façade of the structure.
Minimum Square
Footage for Single-
Family Residential
Homes. 1,200 square foot
Enclosed/Screened
Depends on use. If not specified, all outside
storage not enclosed must be screened.
See Section 8-8 to see if
your particular use is listed
with a requirement or in
Article IV Definitions.
Parking Requirements Depends on use.
See Section 8-8 or Table
13.4 to see if your particular
use is listed.
Paved Parking Depends See Section 13-6.3.l
Buffering
Depends on use. Will need screening if
buffering a single-family residentially zoned
property.
See Section 8-8 to see if
your particular use is listed
with a requirement. For
general requirements, see
Section 12-4.
Fencing
Depends on use. If a corner lot, visibility
instructions in Section 12-3.
See Section 8-8 and/or
Section 12-4.
Planting Area None
Curb & Gutter Mountable curbs are required. Section 13-10.
Setbacks & Lot Widths Varies Section 12-4
Sidewalks None
Signs Varies
See Section 11-4 (don't need
a permit) & 11-7 (need a
permit).
Open Space Yes Section 12-5
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-7
Section 7-7 Residential Mixed – Urban
This medium to high density predominately residential district is established to accommodate compact,
walkable neighborhoods in close proximity to mixed-use activity centers. Public water and sewer are
necessary prerequisites for this type of development. Limited commercial activities are also permitted
subject to issuance of a Special Use. Minor subdivisions consisting of single-family lots sized 10,000 s.f.
or greater are exempt from the provisions of this section.
ZONING REQUIREMENTS
Topic Explanation See Pages
Exterior Building
If denser than R-10 residential
development or a non-residential use,
then all common building materials,
aside from metal and cinderblock
sidings, are acceptable except vinyl
use is limited to no more than 30% of
the front façade of the structure.
Minimum Square Footage
for Single-Family
Residential Homes. 1,200 square foot
Enclosed/Screened
Depends on use. If not specified, all
outside storage not enclosed must be
screened.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement or in Article IV
Definitions.
Parking Requirements Depends on use.
See Section 8-8 or Table 13.4 to
see if your particular use is listed
with a requirement.
Paved Parking Depends See Section 13-6.3.l
Buffering
Depends on use. Will need screening
if buffering a single-family
residentially zoned property.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement.
Fencing
Depends on use. If a corner lot,
visibility instructions in Section 12-3. See Section 8-8 or Section 12-4.
Curb & Gutter Mountable curbs are required. Section 13-10
Setbacks & Lot Widths Varies Section 12-4
Signs Varies
See Section 11-4 (don't need a
permit), 11-7 (if residential), and
11-10 (if non-residential).
Open Space Yes Section 12-5
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-8
Section 7-8 O&I Office and Institutional District.
The O & I Office and Institutional District is established to provide for business and professional office
use, service occupations and light commercial uses. Because the Office and Institutional uses are subject
to the public view, developers and operators of offices and business should provide an appropriate
appearance, parking and design of entrances and exits to offices and businesses in a manner to minimize
the traffic congestion.
ZONING REQUIREMENTS
Topic Explanation See Pages
Exterior Building
Building exteriors may consist of any
of the following materials: utility
brick, standard brick, colored split
faced brick, glass, stone, wood,
concrete composite siding, or other
similar high quality material.
- Stucco, synthetic stucco, iron,
and steel may be used as
secondary materials however
they may not cover more than
20% of the surface area of
any one elevation.
Enclosed/Screened
Depends on use. If not specified, all
outside storage not enclosed must be
screened.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement or in Article IV
Definitions.
Parking Requirements Depends on use.
See Section 8-8 or Table 13.4 to
see if your particular use is listed
with a requirement.
Paved Parking Depends See Section 13-6.3.l
Buffering
Depends on use. Will need screening
if buffering a residentially zoned
property.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement. For general
requirements, see Section 14.
Fencing
Depends on use. If a corner lot,
visibility instructions in Section 12-3.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement. For general
requirements, see Section 14-2.
Planting Area None
Curb & Gutter Mountable Curbs are required.
Setbacks & Lot Widths Varies Section 12-4
Sidewalks None
Signs Varies
See Section 11-4 (don't need a
permit), and 11-8 through 11-10
(need a permit).
Open Space No
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-9
Section 7-9 HC Highway Commercial District.
The Highway Commercial District is established to provide for a compact neighborhood shopping district
which provides convenience goods such as groceries and pharmacies and some types of personal services
to the surrounding residential area. The regulations are designed to protect the surrounding residential
districts and provide an appropriate community appearance. Parking and design of entrances and exits to
businesses must be established in a manner to minimize traffic congestion.
ZONING REQUIREMENTS
Topic Explanation See Pages
Exterior Building
Building exteriors may consist of any
of the following materials: utility
brick, standard brick, colored split
faced brick, glass, stone, wood,
concrete composite siding, or other
similar high quality material.
- Stucco, synthetic stucco, iron,
and steel may be used as
secondary materials however
they may not cover more than
20% of the surface area of
any one elevation.
Enclosed/Screened
Depends on use. If not specified, all
outside storage not enclosed must be
screened.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement or in Article IV
Definitions.
Parking Requirements Depends on use.
See Section 8-8 or Table 13.4 to
see if your particular use is listed
with a requirement.
Paved Parking Depends See Section 13-6.3.l
Buffering
Depends on use. Will need screening
if buffering a residentially zoned
property.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement. For general
requirements, see Section 14.
Fencing
Depends on use. If a corner lot,
visibility instructions in Section 12-3.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement. For general
requirements, see Section 14-2.
Planting Area None
Curb & Gutter None
Setbacks & Lot Widths Varies Section 12-4
Sidewalks Yes, 5-ft Section 13-8.B.
Signs Varies
See Section 11-4 (don't need a
permit), and 11-8 through 11-10
(need a permit).
Open Space No
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-10
Section 7-10 M-1 Heavy Manufacturing District.
The M-1 Heavy Manufacturing District is established for those areas of the community where the
principle use of land is for manufacturing, industrial, and warehousing uses. These uses, by their nature,
may create some nuisances which are not properly associated with residential, institutional, commercial
and/or service establishments. These uses normally seek outlying locations on large tracts of land where
the operations involved do not detract from the development potential of nearby undeveloped properties.
ZONING REQUIREMENTS
Topic Explanation See Pages
Exterior Building Meet NC Building Code
G.S. 143.139.1 or Section 7-
16.12 of the Zoning Ordinance
Enclosed/Screened Depends on use.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement or in Article IV
Definitions.
Parking Requirements Depends on use.
See Section 8-8 or Table 13.4 to
see if your particular use is
listed with a requirement.
Paved Parking Depends See Section 13-6.3.l
Buffering
Depends on use. Will need screening if
buffering a residentially zoned property.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement. For general
requirements, see Section 14.
Fencing
Depends on use. If a corner lot, visibility
instructions in Section 12-3.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement. For general
requirements, see Section 14-2.
Planting Area None
Curb & Gutter None
Setbacks & Lot Widths Varies Section 12-4
Sidewalks No
Signs Varies
See Section 11-4 (don't need a
permit), and 11-8 through 11-10
(need a permit).
Open Space No
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-11
Section 7-11 M-2 Light Manufacturing District.
The M-2 Light Manufacturing District is established for manufacturing, industrial and warehousing
located on planned sites with access to major highways and streets and with adequate utility facilities.
This district is intended to allow a lower density of manufacturing and warehousing operations which
create a more desirable appearance and less environmental pollution than a more dense manufacturing
zone. These uses by their nature may create some nuisance which is not properly associated with
residential, institutional, commercial and or service establishments. These uses normally seek outlying
locations on large tracts of land where the operations involved do not detract from the development
potential of nearby development property. The purpose of these regulations is to control building and
traffic congestion and to provide an appropriate community appearance.
ZONING REQUIREMENTS
Topic Explanation See Pages
Exterior Building Meet NC Building Code
G.S. 143.139.1 or Section 7-
16.12 of the Zoning Ordinance
Enclosed/Screened Depends on use.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement or in Article IV
Definitions.
Parking Requirements Depends on use.
See Section 8-8 or Table 13.4 to
see if your particular use is
listed with a requirement.
Paved Parking Depends See Section 13-6.3.l
Buffering
Depends on use. Will need screening if
buffering a residentially zoned property.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement. For general
requirements, see Section 14.
Fencing
Depends on use. If a corner lot, visibility
instructions in Section 12-3.
See Section 8-8 to see if your
particular use is listed with a
requirement. For general
requirements, see Section 14-2.
Planting Area None
Curb & Gutter None
Setbacks & Lot Widths Varies Section 12-4
Sidewalks No
Signs Varies
See Section 11-4 (don't need a
permit), and 11-8 through 11-10
(need a permit).
Open Space No
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-12
Section 7-12 Overlay Districts – Establishments and Requirements
Overlay districts make regulations applicable to certain areas which are in addition to the regulations
applicable to underlying general use district.
A. MH-O Manufactured Home Overlay District for Manufactured Home Subdivisions
The Manufactured home Overlay District sets forth regulations governing the development of
subdivisions for manufactured homes in Trinity.
1) Criteria for Establishment of District – Manufactured homes may be permitted in a
subdivision of single-family lots in a residential district, provided overlay district zoning
is approved by the City Council. A minimum of ten contiguous lots, meeting the
dimensional requirements of the applicable zoning district, excluding public street rightof-
way, is required to establish a manufactured home subdivision in a Manufactured
Home Overlay District.
2) Standards for Dwelling Units - Only manufactured dwellings meeting Class A criteria as
defined in Article V Definitions of this Ordinance shall be permitted.
3) Manufactured Homes Front Entrance Requirements. Every manufactured home site
shall have a minimum 5 ft. x 10 ft. x 4 in. thick concrete slab at the front door area or a 8
ft. x 12 ft. treated lumber deck or porch built of treated lumber and built to North
Carolina Building Code specifications at the front entrance.
3) Rezoning – An application for a Manufactured home Overlay district shall be processed,
considered and voted on in the same manner as for a rezoning.
4) Site Development and Parking – Consistent with Trinity subdivision requirements. All
manufactured home subdivisions shall be located on roads constructed to North Carolina
Department of Transportation, Division of Highways, subdivision road standards.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-13
Section 7-13 Conditional Zoning Districts
General Requirements
1. Application: Only the property owner(s) of all the property to be included in the district shall
apply for rezoning to an appropriate conditional zoning district. Specific conditions applicable to
these districts may be proposed by the petitioner or the City or its agencies, but only those
conditions mutually approved by the city and the petitioner may be incorporated into the zoning
regulations or permit requirements.
2. Other Regulations Apply: Within a conditional zoning district, all requirements of any
corresponding general zoning district, and all other requirements of this Ordinance, shall apply
except to the extent that the approved conditions are more restrictive that those requirements.
3. Uses Within District: Within a parallel conditional zoning district, only those uses authorized by
Section 7-15 (Permitted Uses in Zoning District) as allowed in the general zoning district to
which the conditional zoning district corresponds shall be permitted. No use(s) shall be permitted
except those use(s) authorized by the conditional zoning district approval.
4. Conditions: In a conditional zoning district, conditions may specify the location on the property
of the proposed use(s); the number of dwelling units; the location and extent of supporting
facilities such as parking lots, driveways, and access streets; the location and extent of buffer
areas and other special purpose areas; the timing of development; the location and extent of
rights-of-ways and other areas to be dedicated for public purposes; and other such matters as the
applicant may propose as conditions upon request.
5. Approval Statement: A statement analyzing the reasonableness of the proposed rezoning shall be
prepared for each petition for a rezoning to a conditional district or other small scale rezoning.
6. Compliance with Approved Plan: No permit shall be issued for any development activity within
a conditional zoning district except in accordance with the approved conditional zoning site plan.
7. Violation of Conditions: Any violation of a condition in an approved conditional zoning district
shall be treated the same as any other violation of this Ordinance and shall be subject to the same
remedies and penalties as any such violation. Any violation of such a condition shall be deemed
to be the same type of violation as the use of a property for a use not permitted under the district
regulations, for the same reason that any use permitted in a conditional zoning district is
permitted only subject to the specified conditions.
8. Cancellation of Site Plan Approval: If for any reason any condition imposed pursuant to theses
regulations is found to be illegal or invalid, or if the applicant should fail to accept any condition,
the approval of the conditional zoning site plan shall be null and void and of no effect and
proceedings shall be instituted to rezone the property to its previous zoning classification.
Procedure
1. Processing Application: Applications for condition zoning districts shall be processed,
considered, and voted upon in the same procedure as that required in Article XVII. No
conditional zoning site plan shall be approved prior to approval of the conditional zoning
district to which it applies.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-14
2. Application Consideration: In considering applications for conditional zoning districts, the
Planning & Zoning Board and City Council shall give due regard that the purposes and intent
of this Ordinance shall be served.
3. Conditions Perpetually Binding: Any conditions in association with a conditional zoning
district and so authorized shall be perpetually binding upon the property included in such
conditional zoning district unless subsequently changes or amended as provided for in this
Article.
4. Greater Restrictions: In approving a conditional zoning district the City Council may impose
only more restrictive requirements upon such district as may be necessary to comply with the
purpose and intent of this ordinance.
5. No removal of Other Requirements: No condition on a conditional zoning district application
shall have the effect of removing or amending any requirements of this ordinance.
6. A conditional zoning site plan shall be submitted for review for any development made
pursuant to any conditional zoning district to the Planning and Zoning Board and City
Council. Site specific conditions must be shown on this plan. Three copies of a site plan
shall be submitted on sheets no larger than 36” by 24” drawn to a scale of no less than 1” =
50’. The plans shall conform to the Community Development checklists.
7. Amendment of Conditions: The City Council may change or amend a conditional zoning
district in the same procedure as that required for the original approval of the conditional
zoning district.
Timing of Amendment Proposal: No proposal to change or amend any conditional zoning district shall
be considered within one (1) year after the date of the original approval of such district, or within one (1)
year after the hearing of any previous proposal to change or amend
Section 7-13 Permitted Uses in Zoning Districts
Permitted Uses in Zoning Districts: In accordance with the applicable ordinance provisions, in each
zoning district, land, building and structures shall only be used and buildings and structures shall only be
erected which are intended to be used for the uses, as listed in the Table of Permitted Uses, unless
otherwise stated in Article IX. In the appropriate columns of the Table below, uses permitted by right in
the various districts are indicated with an “X;” uses requiring a Special Use Permit are indicated by an
“S;” uses requiring a Manufactured Home Overlay Zone are indicated with an “O.”
Table of Permitted Uses:
RA
R-40
R-20
R-12
R-10
RM
RM-U
O-I
HC
M-1
M-2
Accessory Uses
(Residential) – See Note
2
X X X X X X X X X X X
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-15
Table of Permitted Uses:
RA
R-40
R-20
R-12
R-10
RM
RM-U
O-I
HC
M-1
M-2
Accessory Uses
(Commercial)
ATM
Movie Rental
Kiosk
Outdoor Storage
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Adult Uses (see Sexually
Oriented Businesses)
S
Agricultural Uses – Field
Crops
X X X X X X X
Agricultural Uses –
Livestock, See Note 14
X
Amusements, indoor
commercial (e.g. bowling
alleys, skating rinks, pool
halls, video arcades)
X X X
Antique Store/Mall X X
Apparel & accessory
sales
OT X X X
Apartment Buildings S S
Art Galleries OT X X
Athletic fields,
recreational use
buildings, playgrounds,
swim and racquet clubs
(non-profit)
S S S S S S S S
Auction sales, permanent
facility
X X
Automobile body shops
(includes screened
storage of wrecked
vehicles - See Note 3
X X
Automobile car wash
(see below)
Drive Through (Accessory
Uses – existing gas
station)
Drive Through (stand
alone)
Self Service Car Wash
S
S
S
X
X
X
X
X
X
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-16
Table of Permitted Uses:
RA
R-40
R-20
R-12
R-10
RM
RM-U
O-I
HC
M-1
M-2
Automobile parts sales,
(no open storage)
X X X
Automobile parking lots,
(stand alone
public/private)
X S X X
Automobile repair
service, See Note 3
S X X
Automobile sales, and
rental (new & used)
X X
Banks & Savings & Loans X X X X
Barber & Beauty
Shops/Salons
S
OT
X X X X
Bed Breakfast/Tourist
Home
S S S X X X
Boats, Recreational
Vehicles (sales & service)
S S S
Bottling Plants X X
Cabinet Making X X
Cemeteries, Mausoleum S S S
Chemical Manufacturing X
Churches, religious
congregations & their
customary accessory
uses
S S S S S S S
Clinics, medical, dental,
professional
OT X X X
Clubs & lodges, (see
“Athletic Fields”)
S S S S X
Community centers,
public/private non-profit,
for assembly &
recreation
S S S S S S S S
Concrete & asphalt
products plant
X
Condominiums S S
Convenience Store with
gas pump
S X X
Day care facility, adult S S S S
Day care facility, child
and pre-School
S S S S S S
Day care, in-home 5 or
fewer
X X X X X X
Dairy products,
wholesale & processing
X X
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-17
Table of Permitted Uses:
RA
R-40
R-20
R-12
R-10
RM
RM-U
O-I
HC
M-1
M-2
Doctors, Dentists Offices OT X X
Drive-in window services
(banks, laundries,
restaurants, pharmacies,
etc.) where permitted
X X X X
Dry cleaning & laundry
(retail)
OT X X X
Electronic Gaming
Operation
(See Article VIII , Section
8-8)
S S
Emergency Services
(Police, Fire, Ambulatory)
S S S S S S S S
Exterminating services X X X
Fairs, amusements,
carnivals, rides, Ferris
wheels, etc., temporary
S S S S S
Family Care Homes – See
Note 15
X X X X X X X
Farm machinery
sales/service
S X X
Farm supplies sales,
(feed, seed, fertilizer,
etc.)
S S X X
Flea markets, (indoors) X X
Florists/Gift shops OT X X
Foundries, metal X
Funeral Homes S X X
Furniture refinishing X X
Golf, miniature X
Golf Courses S S S S
Governmental Offices X X X
Governmental Services X
Grading and Utility
Contractor
X X
Grocery Stores S X X X
Group Homes S S S S S
Hardware, paint &
garden supplies, See
Note 4
S X X
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-18
Table of Permitted Uses:
RA
R-40
R-20
R-12
R-10
RM
RM-U
O-I
HC
M-1
M-2
Health Club/Spa X X X X
Hobby and Craft Stores OT X
Home furnishing &
appliance sales
X X X
Home and Garden Supply
Retailer, over 25,000 sq.
ft.
S S S
Home occupations – See
Note 5
X X X X X X
Hotels & Motels X
Industrial Equipment
sales/service
X X
Junkyards S
Kennels, commercial with
Outdoor Runs
S S S
Laboratory, medical &
dental
X X X X
Laboratory, research X X X
Land Clearing and Inert
Debris Landfill (LCID) -
Minor
S
Land Clearing and Inert
Debris Landfill (LCID) -
Major
S S
Lawn and Garden
supplies, See Note 4
X X X
Library, public X X X
Live-Work Units, See
Note 6
S
OT
Locksmith, gunsmith OT X
Machine shop, welding
shop
X X
Manufactured Home
Park – See Note 7
S
Manufactured Home on
Individual Lot (Class A
only), See Section 7-13A,
9-3
O
Manufactured Home
Class A, See Notes 7,9 &
Sections 7-13A, 9-3
O
Manufactured Home
Class B, See Notes 7,9 &
Sections 7-13A, 9-3
S
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-19
Table of Permitted Uses:
RA
R-40
R-20
R-12
R-10
RM
RM-U
O-I
HC
M-1
M-2
Manufactured Home
Subdivision, See Section
7-13A
O
Manufactured Home
Sales
S S
Manufactured structures
temporary, See Note 8
X X X X
Manufacturing, apparel,
soft goods, textiles
X X
Manufacturing, brick,
tile/cement
X
Manufacturing, furniture
and upholstery
X X
Manufacturing, machine
tools
X
Manufacturing,
fertilizers, metal plating,
milling (feed, flour, etc.),
paper goods, etc.
X
Manufacturing, sawmills X
Mini warehouse, Storage
Buildings
S S X X
Monument, cut stone
manufacture & sales
X
Nursery & plant
cultivation sales, See
Note 4
X X X X X
Nursing & rest homes S S S S S
Office supply sales X X
Outdoor storage yards
(primary use) See Note 4
S X X
Pet Grooming X X
Pharmacy & drug store X X X
Photographic Studio S
X X X X
Planned Building Groups,
Commercial or Industrial
X S S S
Post Office, Public
Buildings
X X X X X
Printing and copy shops X X
Professional & business
offices
S X X
Public Events, See Note
10
X
X
X X X X
X
X
X
X X
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-20
Table of Permitted Uses:
RA
R-40
R-20
R-12
R-10
RM
RM-U
O-I
HC
M-1
M-2
Public utility substations
& facilities, See Note 11
S S S S S S S S S S S
Radio-control model
races-car track (electric
model cars)
S S S
Radio or television studio X X X
Radio or television tower S S S S
Reception House S S X
Recycling Convenience
Site
S S S S S
Recycling Processing
Facility, Indoors
X X
Repair, rental & service
of products sold within
the same district,
conducted indoors
X X X X
Residence, duplex X X S X
Residence, single-family
detached, site built and
modular, See Note 12
X X X X X X X
Restaurants OT X X
Retail and Membership
Warehouse
Establishments, over
25,000 sq. ft.
S S S
Retail (less than 25,000
sq/ft)(music, books,
electronics, household
and similar sales)
X
S (Old
Town
Overlay
Zone)
X
Rooming House (see B
&B)
S X
Schools, elementary and
secondary
S S S S S S S
Schools, business/trade X X X
Seafood sales X
Service stations S X X
Sexually oriented
businesses
S
Sheet metal fabrication X X
Shooting Range, Outdoor S S
Sign, (manufacturing) X X X
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-21
Table of Permitted Uses:
RA
R-40
R-20
R-12
R-10
RM
RM-U
O-I
HC
M-1
M-2
Solar Energy Systems
Level 1
X X X X X X X X X X X
Solar Energy Systems
Level 2
S
Solar Energy Systems
Level 3
Storage, above ground
flammable liquids for
distribution
S S
Studios, for artist,
dancers, gymnastics,
martial arts, designers,
musicians,
photographers
S OT X X
Swimming Pool, as
Accessory use – See
Notes 2,13
X X X X X S X X
Tailor Shop X X X
Tattoo and body piercing X
Taxidermy X
Telecommunications
Towers
S S S
Temporary offices,
(mobile structures for
use during construction),
See Note 8
X X X X X
Theatre, indoor X
Tire recapping X
Townhouse
Developments
X X
Trailer rentals/sales
(semi-tractor-trailers)
X X
Trucking terminal X
Urgent Care Clinic X X
Veterinary clinic with
Outdoor Run
S S S
Veterinary Clinic, No
Outdoor Run
OT X X X X
With the exclusion of
wine and spirits,
warehousing/wholesaling
and packaged food
products
X
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-22
Table of Permitted Uses:
RA
R-40
R-20
R-12
R-10
RM
RM-U
O-I
HC
M-1
M-2
Section 7-14 Development Standards for Particular Uses - Notes to the Table of
Permitted Uses
1. Accessory Dwelling Unit: Accessory dwelling units within single-family houses or on singlefamily
lots shall be encouraged and designed to meet housing needs.
a. The accessory dwelling unit shall be subordinate to the primary living quarters.
b. Not more than one accessory dwelling unit is permitted per lot.
c. Any accessory dwelling unit shall be located in the rear yard of a single family use lot
subject to the requirements of this Section.
d. Accessory dwelling units may be created as a second story within detached garages
provided that the height of the secondary dwelling unit and/or garage does not exceed the
height of the principal structure on the lot. There shall be a two story height maximum.
e. The accessory dwelling unit may not be larger than fifty percent of the gross floor area of
the principal structure. The minimum habitable area of the secondary dwelling shall not be
less than 300 square feet. Maximum building footprint for a secondary dwelling unit shall
be 750 square feet.
f. No additional parking spaces are required for the accessory dwelling unit provided the
number of spaces for the principal structure (per Article XIII, Section 13-4) is satisfied.
g. Accessory dwelling units shall be architecturally compatible to the principal building (e.g.
pitch of roof, wall or trim materials, architecture style, window details).
h. The property owner(s) on which the accessory dwelling unit is to be located shall occupy at
least one of the dwelling units on the premises.
i. Home occupations may be conducted in an accessory dwelling unit.
2. Accessory Uses
a. For swimming pools as an accessory structure see Note 13 and Article XII, Section 12-4(g).
a. Accessory Structures
• Location: Detached accessory buildings shall be located at least 10 feet behind the front
plane of the primary structure.
• Height: Accessory buildings shall not exceed the roofline of the existing primary
structure as measured from the center of the building.
• Building Footprint: The gross square footage of the accessory building shall not exceed
the gross floor area of the first floor of the principal building. The total built footprint of
the lot shall not exceed twenty four percent (24%) including all development.
• Utilities: Water, sanitary sewer, gas and electric utilities shall be provided by branching
service from the principal building.
• Larger Structure: A request for a larger structure than permitted under this section or for
separate utilities connection shall be approved as a special use permit by the city council.
The applicant shall follow the procedure for application of a special use permit and
supply a site plan depicting existing conditions as well as proposed development. The
applicant shall also submit in writing reasons for exceeding the size requirement or why a
separate utility connection is requested, or both.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-23
• Exterior Building Materials: Accessory structures placed in a side yard shall utilize
exterior building materials that match and/or complement the primary structure. The
developer shall present a plan to the Zoning Administrator for use of exterior building
materials which must be approved prior to issuance of a zoning permit.
• Limit: There shall be no more than two (2) accessory structures per lot. Accessory
structures are only permitted on lots where a principal structure exists.
• Size: Lots measuring 40,000 sq. ft. or smaller: 1,500 sq. ft. or the size allowed by
limiting built-upon area of the lot to 24%, whichever is smaller.
Lots larger than 40,000 sq. ft. but smaller than 2.5 acres: 2,000 sq. ft. or the size allowed
by limiting built-upon area of the lot to 24%, whichever is smaller.
b. Structures associated with Bona Fide farms or lots 2.5 acres and larger shall be excluded from
this section.
d. Residential use shall be permitted in an accessory structure in the RA and R-40 district;
however the accessory structure shall not be more than 40% of gross floor area of the first
floor of the primary building.
e. Outside storage as an accessory use is permitted only in the Heavy Manufacturing district,
provided it is enclosed by a fence at least six feet high.
f. Portable Storage Containers
General
• Portable Storage Containers shall be allowed in the City of Trinity and Extra Territorial
Jurisdiction (ETJ) only in accordance with a Temporary Use Permit issued by the
Planning and Zoning Administrator.
• A Portable Storage Container is not a building or structure.
• A Portable Storage Container is designed for the storage of personal property and
transport by commercial vehicle. Portable Storage Containers are typically rented for
household moving or temporary storage at a central, secure location.
• Portable Storage Containers when on site shall be located in a vehicular parking area and
shall not obstruct any required parking space or public safety installation.
Household or Personal Use
• Portable Storage Containers for Household or Personal use shall be for household
moving or storage of personal property at a separate location. The Temporary Use
Permit shall be valid for fifteen (15) days with one fifteen (15) day extension.
Contractor Use
• Contractors may use Portable Storage Containers for the storage of construction materials
and equipment at a site with a valid Building Permit. The Temporary Use Permit shall be
in the name of the Contractor and will expire with the Building Permit.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-24
• A portable storage container may also be used for storage of household items for the
duration of a renovation project. If a building permit is required for the project, the
Temporary Use Permit shall be in the name of the Contractor and will expire with the
Building Permit. If no Building Permit is required, the Temporary Use Permit shall
expire in 90 days.
3. Automobile Body Shop; Automobile Repair Service – Outdoor servicing, repair or disassembly is
not allowed. Junkyards, automobile graveyards, or the outside storage of secondhand material for
resale are prohibited in any form. All vehicles stored overnight must be stored every night behind the
front lot line. Temporary storage of more than 10 vehicles is permitted only if an opaque screened
enclosure at least 6 feet high is provided.
4. Builders Supply Sales, Contractors Yards, Sales and Rental with Outdoor Storage – All outside
storage shall be completely screened from view from all streets. Security fencing, a minimum of six
feet in height, shall be provided around all outside storage yards. All storage areas shall be
maintained in a manner so as to limit dust from drifting onto adjoining properties. Where storage
yards abut a residential use, the storage area shall be screened and buffered by plantings at least six
feet tall.
5. Home Occupations (including renting of rooms). Home occupations are permitted only as an
incidental use to the home and must operate within the following guidelines:
• A home occupation shall occupy no more than 25% percent of the gross floor area of a dwelling
unit.
• No outside storage or display of items associated with the home occupation is permitted.
• Signage identifying a home occupation may not be illuminated and is limited to one wall or one
freestanding sign per zoning lot and a maximum display surface of four (4) square feet. A permit
is required as provided by Article 11 Signs.
• The home occupation may be conducted entirely within a dwelling unit.
• An accessory structure not to exceed 25% of the gross floor area of the primary residence is
allowed to host the home occupation, provided the same materials and design of the primary
residence are incorporated into the structure.
• Only one person may be employed who is not an occupant of the residence.
• Activities shall not generate traffic, parking, noise, odors, or electrical interference beyond what
normally occurs in the zoning district.
• Instruction in music, dancing, art or similar subjects shall be limited to no more than five (5)
students at one time.
• Permitted home occupations include, but are not limited to: typing services, telephone sales,
barber/beauty services, doctor/dentist office, architects, accountants, music and art lessons, family
day care (5 or fewer persons), food catering, and handcrafting, etc.
Home Occupation – (Grading and Contractors Operation)
• The minimum lot or parcel size shall be five (5) acres.
• All buildings shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any side lot line and 200 feet
from the street right of way.
• The operator of the home occupation must reside on the same parcel of land upon which the
home occupation is located.
• No outdoor storage of materials is permitted.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-25
• No more than five (5) commercial and/or employee vehicles may be parked at the property at one
time. Vehicles with three axels or more are prohibited.
• One home occupation shall be permitted.
• The home occupation shall not create smoke, odor, dust or noise which would cause health
hazard or nuisance to surrounding property.
• The home occupation shall not be operated on site between the hours of 9 p.m. to 6 a.m.
• The property owner shall screen the use to the highest extent possible from adjoining properties
and roadways using location of the building, existing vegetation and new vegetation. New
vegetation shall include a row of Leland cypress or similar trees to obstruct the view of the
building.
• The residence must be approved for occupancy and a site plan shall be present prior to permits
being issued to insure compliance with the above conditions.
6. Live-Work Unit: Construction shall meet requirements of residential and commercial building
codes, and the following:
• Non-residential use areas shall meet accessibility requirements of the North Carolina
Accessibility Code (including site access and parking).
• The maximum total size of Live-Work unit is 3000 square feet and three stories in height.
• The work area shall occupy 50% or less of the total unit.
• Permitted Uses within live-work buildings include retail uses permitted in RM-U district as well
as home occupations.
7. Manufactured Home Parks –
New Manufactured Home Parks - See Special Use provisions parks.
Existing Manufactured Home Parks – Replacement of Homes:
Manufactured Homes may be replaced in existing manufactured home parks by Class A or B homes
and must meet the following requirements:
• Underpinning Requirement. Manufactured homes entering approved manufactured home parks
shall, after the adoption of this Ordinance, and upon installation of the unit, may have a
permanent masonry foundation or vinyl, aluminum, galvanized metal or simulated rock/masonry
panels, underpinning installed.
• Tying Down Manufactured Homes. Every manufactured home placed in the park must be tied
down to resist overturning in the event of high winds. All such tie downs shall be in accordance
with the State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured Homes.
• Wheel and Axle Removed. Every manufactured home placed in the park must have wheels and
axles removed.
• Manufactured Homes Front Entrance Requirements. Every manufactured home placed in the
park shall have a concrete pad (5ft x 10ft x 4in) or a deck or porch (8ft x 12ft) built of treated
lumber and built to North Carolina Building Code specifications at the front entrance.
8. Manufactured Structures, Temporary – Manufactured structures are allowed as temporary
facilities in specific situations:
a. As temporary office quarters but not for human habitation; and
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-26
b. As temporary classroom units where public schools are permitted as long as the units are
approved by the N.C. Department of Insurance. The Zoning Administrator shall issue temporary
use permits for 12 months, renewable for successive six month periods as long as the specific
conditions which created the need for the temporary unit exist.
9. Manufactured Home, Class B - Class B manufactured homes are permitted in manufactured home
parks, not on individual lots unless otherwise stated in the Zoning Ordinance.
10. Public Events – Temporary public events of a civic, religious or of a nonprofit nature may be issued
a temporary zoning permit. Such events shall include but not be limited to: outdoor concerts,
revivals, fundraisers and festivals. Such permits shall be issued for a fixed period of time, not to
exceed 30 days. Public Events shall be permitted in all zoning districts with issuance of a temporary
permit.
To receive this permit the applicant must present a site plan showing where the event will take place,
adequate parking, and points of ingress and egress. The applicant must be the coordinator and contact
person for the event. The applicant must also present a letter of approval to use the property if the
applicant is not the property owner. This permit must be applied for before any tents, equipment or
utilities are set up.
11. Public Utility Substations Including Transformer Stations, Pump and Lift Stations, etc. - The
entire facility shall have a security fence at least six feet high unless the structure is secured and built
of brick or concrete. If the installation abuts a residence, it must be at least 50 feet from the
residence and shall be screened from the residence with a thick buffer of evergreen shrubbery or trees
which will reach at least six feet in height. Equipment producing noise in excess of 70 decibels shall
be located at least 100 feet from the nearest residence.
12. Residence Single Family Detached (Site Built and Modular) - G.S. 143-139.1 as currently written
or hereafter amended identifies the following construction and design standards for modular homes to
qualify for a North Carolina State Residential Building Code seal or label.
• Roof pitch. - For homes with a single predominant roofline, the pitch of the roof shall be no less
than five feet rise for every 12 feet of run.
• Eave projection. - The eave projections of the roof shall be no less than 10 inches, which may not
include a gutter around the perimeter of the home, unless the roof pitch is 8/12 or greater.
• Exterior wall. - The minimum height of the exterior wall shall be at least seven feet six inches for
the first story.
• Siding and roofing materials. - The materials and texture for the exterior materials shall be
compatible in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior materials commonly used in
standard residential construction.
• Foundations. - The home shall be designed to require foundation supports around the perimeter.
The supports may be in the form of piers, pier and curtain wall, piling foundations, a perimeter
wall, or other approved perimeter supports.
In addition, the following appearance standard shall apply to all new site-built and modular residential
structures in Trinity:
• Foundation Materials - A continuous masonry curtain wall at the foundation shall be required, unpierced
except for required access and ventilation points. Acceptable facing materials include
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 7-27
brick, decorative concrete masonry units or similar masonry material as approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
Residential structures which cannot meet this standard may appeal to the Board of Adjustment under
the provisions of Article XVI.
Single Family detached, site built and modular homes are allowed under Mixed Residential (RM) but
only with a Planned Unit Development and only when a special use permit is issued.
13. Swimming Pools (as accessory uses) - Pools shall be located so as to comply with the minimum
setback requirements for accessory structures for the district in which it is located. Pools which are
not an integral part of the principal building shall be located a minimum of ten feet from the principal
building. Security Fencing: Swimming pools located outdoors shall be protected by a fence, or equal
enclosure four feet high and equipped with a self-closing and positive self-latching gate provided with
hardware for permanent locking.
14. Agricultural Uses-Livestock - A minimum lot size of 2 1/2 acres shall be required to keep livestock.
Appropriate fencing shall be required to contain the livestock. A zoning permit shall be required for
the construction of any accessory structures associated with livestock use. All livestock shall be
maintained in accordance with the City of Trinity Animal Control Ordinance.
15. Family Care Homes – No family care home shall be in a multi family residence (townhouse,
condominium or apartment.
16. Recycling Processing Facilities. Recycling Processing Facilities are subject to the following additional
standards and requirements:
a. All outside storage shall be enclosed in a structure or a truck trailer. Areas used for storage shall
be screened from view from public Local Roads and Local Streets as well as all adjoining properties
that are zoned for residential use or contain an existing, legal residential use. Required screening
shall employ fencing a minimum of eight (8) feet in height. To supplement required fencing, a row
of evergreen trees selected from the recommended List of Recommended Species shall be planted
in a staggered pattern for every fifteen (15) feet of fencing used along public Local Roads and Local
Streets. Required plantings shall be between the fence and the public road right-of-way. All fence
gating shall be maintained in a operational manner and all gating shall be closed and secured outside
of business hours.
b. A minimum separation of five feet shall be maintained along the interior perimeter between all
required screening and stored materials.
c. Outside storage shall not extend into any portion of the Front Yard or any Side Yard fronting on a
public Local Road or Local Street..
d. Recycling Processing Facilities shall be maintained in a manner to limit dust from drifting onto
adjoining properties. Weeds and grass heights shall be controlled within the property and along
public rights-of–way.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-1
ARTICLE VIII
SPECIAL USES
Section 8-1 Objectives and Purposes
Permitting Special Uses adds flexibility to the Zoning Ordinance. Subject to high standards of planning
and design, certain property uses which would otherwise be undesirable in certain districts can be developed
to minimize any bad effects they might have on surrounding properties.
The uses for which Special Use Permits are required are listed in the Table of Permitted Uses. A detailed
description of the procedures which must be followed in the issuance of each permit is contained in the
following pages. Uses specified in this section shall be permitted only upon the issuance of a Special Use
Permit by the City Council.
Section 8-2 Application
The applicant for a Special Use Permit is the owner or owners of all property covered by the request. It is
recommended that the applicant, or his/her representative, meet with the Zoning Administrator before
beginning the application process to discuss the proposed plans and the special use process.
In applying for a Special Use Permit, the burden is on the applicant to present sufficient evidence to allow
the City Council to make a finding that all of the required specific standards will be met.
The owner(s) of all property included in the petition for a Special Use Permit shall submit a complete
application to the Zoning Administrator at least 20 days before the meeting of the City Council at which it
is to be first considered. Such application shall include all of the requirements pertaining to it in this
section and without such information cannot be processed for consideration. Applications shall include
site plans and shall be prepared to provide a full and accurate description of the proposed use including its
location, appearance and operational characteristics. Three copies of a site plan shall be submitted on
sheets no larger than 36” by 24” drawn to a scale of no less than 1” = 50’. The plans shall conform to the
Community Development checklists.
At the time of submission, applicants shall pay a fee established by the City Council.
Section 8-3 City Council Review; Notice; Recommendations.
When deciding special use permits the City Council shall follow quasi-judicial procedures.
The City Council shall review the application. In the course of its review, the City Council shall consider
the site plan, all requirements for the particular use, the compatibility of the proposed use with the zoning
district and surrounding properties, and its compatibility with Trinity’s Land Development Plan.
At the meeting during which the application is considered, the Planning Board shall conduct a public
hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the property and to
owners of adjacent properties as listed in the Randolph County tax registry; it shall be posted on the
property for which the Special Use Permit is sought and run in a newspaper of local distribution once
weekly for two consecutive weeks. At the hearing, substantial, competent and material evidence shall
be presented under oath.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-2
The City Council decision shall be done by applying the land-use impact facts of the proposed special
use to the following standards:
a) that the use or development is located, designed, and proposed to be operated so as to
maintain or promote the public health, safety, and general welfare;
b) that the use or development complies with all required regulations and standards of this
ordinance and with all other applicable regulations;
c) that the use or development is located, designed, and proposed to be operated so as not to
substantially injure the value adjoining or abutting property, or that the use or
development is a public necessity; and
d) that the use or development will be in harmony with the area in which it is to be located
and conforms with the general plans for the land use and development of City of Trinity
and its environment.
Section 8-4 City Council Hearing; Notice; Action
When deciding special use permits, the City Council shall follow quasi-judicial procedures.
On receiving the application the City Council shall give notice of a public hearing on the application.
Notice of the public hearing shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the property and to owners of
property within six hundred (600) feet as listed in the Randolph County tax registry; posted on the
property for which the special use permit is sought and run in a local newspaper once weekly for two
consecutive weeks before the public hearing.
All evidence presented at the public hearing shall be under oath, and evidence shall be competent,
substantial, and material. The City Council shall consider the application and comments at the public
hearing and may grant or deny the special use permit requested.
If the Council grants the special use permit, the approval shall include approval of plans as may be
required. In granting the permit, the City Council shall make a written decision that: (a) identifies the
key facts of the case, and (b) applies these facts to the following standards:
a) that the use or development is located, designed, and proposed to be operated so as to
maintain or promote the public health, safety, and general welfare;
b) that the use or development complies with all required regulations and standards of this
ordinance and with all other applicable regulations;
c) that the use or development is located, designed, and proposed to be operated so as not to
substantially injure the value adjoining or abutting property, or that the use or
development is a public necessity; and
d) that the use or development will be in harmony with the area in which it is to be located
and conforms with the general plans for the land use and development of City of Trinity
and its environs.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-3
When voting on the Special Use Permit Request, a majority vote of Council is sufficient to grant the
request.
For the purpose of this section, vacant positions on the Council and member who are disqualified from
voting on quasi-judicial matter shall not be considered members of the Council for calculation of the
requisite majority.
In granting the Permit, the Council may designate only those conditions, in addition and in connection
therewith, as will, in its opinion, assure that the use in its proposed location will be harmonious with the
area in which it is proposed to be located, with the spirit of this ordinance and clearly in keeping with the
public welfare. All such additional conditions shall be entered into the minutes of the meeting at which
the Special Use Permit is granted, on the Special Use Permit itself and on the approved plans. All
specific conditions shall run with the land and shall be binding on the original applicants, their heirs,
successors and assigns.
If the Council denies a request for a Special Use permit, it shall enter the reasons for its action in the
minutes of the meeting at which the action was taken.
Section 8-5 Conflicts of Interest
A member of the Board or City Council shall not participate in or vote on any quasi-judicial matter in a
matter that would violate affected persons’ constitutional rights to an impartial decision maker.
Impermissible conflicts include but are not limited to, a member having a fixed opinion prior to hearing
the matter that is not susceptible to change, undisclosed ex parte communications, a close familial,
business, or other associational relationship with an affected person, or a financial interest in the outcome
of the matter. If an objection is raised to a member’s participation and that member does not recuse
himself or herself, the remaining members shall by majority vote rule on the objection.
Section 8-6 Appeal of Decisions
No appeal may be taken from the action of the City Council in granting or denying a Special Use Permit,
except through Superior Court of Randolph County. Any petition for review shall be filed with the Clerk
of Superior Court within 30 days after decision of the Council is filed in the office of the City Clerk, or
after a written copy of the decision is delivered to every aggrieved party who has filed a written request
for such copy with the clerk at the time of the hearing of the case, whichever is later. The Council’s
decision may be delivered to the aggrieved party either by personal service or by registered mail or
certified mail return receipt requested.
Section 8-7 Failure to Comply with Plans or Conditions
In the event of failure to comply with the plans approved by the City Council or Board of Adjustment or
with any other conditions imposed upon the special use permit, the permit shall thereupon immediately
become void and of no effect. No building permits for further construction or certificates of occupancy
under this special use permit shall be issued. If a failure to comply with conditions in a special use permit
occurs after occupancy, the owner, lessee, or other responsible person shall be notified in writing of the
violation. No earlier than five days after the receipt of the written notice, the body issuing the special use
permit may issue a finding of fact that a violation of the requirements of this ordinance exists. If such
finding of fact is made, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to continue the special use
until the responsible party makes the necessary corrections and the body authorized to issue the permit
conducts a public hearing and finds that the violation no longer exists.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-4
Section 8-8 Regulations for Special Use Permits
Detailed regulations for the special uses subject to this section are set forth in the following regulations
for special uses and the notes related to those provisions.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-5
Use: Adult Establishments
Special Use District: M-1
Information Required for
Special Use Permit
Application:
The following information is required, in addition to information
usually required for a Special use Permit::
a) Name, address and age of the applicant; or if a partnership, the
names, addresses and ages of the persons who constitute such
partnership; or if a corporation, the names, addresses and ages of its
directors, officers and principal stockholders. Each application
shall also include the names, ages and addresses of all present
employees.
b) A complete statement of convictions of any person whose name is
required to be given in paragraph (a) for any crime other than traffic
violations, including bit not limited to, any felony, prostitution or
violation of any local ordinance or state law related to adult
establishments, pornography or indecent exposure.
c) A description of any other business to be operated on the same
premises or on adjoining premises owned by or controlled by
anyone listed in (a) above.
Location Restrictions:
No adult establishment may be located within 1500 feet of residence,
school, church, community center, community college, community
recreational facility, or another adult establishment
All measurements shall be made by drawing straight lines from the
nearest point of the lot line where the proposed adult establishment is to
be located to the nearest point of the lot line or boundary of the closest
residence or other use enumerated above.
Light and Noise:
Flashing lights or fluttering devices designed and used to attract
attention are not permitted.
Amplification of sound directed outside the building used by the
establishment is also not permitted.
Verification of Application
Information:
The application for a special use permit for an adult establishment shall
be acted on as prescribed by this ordinance. In addition,
a) The City shall be given 30 days from receipt of a properly
completed application form to verify the information contained
in the application before any further steps are taken.
b) The application must contain no misstatement of fact.
c) The applicant, or any person having a legal or beneficial
interest in the establishment, or any employee cannot have been
convicted of any crime or ordinance violation involving sexual
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-6
misconduct, including but not limited to G.S.14-177, G.S. 14-
202.1, G.S.14-203, G.S. 14-208, or any local, state or federal
law related to racketeering or the possession, sale or
distribution of a controlled substance.
Compliance with applicable
ordinances and codes:
The applicant must conform to all requirements of applicable law,
including building and fire prevention codes and the approval has been
obtained pursuant to zoning requirements provided by law.
Conditions Leading to
Revocation of Special Use
Permit:
The City Council shall revoke a special use permit issued pursuant to
this section if it finds the any one of the following:
a) A misstatement of fact contained in the application is
discovered after issuance of the permit.
b) The applicant allows persons or corporations to own in interest
in or be employed by the business after issuance of the permit
which would have been in violation of Information Required
for Special Use Permit Application (previous page) if the
same had owned an interest or been employed at the time of
filing the application.
c) The applicant has violated any provision of this ordinance.
d) The applicant or beneficial owner or an employee is convicted
of any crime after issuance of the permit which is listed in
Information Required for Special Use Permit Application.
e) The permittee violates any zoning, building or fire prevention
ordinance.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-7
Use: Apartments.
Special Use District: RM, RM-U,
Density Density: 12,000 square feet, plus 3,000 square feet for each
additional unit over 2.
Site Plan Site Plan: The site plan shall show the location of the building,
streets, walkways, parking, (as per Article XII) recreational areas
and facilities within the site; all existing buildings and structures
within one hundred (100) feet; and public or private easements or
rights-of-way adjoining or intersecting such property.
Design Standards
Included in Site Plan:
Timing: Proposed schedule of development phases.
Circulation: Proposed points of ingress and egress and proposed
pattern of internal automobile and pedestrian circulation.
Landscaping: When a proposed apartment complex abuts a
residentially zoned lot, the complex must adhere to the following
landscaping requirements.
a. At least two (2) rows of evergreen trees which may be
selected from the recommended List of Recommended
Species (on file with the Zoning Administrator) shall be
planted. Trees shall have a minimum height of three feet
(3’) when planted. The rows shall be spaced seven feet
(7’) apart and centered within the buffer strip. Tree spacing
shall be eight feet (8’) off centered with trees in adjacent
rows offset (staggered) four feet (4’); and a solid visual
barrier fence six feet (6’) in height shall be erected around
any loading, unloading, or outdoor storage areas; and
b. Earth berms may be used in conjunction with planting to
satisfy height requirements; but slopes shall not exceed
one foot (1’) to two feet (2’) horizontal.
c. At least one (1) deciduous tree shall be planted along the
street no less than ten feet (10’) off of the right-of-way (on
private property), for each forty feet (40’) of street frontage
or fraction thereof for new construction or extensive
rehabilitation. Each tree shall be at least one and one-half
inches (1 ½”) in caliper and may be selected from the List
of Recommended Species or otherwise approved by the
Zoning Administrator and shall be provided with adequate
space for water percolation and root growth. In lieu of this
requirement, the developer shall provide a Landscaping
Plan and detailed plant list, approved by the Planning
Director or Zoning Administrator, which provides for a
variety of plantings which achieve the desired aesthetic
goals of the buffering requirement.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-8
Traffic: A developer shall present a traffic analysis on projected
traffic counts at peak hours and proposed plans to mitigate any
congestion associated with the development.
Utilities: Proposed provisions for storm drainage and sanitary
sewerage, approved by a N.C. certified registered engineer.
Proposed solid waste storage facilities consisting of a minimum
10’ X 20’ concrete pad with vehicle apron and a six foot (6’) high
stockade fence on minimum of three (3) sides with six foot (6’)
high ballads to protect said fence.
Proposed water system and firefighting facilities such as hydrants
or sprinkler connections.
All plans showing utility construction details must meet the
current specifications of the City of Trinity.
Types of surfacing, slope, grade and cross section of drives,
sidewalks, malls, etc. Private streets shall be designed to assure
proper access and turn around for service and emergency vehicles.
Buffering: Location and heights of all fences, walls, and hedges.
Environmental Impact:
Lighting plan: A lighting plan shall be provided that shows the
type, height and density of all outdoor lighting.
When abutting a residential district lighting shall be designed so as
not to create a nuisance on abutting property owners. The
maximum illumination at the edge of the property line adjacent to
a residential zoning district is ½ foot candles.
Recreation Area: Location and amount of recreation area, if any.
Signage: Size and proposed location of any freestanding signs.
Placement of Buildings: There shall be maintained at least
twenty (20) linear feet of open space between individual and
unattached buildings of one story and thirty (30) linear feet
between building two stories or greater in an apartment
development;
Setbacks from public street right-of-ways shall be the same as
required by the zoning district where the apartments are located;
and
Any group of buildings forming a courtyard shall have at least
twenty-five (25%) percent of the perimeter of such courtyard open
for access by emergency vehicles.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-9
Use: Athletic Fields, Swim and Tennis Clubs, Community Centers, Parks and
Playgrounds, Campgrounds, Clubs and Lodges
Special Use District: RA, R-40, R-20, R-12, R-10, RM-U, M-2, for Athletic Fields, Parks and
Playgrounds, Community Centers, Swim and Tennis Clubs, etc.
RA, R-40, & RM-U for Clubs and Lodges
Required Plans: The applicant shall submit plans which show:
a) location and approximate size of all existing and proposed
buildings and structures on the site and within 500 feet of the
site;
b) proposed points of ingress and egress and the proposed pattern
of internal circulation;
c) proposed parking areas;
d) proposed provision for storm and sanitary sewer; and the
proposed treatment of ground cover, slopes, banks and ditches.
Setbacks: All activities and facilities shall be located at least 20 feet from
any property line.
Planted Buffers: There shall be a planted buffer at least three feet thick and six feet high
between this property and adjoining properties.
Lighting: Lighting shall be located and shielded so as not to adversely affect
adjacent property.
Fenced Swimming Pool: A swimming pool area shall be enclosed by a fence at least five feet
high approved by the Zoning Administrator.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-10
Use: Automobile Car Wash
Special Use District: HC
Plans: Plans shall be presented which show:
Setbacks
Location and layout of all buildings
Fencing, screening and landscaping
Provision for minimizing and slowing runoff from the site.
Setback: Building(s) shall be at least 75 feet from any interior, side or rear
property line which adjoins residentially or public-institutionally zoned
property.
Screening: A minimum six foot high opaque fence shall be provided adjacent to all
residentially-zoned property. In addition, shrubs or trees with a height
of six feet at maturity shall be planted on the side of the fence adjacent
to the residential property.
Operational Requirements: • All washing operations shall be contained in a building.
• Specific areas shall be provided for the manual drying,
waxing, polishing and vacuuming of vehicles where these
services are offered on the site. These areas shall not conflict
with on-site circulation patterns.
• Hours of operation shall be between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
when adjoining developed residentially zoned property.
• Adequate provision shall be made for the safe and efficient disposal
and/or recycling of waste products and runoff.
Condition of Property: The entire property shall be kept in a clean, neat and orderly condition.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-11
Use: Bed and Breakfast (Tourist Home) & Rooming House
Special Use District: RA, R-40, R-20, & RM-U for Bed and Breakfast / Tourist Home
RM for Rooming House
Required Plan: Applicant shall submit a plat showing the location of parking,
buildings, adjacent uses, accessibility to thoroughfares, and
buffering. The plat shall show or state the type of buffering.
Parking and Buffering: a. Parking shall be allowed in the rear yard at one space per each
room to be rented plus one space for each employee, plus two
spaces for permanent occupants of the dwelling.
b. All parking shall be buffered from adjacent properties by a
buffer strip consisting of a screened fence or a planted strip at
least five feet in width, composed of deciduous or evergreen
trees or a mixture of each, less than one row of dense shrubs,
spaced not more than five feet apart.
Use Separation: No bed and breakfast or other similar use shall locate within four
hundred (400) feet of a rooming house, boarding house or another
tourist home.
Operation:
a. The facility must be owned by the landowner who also
resides on the property.
b. The use shall be located in a structure which was originally
constructed as a dwelling.
c. Meals served on premises shall be only for guests of the
facility.
Signs: Signs identifying the operation shall be non illuminated and shall
be either wall or yard signs, no more than 2 square feet in area.
One sign per zoning lot.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-12
Use: Cemeteries (as a principal use, not accessory to a church or
synagogue)
Special Use District: RA, R-40, RM-U
Plans Required Must Show: The applicant shall present plans which show:
(a). topography of the area and assures a well-drained site with
adequate storm drainage facilities;
(b). location of signs, entrances and exits and buildings;
(c). proposed points of access and egress and pattern of internal
circulation;
(d). proposed restrictions, if any.
Street Access and Parking: a) Adequate off-street room shall be provided for funeral
processions.
b) The site shall have direct access to a collector or arterial street.
Buffer: A screen of dense plant material at least six feet high shall be provided
when a cemetery abuts a residential lot.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-13
Use: Churches and Religious Congregations with Their
Customary Accessory Uses
Special Use Districts: RA, R-40, R-20, R-12, R-10, RM-U, O&I
Plans Required Must Show: The applicant shall present plans which show:
(a). topography of the area and assures a well-drained site with
adequate storm drainage facilities;
(b). location of signs, entrances and exits and buildings;
(c). proposed points of access and egress and pattern of internal
circulation;
(d). proposed restrictions, if any.
Street Access and Parking: (a). The site shall have direct access to a collector or arterial street.
Buffer: A screen of dense plant material at least six feet high shall be provided
when a church/synagogue abuts any residential lot.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-14
Use: Condominiums
Special Use District: RM & RM-U
Density Density: 12,000 square feet, plus 3,000 square feet for each
additional unit over 2.
Site Plan The site plan shall show the location of the building, streets,
walkways, parking, recreational areas and facilities within the site;
all existing buildings and structures within one hundred (100) feet;
and public or private easements or rights-of-way adjoining or
intersecting such property.
Design Standards
Included In Site Plan:
Timing: Proposed schedule of development likely to be followed
shall be submitted.
Common Areas: All condominium developments shall contain
commonly owned land for the use of residents of the development.
Landscaping: When a proposed apartment complex abuts a
residentially zoned lot, the complex must adhere to the following
landscaping requirements.
a. At least two (2) rows of evergreen trees whish
may by selected from the recommended List of
Recommended Species (on file with the Zoning
Administrator) shall be planted. Trees shall have
a minimum height of three feet (3’) when planted.
The rows shall be spaced seven feet (7’) apart and
centered within the buffer strip. Tree spacing
shall be eight feet (8’) off centered with the trees
in adjacent rows offset(staggered four feet (4’);
and a solid visual barrier fence six feet (6’) in
height shall be erected around any loading,
unloading, or outdoor storage areas; and
b. Earth berms may be used in conjunction with
planting to satisfy height requirements; but slopes
shall not exceed one foot (1’) to two feet (2’)
horizontal.
c. At least one (1) deciduous tree shall be planted
along the street no less than ten feet (10’) off of
the right of way (on private property), for each
forty feet (40’) of street frontage or fraction
thereof for new construction or extensive
rehabilitation. Each tree shall be at least one and
one-half inches (1 ½ ) in caliper and may be
selected from the List of Recommended Species
or otherwise approved by the Planning and
Zoning Enforcement Officer and shall be provided
with adequate space for water percolation and root
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-15
growth. In lieu of this requirement, the developer
shall provide a Landscaping plan and detailed
plant list, approved by the Planning and Zoning
Enforcement Officer, which provides for a variety
of plantings which achieve the desired aesthetic
goals of the buffering requirements.
Traffic: A developer shall present a traffic analysis on projected
traffic counts at peak hours and proposed plants to mitigate any
congestion associated with the development.
Plans and Declaration: Before a declaration establishing a unit ownership development
may be recorded in the office of the Randolph County Register of
Deeds as prescribed in the North Carolina Unit Ownership Act,
the declaration and plan shall be approved by the City Council.
No unit shall be conveyed until the declaration and plan have been
approved by the City Council and recorded in the Office of the
Randolph County Register of Deeds.
Homeowners Association: The establishment of a homeowners association shall be mandatory.
The homeowners association shall be organized and established as
a legal entity before or as a part of the final plat is approved and
recorded. Membership in the homeowners association is
mandatory for each original purchaser and each successive
purchaser of a residential site.
The homeowners association shall be responsible for payment of
premiums for liability insurance, local taxes, maintenance for
recreational and other facilities located on the common areas,
payment of assessments for public and private capital
improvements made to or for the benefit of the common areas,
maintenance and repair to the exterior of all attached residences
located within the development or other common area facilities. It
shall be further provided that upon default by the homeowners
association in the payment to the governmental authority of any ad
valorem taxes levied against the common areas or assessments for
a period of six (6) months, then each owner of a residential site in
the development shall become obligated to pay to the taxing or
assessing governmental authority a portion of such taxes or
assessments in an amount determined by dividing the total taxes
and/or assessments due to the governmental authority by the total
number of residential sites in the development. If the sum is not
paid by the owner within thirty (30) days following receipt of
notice of the amount due, then the sum shall become a continuing
lien on the residence of the then owner, his heirs, governmental
authority may either bring an action at law against the owner
obligated to pay the same or may elect to foreclose the lien against
the residence of the owner.
The homeowners association shall be empowered to levy
assessments against the owners of residential sites within the
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-16
development for the payment of expenditures made by the
homeowners association for the items set forth in the preceding
subparagraph and any such assessment not paid by the owner
against whom such are assessed shall constitute a lien on the
residence of the owner.
Homeowners Association
Documents To Be
Submitted:
Proposed Articles of Incorporation. Such Articles of
Incorporation shall provide for homeowners control when over
50% of the dwelling units are sold.
Proposed bylaws. Such bylaws shall provide for annual meetings
of the association, election of officers, and distribution of an
annual financial accounting to members.
Proposed annual budget. The association shall have an annual
budget showing monthly assessments. The monthly assessments
must be set at a sufficient level to insure success of the
association.
Proposed restrictions and covenants. for the common area and
residential sites.
Declaration: The Declaration shall be a complete legal document prepared in
accordance with the North Carolina Unit Ownership Act and shall
be submitted along with a plan drawing described below.
The plan of the proposed development shall be prepared and shall
contain the following particulars:
The unit designation of each unit and a statement of its location,
approximate area, number of rooms, and immediate common area
to which it has access and any other data necessary for its proper
identification.
Description of the general common areas and facilities as defined
in the North Carolina Unit Ownership Act and the proportionate
interest of each unit owner therein;
Description of all boundary lines between portions of the structures
designed for different ownership;
Description of all garages, balconies, patios, etc., which form a part
of each unit;
Description of any special common areas and facilities stating
what units shall share the same and in what proportion;
Proposed water system and firefighting facilities such as hydrants
or sprinkler connections;
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-17
Types of surfacing, slope, grade and cross section of drives,
sidewalks, malls, etc. (private streets shall be designed to assure
proper access and turn around for service and emergency
vehicles);
The location and amount of parking spaces as per Article XII;
The location and heights of all fences, walls, and hedges shall be
shown;
Location and amount of recreation area;
Signs: Size and proposed location of any freestanding signs along
the public street
Utilities: All plans showing utility construction details must meet
the current specifications of the City of Trinity; and
Proposed provision for storm drainage and sanitary sewerage,
approved by a N.C. certified registered engineer.
Solid Waste: Proposed solid waste storage facilities consisting of a
minimum 10’ x 20’ concrete pad with vehicle apron and a six foot
(6’) high stockade fence on minimum of three (3) sides with six foot
(6’) high ballards to protect said fence;
Lighting plan: A lighting plan shall be provided that shows the
type, height and density of all outdoor lighting.
When abutting a residential district lighting shall be signed so as
not to create a nuisance on abutting property owners. The
maximum illumination at the edge of the property line adjacent to
a residential zoning district is ½ foot candles.
Placement of Buildings: Space Between Buildings: There shall be maintained at least
twenty (20) linear feet of open space between individual and
unattached buildings of one story and thirty (30) linear feet
between building two stories or greater in a condominium
development;
Setbacks: Setbacks from public street right-of-ways shall be the
same as required by the zoning district where the condominium
development is located; and
Courtyards: Any group of buildings forming a courtyard shall
have at least twenty-five (25%) percent of the perimeter of such
courtyard open for access by emergency vehicles.
Construction; Final
Engineering Survey
Because a “final” plan may not be possible until an engineering
survey has been made of the constructed condominium, City
Council may permit the applicant to build under the special use
permit, providing all items other than the final engineering survey
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-18
data of the boundary line have been provided by the applicant and
approved by Council.
Recording of Declaration
and Plan
No declaration and plan shall be recorded until all final boundary
description have been added to the plan and approved by the
Zoning Administrator.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-19
Use: Day Care, Child, as Principal Use
Day Care Adult, as Principal Use
Special Use District: Child Day Care RA, R-40, RM-U, RM, OI, & HC
Adult Day Care RA, R-40, RM, & RM-U
Required Plans: Plans required, must show:
1. Location and approximate size of all existing and proposed
buildings and structures within the site; also location of buildings
on adjacent lots;
2. Proposed points of access and egress and pattern of internal
circulation;
3. Layout of parking spaces or arrangements for on-street parking if
off street parking is not available;
4. Location and extent of open play area.
Fenced Play Area: For child day care centers:
1. The facility must meet state regulations for minimum square
footage per child for interior and outdoor play space.
2. The aggregate play area must be surrounded by sturdy fence at
least four feet high.
Screening: Suitable screening must be provided to avoid any nuisance to adjoining
residential properties. Where property abuts residentially zoned land,
screening shall incorporate plantings at least six feet high that retain
foliage year round.
Hours of Operation: In residential districts, day care centers shall not be operated between
7:00 pm and 6:00 am.
Licensing Requirements: All required state licensing requirements must be met and permits
obtained.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-20
Use: Electronic Gaming Operations
Special Use District: M-1, M-2
Standards for Evaluation The following specific standards shall be used to evaluate an
application for approval of this use:
(a) Electronic Gaming Operations are not allowed as
an accessory use.
(b) Minors are not allowed on the premises of any
Electronic Gaming Operation.
(c) No Electronic Gaming Operation shall be
established within:
i. Five hundred (500) feet of a residentially
zoned lot line or lot line of a parcel in
residential use; or
ii. One thousand (1,000) feet of any place of
worship, school, park, playground,
convent, or library; or
iii. A one thousand (1,000) foot radius of
another Electronic Gaming Operation.
The location and amount of parking spaces as per Article XII;
The location and heights of all fences, walls, and hedges shall be
shown;
Location and amount of recreation area;
Signs: Size and proposed location of any freestanding signs along
the public street
Utilities: All plans showing utility construction details must meet
the current specifications of the City of Trinity; and
Proposed provision for storm drainage and sanitary sewerage,
approved by a N.C. certified registered engineer.
Solid Waste: Proposed solid waste storage facilities consisting of a
minimum 10’ x 20’ concrete pad with vehicle apron and a six foot
(6’) high stockade fence on minimum of three (3) sides with six foot
(6’) high ballards to protect said fence;
Lighting plan: A lighting plan shall be provided that shows the
type, height and density of all outdoor lighting.
When abutting a residential district lighting shall be signed so as
not to create a nuisance on abutting property owners. The
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-21
maximum illumination at the edge of the property line adjacent to
a residential zoning district is ½ foot candles.
Placement of Buildings: Space Between Buildings: There shall be maintained at least
twenty (20) linear feet of open space between individual and
unattached buildings of one story and thirty (30) linear feet
between building two stories or greater in a condominium
development;
Setbacks: Setbacks from public street right-of-ways shall be the
same as required by the zoning district where the condominium
development is located; and
Courtyards: Any group of buildings forming a courtyard shall
have at least twenty-five (25%) percent of the perimeter of such
courtyard open for access by emergency vehicles.
Construction; Final
Engineering Survey
Because a “final” plan may not be possible until an engineering
survey has been made of the constructed condominium, City
Council may permit the applicant to build under the special use
permit, providing all items other than the final engineering survey
data of the boundary line have been provided by the applicant and
approved by Council.
Recording of Declaration
and Plan
No declaration and plan shall be recorded until all final boundary
description have been added to the plan and approved by the
Zoning Administrator.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-22
Use: Emergency Services (Fire, Police, Ambulatory)
Special Use Districts: RA, R-40, R-20, R-12, R-10, RM, RM-U & OI
Plans Required Must Show: The applicant shall present plans which show:
(a). topography of the area and storm drainage facilities that assure
a well-drained site with adequate storm drainage;
(b). location of signs, entrances and exits and buildings;
(c). proposed points of access and egress
(d). parking for on-duty fire fighters beside or behind the fire station
Street Access and Parking: The site shall have direct access to a collector or arterial street.
Buffer: A screen of dense plant material at least six feet high shall be provided
when a fire station abuts a residential lot.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-23
Use: Fairs and Carnivals (including community and nonprofit
carnivals)
Special Use District: RA, R-40, OI, M-1, M-2
Required Plans:
The applicant must submit plans which show:
(a) internal circulation patterns and provisions for parking
(b) how noise, dust and traffic will be controlled - and the
visual impact of the fair or carnival
(c) size and location of signage
(d) surrounding land uses within 500 feet of the property
Facilities:
Adequate bathroom facilities shall be provided.
Trash Removal:
The applicant shall coordinate with the city to provide for trash
removal.
Days of Operation: The special use permit shall specify the number of days of operation for
the event.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-24
Use: Golf Courses
Special Use District: RA, R-40, R-20, R-12, R-10
Required Site Plan: A site plan must be submitted showing:
(a) property boundaries
(b) proposed buildings and parking areas
(c) proposed points of ingress and egress
(d) proposed pattern of internal automobile and pedestrian
circulation
(e) size and proposed location of signs
(f) lighting plan
(g) proposed schedule of development phases, if applicable
Runoff and Erosion Control: Plans must be submitted which demonstrate how run-off and erosion
will be minimized and controlled. The plans must include proposed
provisions for storm drainage and sanitary sewer approved by an N.C.
certified registered engineer.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-25
Use: Group Care Facility (Group Home)
Special use District: RA, R-40, RM, RM-U, OI
Operation: All group homes shall be licensed and/or sponsored by the
appropriate state or local agency.
The facility shall be limited to no more than thirty (30) persons.
Property Separation: No Such facility shall be located within one-half (1/2) mile of an
existing group care facility.
Parking: One space for every five (5) residents or fraction thereof, plus one
parking space for each employee on the premises.
Signage: One sign permitted, not to exceed three square feet in area.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-26
Use: Junkyards
Special Use District: M-1
Minimum Acreage: Ten (10) acres minimum are required for new junkyard/automobile
graveyard facilities.
Site Plan: The site plan shall show the location of the buildings, proposed
storage areas as well as the following details:
(1) A solid fence or wall not less than eight (8’) feet in height
shall be placed and maintained around all setback boundaries;
an open space setback of at least fifty (50’) feet shall be
maintained around the enclosure; such area shall not be used
for storage and shall be grassed and maintained in natural
vegetation outside the enclosed area.
(2) Weeds and grasses shall be controlled within the
junkyard/automobile graveyard.
(3) The height of items inside the junkyard/automobile graveyard
shall not exceed the height of the barrier fence.
(4) Items shall not be stored closer than five hundred (500’) feet
to any adjoining residential occupancy.
Copies of the site plan and application shall be sent to the appropriate
State agencies.
Stormwater and Erosion
Control:
Stormwater runoff and erosion control measures shall be installed
around the site in accordance with state standards.
Monitoring Well: A monitoring well shall be installed on the site, if applicable. The
applicant shall have the well tested at least once a year by an
approved company or laboratory. Results of all tests shall be
forwarded to the City of Trinity and appropriate state agencies.
Tire Storage: All unmounted tires (200 maximum) shall be stored in an enclosed
building to prevent the accumulation of storm water within the well of
the tire.
Financial Responsibility: The owner understands that he/she will be financially responsible for
any contamination of the site and/or its environs.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-27
Use: Land Clearing and Inert Debris Landfill (Minor):
Special Use Districts: RA
Required Plans:
1) Maximum Area: Two (2) acres.
2) Maximum Duration: Landfills are limited to a maximum period of operation of three (3)
years from the date of issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy by City of Trinity,
provided that the Planning Board may upon request grant one (1) or more three-year
renewals.
3) Use separation: One hundred (100) feet minimum from any property line to the edge of
the fill area and three hundred (300) feet minimum from any residence not on the same
tract as the landfill.
4) Buffer: Where possible a minimum fifteen (15) foot tree buffer shall be retained around
the exterior property line.
5) Access: Access to the landfill shall be from a state maintained paved road, provided that
the Planning Board may grant a waiver to the paving requirement upon reasonable
conditions and shall be controlled with gates, chains, fences, ditches and/or trees to
prevent unregulated dumping.
6) Dust: All unpaved areas shall be maintained in a manner which prevents dust from
leaving the property.
7) Operation:
a) No filling is permitted in the 100-year floodplain of any stream. Filling to the
edge of the 100-year floodplain is permitted only if the back slope is stable and no
steeper than 3:1;
b) No filling is permitted in minor drainage ways unless the drainage has been piped
or otherwise diverted in accordance with approved plans; and
c) No filling is permitted in utility easements, except electrical transmission
easements for 44kv or greater lines.
8) Closure: Landfills shall be closed with a minimum of one (1) foot of clean soil, graded to
a maximum slope of three to one (3:1), and stabilized with vegetation or by other
approved means.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-28
Use: Land Clearing and Inert Debris Landfill (Major):
Special Use Districts: M1 & M2
Required Plans:
Setbacks & Buffers
1) Use separation: One hundred (100) feet minimum from any property line to the edge of
the fill area and three hundred (300) feet minimum from any residence not on the same
tract as the landfill.
2) Buffer: Where possible a minimum fifteen (15) foot tree buffer shall be retained around
the exterior property line.
Access
1) Access to the landfill shall be controlled with gates, chains, fences, ditches and/or trees to
prevent unregulated dumping.
2) Dust: All unpaved areas shall be maintained in a manner which prevents dust from
leaving the property.
Operation
1) No filling is permitted in the 100-year floodplain of any stream. Filling to the edge of the
100-year floodplain is permitted only if the back slope is stable and no steeper than 3:1;
2) No filling is permitted in minor drainage ways unless the drainage has been piped or
otherwise diverted in accordance with approved plans; and
3) No filling is permitted in utility easements, except electrical transmission easements for
44kv or greater lines.
Closure
1) Landfills shall be closed with a minimum of one (1) foot of clean soil, graded to a
maximum slope of three to one (3:1), and stabilized with vegetation or by other approved
means.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-29
Use: Manufactured Home Parks
Special Use District: RM
Minimum Lot Size:
a) 40,000 sq. ' with individual well and septic tank; 40,000 sq.' inside
watershed
b) 15,000 sq. ' with individual septic tank and public or community
water system; 40,000 sq. ' inside watershed
c) 7,500 sq. ' with individual well and public community sewer;
12,500 sq. ' inside watershed
d) 7,500 sq. ' with public or community water and sewer system;
12,500 sq. ' inside watershed
Any and all lot sizes may be increased by the City Council to protect
public health, safety and welfare
Class A and Class B Homes
Permitted; Tie Downs and
Appearance
Class A and Class B manufactured homes may be placed in a
manufactured home park. Class C manufactured homes are a
nonconforming use and may not be placed in a manufactured home
park.
Additional criteria:
(a) Underpinning Requirement. Manufactured homes entering
approved manufactured home parks shall, after the adoption of
this Ordinance, and upon installation of unit, have vinyl,
aluminum, galvanized metal or simulated rock/masonry
panels, underpinning installed.
(b) Tying Down Manufactured Homes. Every manufactured
home placed in the park must be tied down to resist
overturning in the event of high winds. All such tie downs
shall be in accordance with the State of North Carolina
Regulations for Manufactured Homes.
(c) Wheel and Axle Removal. Every manufactured home placed
in the park must have wheels and axles removed.
(d) Manufactured Homes Front Entrance Requirements. Every
manufactured home placed in the park shall have a concrete
pad (5ft. x 10ft. x 4in.) or a deck or porch (8ft. x 12ft.) built of
treated lumber and built to North Carolina Building Code
specifications at the front entrance.
Setbacks: a) Park Setback Requirements.
Front 30 ft. from street lines
Rear exterior 25 ft., from rear property line
Side interior 10 ft., from adjoining parcels
Side street 30 ft. from side street line
b) A manufactured home shall be sited so that:
• It is located at least twenty-five feet (25) from adjacent
homes and
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-30
• A minimum five (5) foot setback from adjacent home
spaces is maintained.
c) Parking spaces shall be at least five (5) feet from adjacent home
spaces.
Parking:
Each park shall provide at least two (2) parking spaces per home. The
minimum size of each space shall be eight and one-half feet (8 ½) feet
by eighteen (18) feet. Parking spaces shall be at least five (5) feet from
adjacent home spaces.
Signage :
.
Each manufactured home park shall have located at its entrance,
perpendicular to the public road, a permanent sign not to exceed
sixteen (16) sq. ft. and not less than twelve (12) sq. ft., indicating
the park name in a minimum of six (6) inch letters on both sides
of the sign.
• The sign shall be bordered with shrubs or other yearround
plantings that are maintained so as to enhance
the park entrance.
• Any lighting of the sign shall be directed so that
adjacent properties are not subject to glare.
All signage must comply with the Randolph County 911
addressing requirements.
Identification of Spaces: Each proposed home space in a manufactured home park shall be
clearly marked by a permanent home space number sign or marker.
The home space number shall be of a size, reflectivity and color and in
a location which is readily identifiable by emergency personnel and
inspectors. All home space number signs shall be consistent within a
park and must be approved by the Randolph County 911 addressing
requirements.
Spaces Staked: Mobile home spaces shall be properly staked.
Open Space: Each park containing ten (10) or more home spaces shall provide at
least one (1) specifically designated passive recreational area amounting
to 200 sq. ft. per home space.
Landscaping:
a) Internal -Landscaping shall be provided throughout the park with
ample trees and shrubs to provide shade and break up open areas.
All banks and open areas shall be grassed.
b) External – A continuous border of trees or shrubs shall be planted
along the perimeter of the park to provide a visual break between
the park and adjacent uses.
Roads and Streets: a) Each manufactured home park shall have public access. Entrance
from a public highway shall meet all North Carolina Department of
Transportation specifications.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-31
b) Roads shall be constructed to North Carolina Department of
Transportation, Division of Highways, minimum standards. All
interior streets shall be retained as private streets on manufactured
home park property
c) All roads shall be paved.
d) All roads within new parks or additions to existing parks shall have
a forty-five (45) foot minimum right-of-way and maintain a four (4)
inch minimum stabilized base.
e) Cul-de-sacs shall be provided with a turnaround for emergency
service and vehicles, having forty (40) foot radius.
No Development in Flood
Plain:
Manufactured home parks shall not be located in a designated flood plain,
and those located on ground that is susceptible to flooding should be
graded so as to prevent any water from ponding or accumulating on the
premises. Where storm drainage pipes are located in adjacent streets,
underground drainage facilities with connections to the storm drainage
system shall be provided for the manufactured home park. Topographic
information and National Flood Insurance elevations shall be provided to
determine areas susceptible to flooding.
Preliminary Plan Review: A preliminary plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board for review
and the City Council for review and approval. Such preliminary plan
shall be drawn at a scale of not less than one-hundred (100) feet to the
inch and shall show the following on one or more sheets:
1) The name of the manufactured home park, the names and
addresses of the owner(s) and the designer of the park; date,
approximate north arrow and scale; and the boundary line of
the tract with accurate linear and angular dimensions drawn
to scale;
2) Locations of existing and platted property lines, streets,
buildings, water courses, railroads, bridges, water mains,
sewers, culverts, drain pipes and any utility easement on the
land to be developed as a manufactured home park. The
names of owners of adjoining properties shall also be
shown.
3) The names, proposed location and approximate dimensions
of proposed streets, alleys, driveways, entrances, exits,
walkways, easements, recreation areas, parks and other
spaces, reservations, trailer spaces and building lines within
the park. This information should be graphical only, not
requiring detailed computations or field work above that
required to obtain the above information; and
4) Plans of proposed utility layouts (sewer lines, water lines,
storm drainage, etc.) showing feasible connections to
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-32
existing and proposed utility systems; plan for location and
height of electric lighting; and the location and number of
garbage receptacles;
Final Plan Review and
Public Hearing:
Two copies of the final plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board
for review and to the City Council for final approval, pending public
hearing for the Special Use Permit. It shall conform with the
preliminary plan as approved. If desired by the applicant, it may
constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plan to be
developed at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to
the minimum requirements of this Section. The final plan shall be
submitted on mylar (reproducible sheets) either fifteen (15) inches by
twenty-one (21) inches or twenty (20) inches by twenty-four (24) inches
in size, to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one-hundred (100)
feet. It shall contain the following:
1) A site plan with the same graphical information required
for the preliminary plan;
2) Name of the manufactured home park, names and address
of owner(s) and park designer.
3) Date, approximate north arrow and scale;
4) Boundary line of the tract with accurate linear and angular
dimensions drawn to scale;
5) Names, location and dimensions of proposed streets,
driveways, entrances, exits, walkways, easements,
recreation areas, and other open spaces, reservations,
manufactured home spaces and building lines within the
park. The information should be drawn accurately with
detailed computations and field work completed.
6) Final engineering plans of proposed utility layouts (sewer
lines, water lines, storm drainage, etc.) showing feasible
connections to existing and proposed utility systems; plan
for location and height of electric lighting; and location and
number of garbage receptacles.
Notice shall be given and a public hearing held according to the
provisions of this Article.
Procedure after Special Use
Permit is Granted.
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall send a copy of the survey plat to the
Land Quality Section, Division of Environmental Management,
North Carolina Department of Environment, Health and Natural
Resources, when it is deemed necessary.
(b) Following the issuance of the permit, the Health Department shall
release improvement permits to the developer, who may then begin
development.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-33
(c) After road construction has been completed, the Zoning
Administrator shall verify that all new roads have been built as
required in section 75.3(e).
(d) When all improvements as required by this Ordinance have been
completed, a Certificate of Manufactured Home Park Operation
shall be issued. The Certificate of Manufactured Home Park
Operation shall be signed by the Zoning Administrator and Mayor
certifying that the manufactured home park is in compliance with
all city, county and state regulations. This shall apply to new parks
or expansions to existing parks. The manufactured home park
developer may then begin placing manufactured homes in the park.
(e) The manufactured home park developer may begin placing
manufactured homes in the park before all improvements have been
completed and a Certificate of Manufactured Home Park
Operations has been issued if the Planning Board grants a waiver
allowing the posting of a performance bond that insures completion
of improvements. The bond shall be 100% of the cost of
completion as determined by the Zoning Administrator. In granting
this waiver, the Planning Board shall find that the public welfare,
safety and health will not be endangered. In those cases where
improvements have not been installed within the terms set by the
Planning Board, the Board may declare the bond in default and
require all improvements to be installed. The City will take such
actions necessary to collect on the defaulted bond and provide for
the required improvements.
Compliance with
Requirements of Permit:
A permit to develop a manufactured home park may be revoked by the
City Council upon a finding of fact, after notice and hearing, that a
violation of the requirements of this Ordinance exists. The Owner,
Lessee, or other responsible person shall be notified in writing of such
violation, and shall accept service personally or by certified mail with
signed return receipt. The date for hearing shall be set no earlier than
thirty (30) days from the date or receipt of said notice. Upon correction
of said violation satisfactory to the Zoning Administrator, the Notice of
Hearing may be withdrawn and the hearing canceled, or the Owner,
Lessee or other responsible person may re-apply for the required permit.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-34
Requirements Applicable to Manufactured Home Park Owners
And
Criteria Applicable to All Homes in Manufactured Home Parks
Requirements Applicable to Park Management
A) Erosion Control - An erosion control plan which provides information as specified in the
regulations of Land Quality Section of the North Carolina Department of Natural Resources and
Community Development shall be submitted to the state agency for all manufactured home parks
where one or more acres of land is disturbed.
B) Manufactured Home Park Ownership -Manufactured home park operators shall be required under
this ordinance to specifically comply with GS 105-316(a)(1), which requires that each year
manufactured home park operators furnish the County Tax Supervisor with the name of the
owner and a description of each manufactured home located in the park.
C) Sale of Parks or Lots - Manufactured home parks may not be sold or transferred unless the
existing water and sewer systems meet Health Department standards. Individual spaces in a
manufactured home park may not be sold unless the individual lot size and road construction
meet all county and state regulations.
D) Animal Control - Manufactured home park owners shall establish park regulations to insure
adequate control of animals.
E) Garbage Disposal - The collection of trash and garbage and their disposal shall be provided for in
such a manner as to maintain a clean and orderly appearance. Junked vehicles, appliances,
furniture, and similar materials shall not be allowed to accumulate on manufactured home park
premises.
F) Fencing of Private Sewage Treatment Plants - Private sewage treatment plants as approved by the
North Carolina Division of Environmental Management shall be required to be enclosed with a
chain link fence a minimum of seven feet in height and locked when the plants are unattended.
G) Water Supply - All Manufactured Home Parks with less than 15 spaces or less than 25 people,
shall provide a safe, potable and adequate water supply. Safe shall be defined as free of bacteria
and chemicals that are detrimental to public health; and adequate being defined as providing
enough water for normally accepted standards of domestic use.
H) 911/Addressing. All manufactured home parks must comply with the County 911/Addressing
Regulations.
I) Commercial Operations within a Manufactured Home Park. Commercial operations are prohibited
within a manufactured home park.
J) Roads. All access roads must be maintained in a manner as to provide adequate and safe egress
and ingress.
K) Certificate of Manufactured Home Park Operation. All manufactured home parks shall obtain a
Certificate of Operation.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-35
L) Inspections. All manufactured home parks shall be inspected bi-annually for compliance by the
City Zoning Administrator.
M) Electrical Releases. All manufactured home parks shall be required to be in full compliance with
the regulations of this section prior to issuance of electrical service for individual manufactured
homes.
N) Conflict with Health Department Regulations. In the event the State or County Board of Health
has adopted or adopts regulations governing manufactured homes or manufactured home parks,
the requirements of this ordinance or the requirements of the State or County Board of Health,
whichever is more stringent, shall govern.
Criteria Applicable to New and Replacement Homes in Existing Manufactured Home Parks
O) Class A and B – Only a Class A home or a Class B home may be placed in a manufactured home
park. Class C homes are a nonconforming use. If a Class C home exists, it may not be replaced
with another Class C home.
P) Underpinning Requirement. Manufactured homes entering approved manufactured home parks
shall, after the adoption of this Ordinance, and upon installation of unit, have vinyl, aluminum,
galvanized metal or simulated rock/masonry panels, underpinning installed.
Q) Tying Down Manufactured Homes. Every manufactured home placed in the park must be tied
down to resist overturning in the event of high winds. All such tie downs shall be in accordance
with the State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured Homes.
R) Wheel and Axle Removal. Every manufactured home placed in the park must have wheels and
axles removed.
S) Manufactured Homes Front Entrance Requirements. Every manufactured home placed in the park
shall have a concrete pad (5ft. x 10ft. x 4in.) or a deck or porch (8ft. x 12ft.) built of treated lumber
and built to North Carolina Building Code specifications at the front entrance.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-36
Use: Manufactured Home, Boat, Travel Trailer, Camper and
Recreational Vehicle Sales and Service
Special Use District: M-1, M-2
Plan Required:
A placement plan for the manufactured homes shall be approved by the
city before the sales lot opens.
Open Space: At least 60% of the property must be open land.
Setbacks and Separation
Between Structures:
(a) A setback of at least 15 feet from any exterior boundary line is
required.
(b) Front yard and corner lot setbacks must be met.
(c) There shall be a 20 foot separation between manufactured homes
and between a manufactured home and any other structure.
Proximity to Other Sales
Lots:
No manufactured home sales and display lot may be located within
5000 feet of another manufactured home sales lot.
Parking: There shall be off-street parking at a ratio of one parking space per two
manufactured homes and a minimum of five spaces.
Signs: Banner type signs are not permitted.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-37
Use: Mini Warehouses
Special Use District: HC, RM
Plans Required:
Plans shall be submitted which show layout and placement of buildings,
ingress and egress, plans for minimizing stormwater runoff from the
site, signage and landscaping.
Maximum Height:
20 feet not exceeding one story
Storage: a. No outside storage is permitted
b. Storage of hazardous, toxic or explosive substances is
prohibited.
Operation:
No business activity other than the rental of storage units shall be
conducted on the premises.
Lighting:
Lights shall be arranged so that no light or glare is directed into a
residence.
Screening:
An opaque screen at least eight feet high shall be provided along
each property adjoining a residentially zoned district, and six feet
high along any public right-of-way.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-38
Use: Nursing Homes, Assisted Living
Special use District: RA, R-40, RM,
Plans Required:
a. Structures - Location and approximate size of all existing and
proposed buildings and structures within the site and on the
lots adjacent thereto.
b. Circulation - Proposed points of access and egress and pattern
of internal circulation
c. Parking and Loading - Layout of parking spaces
Parking and Loading:
One space for each assisted living unit; plus one space for each 3
resident nursing beds; plus staff parking.
Operation: a. The facility shall provide centrally located shared food
preparation, service and major dining areas.
b. Common recreation, social and service facilities shall be
provided at a minimum rate of thirty (30) square feet per
dwelling unit or per rooming unit.
c. All facilities shall be solely for the use of residents and their
guests.
d. Facilities for administrative services and limited medical services
for the exclusive use of the resident shall be located on the site.
Other Requirements:
Must meet all requirements for licensing by the State of North Carolina.
Where located in a residential district, there must be ample site area,
adequate open space on all sides of the proposed structure and other
considerations, including landscaping, to the character of the
neighborhood so that its residential nature will be preserved.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-39
Use: Planned Building Groups, Commercial or Industrial
Special Use District: OI, HC, M-1, M-2
Site Plan: The site plan shall show the location of the buildings, streets,
walkways, parking areas, easements or rights-of-way adjoining or
intersecting the property, and shall also include:
(1) Proposed provisions for storm drainage and sanitary
sewerage, approved by a N.C. certified registered engineer;
(2) Size and proposed location of any freestanding signs;
(3) Proposed solid waste storage facilities consisting of a
minimum 10’ X 20’ concrete pad with vehicle apron and a six
foot (6’) high stockade fence on minimum of three (3) sides
with six foot (6’) foot high ballards to protect said fence;
(4) Proposed water system and fire fighting facilities such as
hydrants or sprinkler connections;
(5) The location and heights of all fences, walls, and hedges shall
be shown;
(6) Lighting plan: All lighting shall be directed away from all
residential zoned areas; and the location and height of all
lighting shall be shown;
(7) All plans showing utility construction details must meet the
current specifications of the City of Trinity.
Parking: As required by Article 13.
Timing: Developer shall submit a proposed schedule of development likely to
be followed.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-40
Use: Public Utility Facilities and Substations / Public Works
Facilities Essential to the Immediate Area (transformer
stations, pumping stations, water towers, and telephone
exchanges)
Special Use District: RA, R-40, R-20, R-12, R-10, RM, RM-U, OI, HC, M-1, M-2
Setbacks and Landscaping: All buildings and apparatus shall be set back at least 20 feet from all
property lines.
They shall be designed, landscaped and maintained in accordance with
other public facilities
On-site Storage: Vehicles or material shall be stored on the premises inside a building or
under cover.
Outside storage of apparatus and equipment is permitted only in the M-
1 district and must be enclosed by a solid fence at least 6 feet high.
Fenced facilities: Such facilities as water towers, pumping stations and so forth shall be
surrounded by a chain link fence six feet high.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-41
Use: Radio Controlled Race Car Tracks
Special Use District: M-1, M-2
Plans Required:
Plans shall be submitted which show layout and placement of the track
and any buildings; parking, ingress and egress, plans for controlling
stormwater runoff from the site, signage and landscaping.
Storage: No outside storage is permitted on-site.
Operation:
The City and the operator shall mutually agree on days and hours of
operation which shall be written into the Special Use Permit and posted
on site. Violation of the hours operation shall be a violation of the
Zoning Ordinance.
Lighting:
Lights shall be arranged so that no light or glare is directed into a
residence.
Screening:
An opaque screen at least eight feet high shall be provided along
each property line adjoining a residentially zoned district.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-42
Use: Reception Facility
Special Use District: RA, R-40
Site Plan: The site plan shall show the location of parking, buildings, adjacent
uses, accessibility to thoroughfares, and buffering. The plat shall show
or state the type of buffering. The application and site plan must also
satisfy the following requirements;
Design Standards Included in Site Plan:
(1) Parking
(a) Parking shall be allowed at one space per 3 guests plus one per employee.
(b) All parking shall be buffered from adjacent properties by a buffer strip
consisting of a screened fence or a planted strip at least five feet in width,
composed of deciduous or evergreen trees or a mixture of each, less than one
row of dense shrubs, spaced not more than five feet apart.
(c) A parking plan shall be presented to show adequate parking for a variety of
events and guests as well as space for over flow parking.
(2) Use Separation
(a) No reception house or other similar uses shall locate within four hundred (400)
feet of a rooming house, boarding house or another tourist home.
(3) Operation:
(a) An owner or manager shall be on the premises for every event.
(b) The use shall be located in a structure which was originally constructed as a
single family dwelling or an approved accessory structure.
(c) Meals served on premises shall be only for guests of the facility.
(d) The reception house shall meet all applicable health, fire safety and building
codes and shall be operated so as not to give the appearance of being a business.
Minimal outward modifications of the structure or grounds may be made only if
such changes are compatible with the character of the area or the neighborhood.
(e) No additional dwellings shall be placed on the same lot as the reception house
unless otherwise permitted.
(f) Outdoor activity hours: Special functions conducted outdoors and outdoors
activities related to special functions are prohibited after 10:00 pm on Sunday
through Thursday nights. Friday and Saturday and evenings before national
holidays, outdoor activities are prohibited after 11:00 pm. All activities shall
comply with the Noise Ordinance of the City of Trinity.
(4) Signs:
(a) Signs identifying the operation shall be non-illuminated and shall be either wall
or yard signs, no more than 4 square feet in area. One sign per zoning lot.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-43
Use: Recycling Convenience Site
Special Use District: RA, R-40, OI, HC, M-1, M-2
Required Plans: The applicant must submit plans which show:
a. Location and approximate size of all existing and proposed
buildings and structures on the site.
b. Proposed points of access and egress and pattern of internal
circulation;
c. Layout of parking spaces;
Operation: a. The facilities shall only be operated by a local government
or by a non profit.
b. The use must be secondary to another primary use such as a
school, fire station or other government facility.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-44
Use: Retail and Membership Warehouses, Building, Home and
Garden, and Other Retail Stores over 25,000 sq. ft. in Size
Special Use District: M-1, M-2
Plans Required:
Plans shall be submitted which show layout and placement of buildings,
ingress and egress, plans for minimizing stormwater runoff from the
site, parking, signage and landscaping.
Parking: (a). Parking shall be distributed around the principal building with
significant parking areas at the side and rear of the building so as to
reduce parking area between the front façade of the principal
building and the street.
(b). There shall be a landscaped planting yard at least 10 feet wide
between the street and all off-street parking areas.
(c). Parking areas shall be interspersed with trees and planting areas
absorb stormwater and break up the view of hard surfaces and
parked cars.
Stormwater Control: The site design shall incorporate features such as grassy and/or planted
berms, swales, and planting areas throughout parking lots and other
hard surfaces so as to retain dispersed rainfall on site and significantly
reduce runoff.
Storage: Outside storage shall be completely screened from view from all streets.
Security fencing, a minimum of six feet in height, shall be provided
around all outside storage yards. All storage areas shall be maintained
in a manner so as to limit dust from drifting onto adjoining properties.
Where storage yards abut a residential use, the storage area shall be
screened and buffered by plantings at least six feet tall.
Lighting:
Lights shall be arranged so that no light or glare is directed into a
residence.
Screening:
Where the retail establishment is adjacent to residential uses, an
earth berm planted with evergreen trees is required.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-45
Use: Service Stations, Convenience Stores with Gas Pumps
Special Use District: HC
Lot Area and Frontage: Each such station shall have a minimum lot area of 6000 square feet
with a frontage of not less than 100 feet.
Automobile Storage: Outdoor automobile storage is not permitted in conjunction with
service stations in these districts.
Setbacks: No portion of a service station building or fixtures shall be nearer than
25 feet from the curb line.
Landscaping: A six foot high fence and suitable landscaping shall be provided when a
service station abuts a residential district or use.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-46
Use: Schools, Elementary and Secondary
Special Use District: RA, R-40, R-20, R-12, R-10, RM, RM-U, O&I
Required Plans:
Building Height
The applicant must submit plans which show:
a. location and approximate size of all existing and proposed
buildings and structures on the site and on the lots which
adjoin the site;
b. proposed points of access and egress and pattern of internal
circulation;
c. layout of parking spaces;
d. location and extent of playgrounds and athletic fields;
e. estimated number of students at opening and capacity for
additional students;
f. parking for elementary and middle schools - 5 spaces, plus
1 space per classroom employee and staff member
g. parking for senior high schools - 1 space per four students,
plus 1 space for each classroom, administrative and noneducational
employee
The maximum building height for any school building shall be
50 feet
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-47
Use: Shooting Ranges, Outdoor
Special use District: RA & R-40
Site Plan: The site plan shall show:
a. Location of any and all buildings on the site and adjacent
properties
b. Proposed shooting range(s) and targets and their proximity to
adjacent properties.
c. Firing line requirements.
d. Backstop requirements.
e. Operating hours of shooting range.
Minimum Acreage A five (5) acre minimum site is required for new shooting range
operations.
Siting Requirements: Primary backstops shall be required, located one hundred (100) yards
or less from the firing point, at least eight (8) feet high, ten (10) feet
thick at the base and two (2) feet thick at the top and sufficiently wide
to extend five (5) feet beyond both sides of the center of the target.
For each additional one hundred (100) yards of distance from the
firing point, two (2) feet in height and one (1) foot in width shall be
added to the dimensions of the backstop.
A site location having special conditions of natural topography for a
primary backstop and meeting the above dimensions shall be
considered for meeting minimum requirements. These backstop
requirements shall not apply to the shot gun shooting activities which
do not involve the use of slugs (i.e. skeet, trap and sporting clays.)
Setback: No outdoor firing line shall be located closer than 300 ft. of any
exterior property line.
Hours of Operation: The discharge of firearms at outdoor shooting ranges shall be
prohibited between sunset and sunrise. Sunday discharge of firearms
shall be allowed from Noon until 9:00 p.m. only.
Temporary Activities: Firing ranges established on a temporary basis for the purpose of
firearms safety training shall be allowed. Training shall be conducted
by a certified or equivalent instructor utilizing normally accepted
standards for safe firearms training. A permit shall be obtained from
the Zoning Administrator after his approval of the site to be used.
This permit will be good for seventy two (72) hours.
Unregulated Activities: The standards of these requirements do not regulate or prohibit an
individual’s right to discharge firearms on their property for target
practice, sighting or hunting; nor shall the standards apply to those
lands legally used by Private Hunting Clubs for traditional hunting
activities.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-48
Use: Solar Energy Systems, Level 2
Special use District: RA
Site Plan: The site plan shall show:
A. Setback and height limitations.
B. If impervious percentage goes over 24%, a stormwater plan is
needed.
C. Lighting
D. Signage locations
E. Fence
F. Tree buffering
Minimum Acreage A twenty-five (25) acre minimum site is required.
Height: Twenty-five (25) feet.
Setback: No solar panels can be put within 100 feet of the property line.
Lighting: If lighting is provided at the site, it shall be shielded and downcast
such that the light does not spill onto adjacent properties. Motion
sensor control is preferred.
Signage: Public signage as permitted by Zoning Ordinance. Security, safety,
and/or warning signage need to be placed every 500 feet.
Tree Buffering: Two rows of approved trees will need to be placed between the fence
and solar panels where the property abuts a non-vacant property or is
within 60 feet of a state or city maintained road.
Decommissioning Plan:
A decommissioning plan signed by the party responsible for
decommissioning and the landowner (if different) addressing the
following shall be submitted with permit application. Requirements
for the decommission plan are below.
A. Anticipated life of the solar farm
B. Estimated decommissioning costs in current dollars
C. Method for ensuring that funds will be available for
decommissioning and restoration.
D. Anticipated manner in which the solar farm project will be
decommissioned and the site restored.
Following a continuous six month period in which no electricity is
generated, the permit holder will have six months to complete
decommissioning of the solar farm. Decommissioning includes
removal of solar panels, buildings, cabling, electrical components,
and any other associated facilities below grade as describe in the
approved decommissioning plan.
Prior to the issuance of a zoning compliance certificate, the applicant
must provide the City with a performance guarantee as provided
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-49
Performance Guarantee
below. The amount of the guarantee shall be one and a quarter times
the estimated decommissioning cost minus the salvageable value, or
$500,000.00, whichever is greater. Estimates for decommissioning
the site and salvage value shall be determined by a North Carolina
licensed engineer or a licensed contractor. It is the responsibility of
the applicant to provide the City with the certified cost estimate.
A surety or performance bond that renews automatically, includes a
minimum 60-day notice to the City prior to cancellation, is approved
by the Finance Director, and is from a company on the U.S.
Department of Treasury’s Listing of Certified Companies. A bond
certificate must be submitted to the finance department each year
verifying the bond has been properly renewed.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-50
Use: Storage of Above Ground Bulk Oil or Petroleum Products for
Wholesale or Retail Distribution
Special Use District: M-1, M-2
Minimum Lot Size: The minimum size lot, tract or parcel must be one acre.
Setbacks and Buffers: a) All storage tanks and loading facilities shall be located at least
25 feet from any side or rear property line.
b) The minimum building setback line is 40 feet.
c) All storage tanks and loading facilities shall be located a
minimum of 85 feet from any exterior property line bordering a
residential district.
d) A buffer strip is required for side or rear lot lines that abut a
residential or office district.
General Health and Safety
Conditions:
a) The proposed site shall not endanger the safety of properties in
the area, and vehicular access shall not require the use of minor
residential access streets.
b) All facilities shall comply with the American Insurance
Association's Flammable and Combustible Liquid's Code.
c) Facilities must meet all E.P.A. and state environmental
requirements.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-51
Use: Telecommunications Towers
Radio or Television Towers
Special Use District: RA, M-1, M-2
Standards: See Appendix A - A Local Ordinance Regulating the
Siting of Wireless Telecommunications Towers and
Facilities
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-52
Use: Townhouse Development
Special Use District: RM
Density: Density: 12,000 square feet, plus 3,000 square feet for each
additional unit over 2.
Site Plan: A site plan shall be submitted that shows the location of the
buildings, streets, alleys, walkways, parking areas, recreational
areas and facilities, numbered and dimensional residential sites and
common areas within the site and all existing buildings and
structures within one hundred (100) feet in addition to public or
private easements or rights-of-way adjoining or intersecting such
property.
Design Standards Included
in Site Plan:
Timing: Proposed schedule of development phases.
Circulation: Proposed points of ingress and egress and proposed
pattern of internal automobile and pedestrian circulation.
Landscaping: When a proposed apartment complex abuts a
residentially zoned lot, the complex must adhere to the following
landscaping requirements.
a. At least two (2) rows of evergreen trees whish may
by selected from the recommended List of
Recommended Species (on file with the Zoning
Administrator) shall be planted. Trees shall have a
minimum height of three feet (3’) when planted.
The rows shall be spaced seven feet (7’) apart and
centered within the buffer strip. Tree spacing shall
be eight feet (8’) off centered with the trees in
adjacent rows offset(staggered four feet (4’); and a
solid visual barrier fence six feet (6’) in height shall
be erected around any loading, unloading, or
outdoor storage areas; and
b. Earth berms may be used in conjunction with
planting to satisfy height requirements; but slopes
shall not exceed one foot (1’) to two feet (2’)
horizontal.
c. At least one (1) deciduous tree shall be planted
along the street no less than ten feet (10’) off of the
right of way (on private property), for each forty
feet (40’) of street frontage or fraction thereof for
new construction or extensive rehabilitation. Each
tree shall be at least one and one-half inches (1 ½ )
in caliper and may be selected from the List of
Recommended Species or otherwise approved by
the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator and
shall be provided with adequate space for water
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-53
percolation and root growth. In lieu of this
requirement, the developer shall provide a
Landscaping plan and detailed plant list, approved
by the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator,
which provides for a variety of plantings which
achieve the desired aesthetic goals of the buffering
requirements.
Traffic: A developer shall present a traffic analysis on projected
traffic counts at peak hours and proposed plants to mitigate any
congestion associated with the development.
Storm Drainage: Proposed provisions for storm drainage and
sanitary sewerage, approved by a N.C. certified registered engineer;
Signs: Size and proposed location of any freestanding signs;
Solid Waste: Proposed solid waste storage facilities consisting of a
minimum 10’ X 20’ concrete pad with vehicle apron and a six foot
(6’) high stockade fence on minimum of three (3) sides with six foot
(6’) foot high ballards to protect said fence;
Water System: Proposed water system and fire fighting facilities
such as hydrants or sprinkler connections;
Lighting plan: A lighting plan shall be provided that shows the
type, height and density of all outdoor lighting.
When abutting a residential district lighting shall be signed so as not
to create a nuisance on abutting property owners. The maximum
illumination at the edge of the property line adjacent to a residential
zoning district is ½ foot candles.
Recreation Area: Location and amount of recreation area, if any;
and
All plans showing utility construction details must meet the current
specifications of the City of Trinity.
Common Areas: Areas not shown as lots on the site development plan shall be
designated as common areas and on any subdivision plan as areas to
be held in separate ownership for the use and benefit of residents of
the development.
Easements over the common areas for access, ingress, and egress
from and to public streets and walkways and easements for
enjoyment of the common areas, as well as for parking, shall be
granted to each owner of a residential site.
All common walls between individual residences shall be party walls
and provisions for the maintenance thereof and restoration in the
event of destruction or damages shall be established.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-54
Homeowners Association
Documents to Be Submitted:
The establishment of a homeowners association shall be mandatory.
The homeowners association shall be organized and established as a
legal entity prior to or as a part of the final plat approval and
recording process. Membership in the homeowners association
shall be mandatory for each original purchaser and each successive
purchaser of a residential site.
Responsibilities of Homeowners Association - The homeowners
association shall be responsible for the payment of premiums for
liability insurance, local taxes, maintenance or recreational and
other facilities located on the common areas, payment of
assessments for public and private capital improvements made to or
for the benefit of the common areas, maintenance and repair to the
exterior of all attached residences located within the development or
other common area facilities.
It shall be further provided that upon default by the homeowners
association in the payment to the governmental authority of any ad
valorem taxes levied against the common areas or assessments in an
amount determined by dividing the total taxes and/or assessments
due to the governmental authority by the total number of residential
sites in the development. If the sum is not paid by the owner within
thirty (30) days following receipt of notice of the amount due, then
the sum shall become a continuing lien on the residence of the then
owner, his heirs, governmental authority may either bring an action
at law against the owner obligated to pay the same or may elect to
foreclose the lien against the residence of the owner.
Assessments - The homeowners association shall be empowered to
levy assessments against the owners of residential sites within the
development for the payment of expenditures made by the
homeowners association for the items set forth in the preceding
subparagraph and any such assessment not paid by the owner against
whom such are assessed shall constitute a lien on the residence of the
owner.
Proposed Articles of Incorporation - Such Articles of Incorporation
shall provide for homeowners control when over 50% of the
dwelling units are sold.
Proposed bylaws - Such bylaws shall provide for annual meetings of
the association, election of officers, and distribution of an annual
financial accounting to members.
. Proposed annual budget - The proposed annual budget shall show
monthly assessments. The monthly assessments must be set at a
sufficient level to insure success of the association.
Proposed restrictions and covenants - A document containing
proposed restrictions and covenants for the common area and
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 8-55
residential sites shall be submitted along with the previously
mentioned documents.
Use: Veterinary Clinics and Kennels with Outside Runs
Special Use District: RA, M1 & M-2
Construction Requirements: 1. Three sides of each run must have four foot high walls of block
concrete.
2. A concrete floor is required.
3. The open side of the run must be screened from the public.
Noise: There shall be no noise generated activities between sunset and
sunrise.
Plan Approval: The city must approve a site plan of the kennel and runs and a waste
treatment plan.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 9 -1
ARTICLE IX
NONCONFORMITIES
Section 9-1 Purpose and Intent
If, within the districts established by this ordinance, or by amendments that may later be adopted, there
exist lots, structures and use of land and structures which were lawful before this ordinance was passed or
amended, but which would be prohibited under the terms of this ordinance, it is the intent of this
ordinance to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed but not to encourage their
continuance. Such nonconformities are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses
in the districts in which they are located.
It is further the intent of this ordinance that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or used
as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
Section 9-2 Nonconforming Lots of Record
Single Lots of Record
When a lot has an area which does not conform to the dimensional requirements of the district where they
are located, but such lot was of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance or any subsequent
amendment which renders such lot nonconforming, then such lot may be built upon if compliance is
achieved with regard to setback dimensions, width, and other requirements, regardless of lot area. Lots
that cannot meet the setback, width, and/or buffering requirements of this Ordinance may seek a variance
from the Board of Adjustments.
Section 9-3 Nonconforming Uses of Land
1) Extensions of Use. Nonconforming uses of land shall not be enlarged or extended in any way unless
otherwise stated in this section.
2) Change of Use. When a non-conforming use of land has been changed to a conforming use, it shall
not thereafter be used for any nonconforming use.
3) Nonconforming Residential Uses of Land - In the case of a residence that is a nonconforming
use of land in a commercial or industrial zone, such residence may be repaired, rebuilt or added to as
long as the dimensional requirements of the district are met. Minor variances in setbacks due to lot
size may be presented to the Board of Adjustment for consideration. This policy is adopted in the
interest of maintaining an adequate stock of housing in Trinity.
4) Manufactured Homes as Nonconforming Residential Uses - Manufactured homes on individual
zoning lots, are a nonconforming use in Trinity. However, in the interest of maintaining an adequate
housing stock in the community, existing manufactured homes are allowed to continue and in certain
instances may be replaced.
(a) Continuation of a Manufactured Home on An Individual Lot – A manufactured home on an
individual lot may be continued, provided that within six months from the date of adoption of
this Ordinance it shall be tied down to resist overturning in the event of high winds. All tie
downs shall be in accordance with the State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured
Homes.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 9 -2
(b) Replacing a Manufactured Home on an Individual Lot
1. Replacements can be made only in zones R-A, R-40 & RM.
2. No replacements will be allowed on property that contains another principal use.
3. In the interest of preserving housing stock within Trinity, a single wide
manufactured home may be replaced by a Class A or a Class B manufactured
home.
4. A permit must be obtained from the Zoning Administrator.
5. The permit applicant must be the property owner and occupant of the
manufactured home being replaced. Rental units may only be replaced if
destroyed by natural causes.
6. The manufactured home shall have a continuous, permanent masonry
underpinning or simulated rock/masonry panels, unpierced except for ventilation
and access.
7. It shall be tied down to resist overturning in the event of high winds. All such tie
downs shall be in accordance with the State of North Carolina Regulations for
Manufactured Homes.
8. It shall have a front entrance with a minimum 4 ft. x 8 ft. x 4 in. thick
concrete slab at the front door area, or a 5 ft. x 10 ft. treated lumber deck
or porch built of treated lumber and built to North Carolina Building Code
specifications at the front entrance
Section 9-4 Nonconforming Uses of Structures
This category of nonconformities consists of structure used, at the time of passage of this ordinance, for
purposes not permitted in the district in which they are located.
(1) A nonconforming use of a structure may be changed to a conforming use.
(2) A nonconforming use of a structure shall not be changed to another nonconforming use.
(3) When a nonconforming use of a structure has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not
thereafter be used for any nonconforming use.
(4) Normal maintenance and repair of a building occupied by a nonconforming use is permitted
and encouraged provided it does not extend the non-conforming use.
(5) A nonconforming use of a structure shall not be extended or enlarged beyond the structure in
existence at the time the use became nonconforming. Extensions of the structure to
accommodate expansion of a nonconforming use are not permitted.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 9 -3
(6) When a nonconforming use of a structure is discontinued for a continuous period of 180 days,
any future use of the structure shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the
provisions of this ordinance.
Section 9-5 Nonconforming Structures
When a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance that could
not be built under the terms of this ordinance by reason of restrictions on lot coverage, height, yard size or
setbacks, the structure may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions:
1) No structure may be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity.
2) Normal maintenance and repair of a nonconforming structure is permitted and encouraged
provided it does not extend the nonconformity.
Section 9-6 Repairs and Maintenance
Buildings or structures other than single-family houses that are destroyed by any means to an extent of
more than 60% of assessed value, exclusive of land value, shall not be reconstructed except in conformity
with the provisions of this ordinance. Nonconforming single family houses that are damaged or
destroyed may be rebuilt on the same lot as long as the amount of nonconformity is not increased.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of
any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any officials charged with protecting the public
safety, upon order of such official.
Section 9-7 Nonconformities Created by Changes in Zoning Boundaries or Regulations
Any nonconformance created by a change in district boundaries or ordinance regulations after the date of
passage of this ordinance shall also be governed by the provisions of this Article.
Section 9-8 Nonconforming Signs: See Section 11-12.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 10 -1
ARTICLE X
ZONING VESTED RIGHTS
Section 10 -1 Vested Right Conferred
A vested right is conferred pursuant to NCGS 160A-385.1 to undertake and complete the development and
use of property according to the terms and conditions of a site specific development plan, approved as
provided for in this Article.
Section 10-2 Obtaining a Vested Right
A developer may obtain a vested right as provided by G.S. 160A-385.1 to commence a project at a future
date. A vested right is obtained:
(1) automatically when a special use permit is granted by virtue of approval of a special
use by the City Council, and
(2) when the City Council approves a site specific development plan submitted by a
developer in conjunction with an application for a zoning permit with vested rights.
Section 10-3 Term.
The right to commence a project authorized by any of the above means vests from the date the applicable
permit is authorized and remains vested for two years.
Section 10-4 Zoning Permit Required
A zoning permit is required before commencing work on any project in which a vested right exists.
(1) The Zoning Administrator shall issue the zoning permit for a project in which the
vested right has been conferred by a special use permit.
(2) In any other case, an applicant shall apply for a zoning permit with vested rights as
outlined in Section 10-5 below.
Section 10-5 Application for a Zoning Permit with Vested Rights.
The applicant shall submit seven copies of a site specific development plan drawn to scale describing with
reasonable certainty the type and intensity of use of the specific parcel or parcels of land. The plan shall
include:
(1) boundaries of the site;
(2) significant topographical and other natural features affecting the development of the
site;
(3) location on the site of the proposed buildings, structures and other improvements;
(4) dimensions, including height of the proposed buildings and other structures;
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 10 -2
(5) location of all existing and proposed infrastructure on the site including water, sewer,
roads and walkways; and
(6) such other information as the Zoning Administrator may determine to be necessary in
order to determine the specifics of the plan
Section 10-6 Action by City Council.
Upon receipt of a properly prepared site specific development plan, the Zoning Administrator shall
arrange to bring the plan to the Planning Board for its recommendations and then to the City Council.
(a) Public Hearing - The City Council shall conduct a public hearing with notice given as
provided for in Section 17-1(2) of this Ordinance.
(b) Considerations - In considering an application for a zoning permit with vested rights,
the City Council shall give due regard to whether issuance of the permit would serve
the purpose and intent of this ordinance, secure public safety and welfare and do
substantial justice. If the Council should find, after public hearing, that the proposed
permit should not be granted, the permit should be denied.
(c) Findings. In granting a zoning permit with vested rights the City Council shall make
the following affirmative findings:
(1) the use requested is among those permitted in the district in which the
property is located and complies with all the requirements of this and
other applicable ordinances;
(2) the requested permit is either essential or desirable for the public
convenience or welfare;
(3) the requested permit will not impair the integrity or character of the
surrounding or adjoining districts and will not be detrimental to the
health, safety, or welfare of the community;
(4) adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, sanitation and/or other
necessary facilities have been or are being provided.
(d) Additional Conditions - In granting a zoning permit with vested rights, the City
Council may impose such additional restrictions and requirements upon the
permit as it may deem necessary in order that the purpose and intent of this
ordinance are served, public welfare secured and substantial justice done.
Approval of a site specific development plan with the condition that a variance or
modification be obtained shall not confer a vested right unless and until the
necessary variance or modification is obtained.
(e) Acceptance by Applicant - If all requirements and conditions are accepted by the
applicant, the Council shall authorize the issuance of the permit; otherwise the permit
shall be denied. Any permit so authorized shall remain vested for two years from the
date of the action granting the Permit.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 10 -3
Section 10-7 Violations
Any violation of a term of condition involved the granting of a zoning permit with vested rights shall be
treated the same as a violation of this ordinance and shall be subject to the same remedies and penalties as
any such violation. In addition, the City Council may, after public hearing, revoke any such vested rights
for failure to abide by any such term or condition.
Section 10-8 Other Ordinances Apply.
The establishment of a vested right shall not preclude the application of overlay zoning which imposes
additional requirements but does not affect the allowable type or intensity of use, or ordinances or
regulations which are general in nature and are applicable to all property subject to land use regulation,
including, but not limited to, building, fire, mechanical, electrical and plumbing codes.
Section 10-9 Changes or Amendments.
No change or amendment to any zoning permit with vested rights shall be made except after public
hearing and except as provided for in this ordinance for the original issuance or such permit. If, at the
time of consideration of a proposed change or amendment to an existing permit, the permit or proposed
change or amendment could not be lawfully made under ordinance conditions existing at that time, the
proposed change or amendment shall be denied. In addition, in no case shall there be an extension of the
two-year time period for which the development right is vested. Nothing herein shall exempt plans
related to the permit from subsequent reviews and approvals to ensure compliance with the terms and
conditions of the original approval, provided that such reviews and approvals are not inconsistent with the
original approvals.
Section 10-10 Status at Expiration of Term
A right which has been vested shall terminate at the end of the two-year vesting period with respect to
buildings and uses for which no valid building permit applications have been filed. Upon issuance of a
building permit, the provisions of G.S. 160A-418 and G.S. 160A-422 shall apply except that a building
permit shall not expire or be revoked because of the running of time while a vested right under this
Article is outstanding. Any development constructed pursuant to a zoning permit with vested rights for
which the vested term has expired and which is not in conformance with all the terms of the ordinance
because of changes made in the provisions of this ordinance, including the zoning map, after the issuance
of the permit shall be subject to the provisions of this ordinance relating to non-conformities the same as
any other nonconformity.
Section 10-11 Annexation Declaration
Any landowner who signs an annexation petition to the City pursuant to G.S. 160A-31 or G.S. 160A-58.1
shall, as part of that petition, file a signed statement declaring whether or not vested rights with respect to
the property subject to the petition have been established under G.S. 160A-385.1 or G.S. 153A-344.1. If
the statement declares that such rights have been established, the City may require petitioners to provide
proof of such rights. A statement which declares that no vested rights have been established by law shall
be binding on the landowner and any such vested right shall be terminated.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 11-1
ARTICLE XI
SIGNS
Section 11-1. Findings, Purpose, Intent, & Interpretations
(a) The intent of this Article is to authorize use of signs whose types, sizes, and arrangements are
compatible with their surroundings; appropriate to the type and intensity of activity to properties
or occupants of products or on the community as a whole; legible in the circumstances in which
they are seen; and appropriate to traffic safety.
(b) Signs obstruct views, distract motorists, displace alternative uses for land, and pose other problems
that legitimately call for regulation. The purpose of this article is to regulate the size, color,
illumination, movement, materials, location, height, and condition of all signs placed on private
property for exterior observation, thus ensuring the protection of property values, the character of
the various neighborhoods, the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community,
protection against destruction of or encroachment on historic convenience to citizens and
encouraging economic development. This article allows adequate communication through signage
while encouraging aesthetic quality in the design, location, size and purpose of all signs. This
article must be interpreted in a manner consistent with the First Amendment guarantee of free
speech.
(c) If any provision of this article is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
finding shall not affect the validity of other provisions of this article which can be given effect
without the invalid provision.
(d) A sign placed on land or on a building for the purpose of identification, protection or directing
persons to a use conducted therein is deemed to be an integral but accessory and subordinate part
of the principal use of land or building. Therefore, the intent of this article is to establish limitations
on signs in order to ensure they are appropriate to the land, building, or use to which they are
appurtenant and are adequate for the intended purpose while balancing the individual and
community interests identified in this section.
(e) These regulations do no regulate every form and instance of visual communication that may be
displayed anywhere within the jurisdictional limits of the City. Rather, they are intended to regulate
those forms and instances that are most likely to meaningfully affect one or more of the purposes
set forth above.
(f) These regulations do not entirely eliminate all of the harms that may be created by the installation
and display of signs. Rather, they strike an appropriate balance that preserves ample channels of
communication by means of visual display while still reducing and mitigating the extent of the
harms caused by signs.
(g) This ordinance is not intended to and does not apply to signs erected, maintained or
otherwise posted, owned or leased by the State of North Carolina, the federal government
or this City. The inclusion of “government” in describing some signs does not intend to
subject the government to regulation, but instead helps illuminate the type of sign that
falls within the immunities of the government from regulation.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 11-2
Section 11-2 . General Limitations on All Signs
(a) Unless specifically exempted, no sign visible from a public right-of-way, whether exterior or interior
to a structure, shall be erected, displayed or substantially altered except in accord with the provisions
of this Article and until a permit has been issued by the City.
(b) No sign, including the supports, frames, and embellishments, shall be located on a public right-of way
unless otherwise exempted Section 11-4.g.
(c) No sign shall obstruct a door, fire escape, stairway, ladder, or opening intended to provide ingress or
egress for buildings, structures or lots.
(d) No sign shall have more than two (2) display surfaces.
(e) Illuminated signs may have either an exterior or interior source of illumination. Exterior illumination
shall be beamed down and away or shielded from any public street or right of way, residential district,
or from adjacent properties or oncoming traffic. Internal illumination, where the source of
illumination is from within the sign itself, shall not present a glare such that it distracts traffic or is a
nuisance to nearby property owners. All wiring, grounding, etc. for illuminated signs shall meet the
requirements of the National Electric Code.
(f) All signs shall be maintained in a state of good repair. No sign shall be continued which becomes
structurally unsafe or endangers the safety of the public or property. When evidence of an unsafe
sign is brought to the attention of the Zoning Officer, he shall order that such sign be made safe or be
removed. A period of forty-eight (48) hours following receipt of the notice by the person or firm
owning or using the sign shall be used for compliance.
Section 11-3 Prohibited Signs
Unless otherwise permitted under this Article, the following signs are prohibited in all zoning districts:
(a) Any sign not authorized by the Code of Ordinances2; and
(b) Any sign not constructed pursuant to a valid building permit where one is required.
(c) Animated rotating, flashing or other moving or apparently moving signs (except as permitted in
the O&I zoning district),
(d) Signs and/or devices consisting of wind-blown propellers, strung light bulbs, balloons more than
three feet in diameter, gas filled figures and similar devices (except as permitted in the nonresidential
temporary sign section (Section 11-9(b)).
(e) Sign which encroach over a public right-of-way, except that projecting signs, shall clear
sidewalks, and pedestrian paths by a height of at least eight (8) feet.
2 “The Code of Ordinances” is intended to mean the code of the city and is not intended to be limited to
this Sign Code ordinance. Other City ordinances mention signs and/or have the potential to do so in the
future.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 11-3
(f) Signs that are attached to or mounted on vehicles that are parked in the same location visible to
the general public for more than seven days in one year and it are evident that the principal use of
the vehicle is for advertising rather than transport.
(g) Signs or lights of any type that make use of the words “STOP,” “SLOW,” “CAUTION,”
“DANGER,” or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in such a manner as is reasonably
likely to be confused with traffic directional and regulatory signs and do not conform the Uniform
Manual of Traffic Control devices, published by the N.C. Dept. of Transportation;
(h) Signs located in such a manner as to obscure, or physically interfere with the effectiveness of an
official traffic sign, signal or device, obstruct or physically interfere with the driver’s view of
approaching, merging or intersecting traffic;
(i) Mobile or portable signs (including A and T shaped signs).
(j) Snipe signs, including but not limited to signs affixed to or painted on a utility pole, light
standard, traffic control post or painted on trees, rocks, or other natural features.
(k) Graffiti.
Section 11-4 Signs Not Authorized in All Zoning Districts
The following signs are exempt from permit requirements provided they comply with Section 11-2:
(a) Signs bearing only property identification numbers and names, post office box numbers of
occupants of the premises or other identification of premises so that public safety agencies can
easily identify the property from a public street. In cases where the building is not located within
view of the public street, the identifier shall be located on a mail box or other suitable device
visible from the street. Such signs shall not be illuminated. The size and location of the
identifying numerals and letters (if any) must be proportional to the size of the building and the
distance from the street to the building and in no case larger than two (2) square feet in area per
display surface. Two (2) signs per zoning lot are permitted;
(b) Government signs which form the expression of that government are allowed in every
zoning district when erected and maintained pursuant to law. Examples include, but are
not limited to, flags and insignia of government, legal notices, bankruptcy, estate and legal sale
signs, and traffic directional or regulatory signs as allowed under the Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, published by the N.C. Dept. of Transportation, most recent edition as erected by
or on behalf of a governmental body ;
(c) Memorial signs or tablets, and names and construction dates of buildings when cut into any
masonry surface or affixed to a building;
(d) Traffic control devices on private or public property erected and maintained to comply with the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted in this state and if not adopted by this state
with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the N.C. Department of
Transportation.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 11-4
(e) Premise signs are permitted on private property with the permission of the property owner,
provided such signs do not exceed nine square feet in area per display surface. The material of
the signs must be permanent in nature. Signs cannot be made up of aluminum, fiberglass,
cardboard, or plastic without a metal frame around the sign to protect it from weathering. Grass
cannot be allowed to cover the message of the signs. Off-premise signs are not allowed to be
illuminated.
(f) One sandwich board sign, per street frontage per business, in any of the commercial districts as
a. The total area of the signboard shall not exceed eight square feet per side.
b. Any sandwich board shall not exceed two linear feet in width, width with a maximum
height of 48 inches.
c. The sign shall be located within the storefront of the business installing the sign, and its
location shall not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
d. The sign must be constructed of materials that present a finished appearance. The sign
lettering should be professionally painted or applied; however, chalkboard signs shall be
permitted.
e. The sign shall be removed at the end of the day.
f. Any person erecting a sandwich board sign shall indemnify and hold harmless the City of
Trinity and its employees from any claim arising out of the presence of the sign on city
property or right-of-way.
(g) Signs erected in the right of way.
a. During the period beginning on the 30th day before the beginning date of “one stop” early
voting and ending on the 10th day after the primary or election day, person may place signs
in the right-of-way of the State highway system or City Street as provided in this section.
Signs must be placed in compliance with subsection i (below) and removed by the end of
the period prescribed herein.
i. Sign Placement – The permittee must obtain the permission of any property owner of
a residence, business or religious institution fronting the right-of-way where a sign
would be erected. Signs must be placed in accordance with follow:
1. No sign shall be permitted in the right-of-way of a fully controlled access
highway.
2. No sign shall be closer than three feet from the edge of the pavement of
the road.
3. No sign shall obscure motorist visibility at an intersection.
4. No sign shall be larger than 864 square inches.
5. No sign shall obscure or replace another sign.
6. No sign shall be higher than 42 inches above the edge of the pavement of
the road.
Section 11-5. Signs Requiring a Permit
Unless specifically exempted, no sign visible from a public right-of-way, whether exterior or interior to a
structure, shall be erected, displayed or substantially altered except in accord with the provisions of this
Article and until a permit has been issued by the City.
Section 11-6. Permit Application.
(a) Application for sign permits shall be submitted on forms obtained at the Trinity City Hall. Each
application shall be accompanied by plans which:
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 11-5
(1) Indicate the proposed site by identifying the property by ownership, location and use;
(2) Show the location of the sign on the lot in relation to property lines and buildings, zoning
district boundaries, right-of-way lines, and existing signs; and
(3) Show (drawing to scale) size, character, complete structural specifications and methods of
anchoring and support.
(b) The Zoning Administrator may also require such additional information as will enable a
determination that the sign can or cannot be erected in conformance with this ordinance.
(c) A fee established by the City shall be charged to erect a sign in the City of Trinity.
Section 11-7. Specific Sign Regulations in Agricultural and Residential Districts.
The following signs require a permit from the Zoning Administrator. With the exception of signs
generally permitted in Section 11-4 and 11-9, no sign shall be erected or displayed in any residential
district except as provided below:
(a) For Residential Developments (including identification of a subdivision, multi-family
development, or planned development, or the name, name of management firm and telephone
number of an apartment group) the maximum size and number of signs that the owner(s) may
erect and maintain at the entrance(s) to the development must meet the following standards:
(1) No more than two freestanding entrance signs per access, sixty (60) square feet in area per
display surface, with a maximum height of eight (8) feet if ground mounted or no higher than
the roof line if wall mounted.
(2) One announcement sign for subdivisions with open lots is allowed. The ground mounted
post(s) may have a max of 2 signs, maximum size of each sign is 50 square feet, and the
maximum height of the sign is 15 feet. The announcement sign must be removed 30 days
after the last lot has been sold.
(3) One information sign may be allowed in a subdivision entrance at a model home location.
The information sign maybe free standing or on a wall. The ground mounted post(s) or wall
may have no more than 2 signs, each sign can be no larger than 16 square feet in area. And
no higher than 10 feet or the roof line if wall mounted. These signs must be removed 30 days
after the model home has been sold.
(b) Home occupation signs identifying a home occupation, provided such signs are not illuminated
and are limited to one wall or one freestanding sign per lot and a maximum display surface of
four (4) square feet; and
(c) Nonresidential signs identifying nonresidential uses permitted as a principal or special use in
residential districts; provided such signs are limited to one freestanding sign per zoning lot or one
wall sign per lot and thirty-two (32) square feet in area and 10 feet high. Such signs may be
illuminated upon review and approval of the Zoning Administrator.
(d) Off-Premise Signs facing the Interstate (Outdoor Advertising Signs) – Off-premises signs
(outdoor advertising signs) are permitted within, 400 feet of Interstate-85 right-of-way. If within
the 400 feet distance to the right-of-way, billboard signs are allowed with a maximum height of
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 11-6
60 feet, maximum area of display surface of 672 square feet (14 feet by 48 feet), minimum
distance apart of 1,320 feet or ¼ of a mile; and are oriented to face the travel lane(s) of the
interstate. The parcel that the sign is located on must not have a housing density greater than one
house per 2.5 acres and the sign location must be more than 100 feet from the house or any other
structure. The minimum parcel size must be 2.5 acres.
(e) Off-Premise Signs not facing the Interstate – Off-premise signs not facing the interstate will have
a max area of display of nine (9) square feet, and a maximum height of 6 feet. All signs must
have a frame around them unless approved by the Zoning Administrator or Code Enforcement
Officer. Signs cannot be in the right-of-way, they cannot be partially or completed covered by
grass/weeds, and they cannot be illuminated.
(f) Location: Permitted signs may be anywhere on the premises, except in a required side yard or
within a site triangle, or within street right-of-way.
Section 11-8. Signs Permitted in O-I, HC, RM-U, M-1, & M-2.
(a) The following signs require a permit from the Zoning Administrator. With the exception of signs
generally permitted in Section 11-4, no sign shall be erected or displayed in the above listed districts
except as provided below for the type of sign and the zoning district in which it is located.
(b) Where a zoning lot contains more than one principal use or establishment, the provisions below shall
apply to the zoning lot as a whole, and the owner(s) of the zoning lot shall be responsible for
allocating permitted signs and display surface areas among the individual uses or establishments. The
sign plan submitted for such zoning lot shall show all signs located or proposed thereon and shall be
designed so that all signs are in harmony and consistent with each other.
(c) Freestanding Signs - On premise freestanding signs may be erected and displayed on a zoning lot in
compliance with the maximum dimensional limitations stated below, provided:
(1). The zoning lot on which a freestanding sign is located shall be accessible by
automobile and contain off-street parking for the principal uses(s);
(2). Freestanding signs shall be limited to one sign per street frontage for each zoning lot;
(3). No freestanding sign shall be permitted on the same lot frontage where there is a
projecting sign;
(4). Freestanding signs shall clear driveway and parking areas by a height of at least
fourteen (14) feet and shall clear sidewalks and pedestrian paths by a height of least
nine (9) feet.
(5). Announcement Signs – One announcement sign is allowed outside of the normal
advertising freestanding sign as long as all lots/or building sites located on the site
plan have not been built on. The ground mounted post(s) may have a max of 2 signs,
maximum size of each sign is 50 square feet, and the maximum height of the sign is
15 feet. The announcement sign must be removed 30 days after the last lot/or building
site has been sold.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 11-7
(d) Projecting Signs - Projecting signs may be erected and displayed on a zoning lot in compliance with
the maximum area per display surface limitations contained below provided:
(1). The building to which a projecting sign is attached shall be twenty (20) feet or more in
width;
(2). Projecting signs shall be limited to one sign per street frontage, and shall not be
located closer than fifty (50) feet to any other projecting sign;
(3). No projecting sign shall be permitted on the same street frontage where there is a
freestanding sign;
(4). Projecting signs shall clear sidewalks and pedestrian paths by a height of at least ten
(10) feet and shall project no more than five (5) feet from the building to which they
are attached, and shall not extend beyond the inner edge of the curb line;
(5). No projecting sign shall extend above the soffit, parapet or eave line, as appropriate,
of the building to which it is attached;
(6). Projecting signs shall not be located at the intersection of building corners except at
right angles to a building façade; and
(7). The message of projecting signs shall be limited to the names(s) of the
establishment(s) located on the zoning lot and/or the name of a multi-use development
located thereon.
(e) Wall Signs - Wall signs may be erected and displayed on a zoning lot in compliance with the
requirements below:
(1). Posters and paper signs displayed on or through windows are exempt;
(2). Wall signs placed in the space between windows on different stories of a building
shall not exceed in height two-thirds (2/3) of the distance between the top of a window
and the sill of the window above;
(3). No wall sign shall protrude more than twelve (12) inches from the wall to which it is
attached nor exceed 150 square feet per principle business;
(4). No wall sign shall extend above the peak of the roof of the building to which it is
attached;
(5). The display area of wall signs painted on, affixed to or otherwise displayed on or
through a façade window shall not exceed 15% of the area of the window;
(6). Wall signs, or portions of wall signs, placed between window spandrels shall not
exceed in height two-thirds of the height of the spandrel;
(7). In industrial zones, wall signs on the side of buildings adjacent to lots zoned
residential are permitted only when the building is at least fifty (50) feet from the side
lot line of the residential lot; and
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 11-8
(8). Wall signs on the side of buildings in the O&I zone are not permitted. However,
individual letters that identify the name of said building are permitted;
(9). Wall signs shall not cover or interrupt major architectural features.
(f) Marquee or Awning Signs - Marquee signs may be erected and displayed on a zoning lot in
compliance with the requirements below:
(1) Signs hung below a marquee or awning shall conform in size and appearance to
existing signs under the same marquee or awning. Where there are no such existing signs
under a marquee or awning, signs being under them shall be no more than ten (10) inches
high and three (3) feet long;
(2) Marquee and awning signs shall not be illuminated; and
(3) Signs below a marquee or awning shall not be less than nine (9) feet above the ground or
sidewalk.
(g) Off-Premises Signs facing the Interstate (Outdoor Advertising Signs) – Off-premises signs (outdoor
advertising signs) are permitted within, 400 feet of Interstate-85 right-of-way. If within the 400 feet
distance to the right-of-way, billboard signs are allowed with a maximum height of 60 feet, maximum
area of display surface of 672 square feet (14 feet by 48 feet), minimum distance apart of 1,320 feet or
¼ of a mile; and are oriented to face the travel lane(s) of the interstate.
(h) Off-Premise Signs not facing the Interstate – Off-premise signs not facing the interstate will have a
max area of display of nine (9) feet, and a maximum height of 6 feet. All signs must have a frame
around them unless approved by the Zoning Administrator or Code Enforcement Officer. Signs
cannot be in the right-of-way, they cannot be partially or completed covered by grass/weeds, and they
cannot be illuminated.
(i) Animated signs are allowed in O&I zoning as long as the sign meets the other requirement described
in section 11-8 and 11-10.
Section 11 – 9 Temporary Signs
Temporary signs are allowed at any time without a permit under section 11-4 may receive a permit from
the zoning administrator provided they meet the standards of this section:
(a) Residential Zoning Districts:
a. The signs may be erected only with the permission of the property owner;
b. Temporary sign permits may be issued for no more than thirty days each;
c. Temporary sign permits may be issued for no more than six times per year for each
property;
d. The total area of all temporary signs may be no larger than six square feet. Signs may be
no taller than four feet.3
e. This section does not authorize snipe signs.
(b) Non-Residential Zoning Districts:
a. The signs may only be erected with the permission of the property owner;
3 For example, three 2-foot square signs are permitted.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 11-9
b. Temporary signs permits may be issued for no more than thirty days each are allowed,
this includes banners, flags, and pennants;
c. Temporary sign permits may be issued no more than six times per year for each property
d. The total area of all temporary signs may be no larger than thirty-two square feet. Signs
may be no taller than eight feet.4
e. This section does not authorize snipe signs.
(c) Signs in residential properties that open the property up to the public are allowed, provided such signs
do not exceed one sign per street frontage per zoning lot or one sign per four hundred (400) feet of
street frontage, or six (6) square feet in area per display surface for residential properties. For nonresidential
properties, said signs can be used when the property is open to the public during abnormal
business hours or when the company/entity is closed. Said sign can be thirty-two (32) square feet in
size. Said signs are to be removed in no more than seventy- two (72) hours after the property has
been closed to the public.5
(d) Construction site identification signs whose message is limited to identification of architects,
engineers, contractors and other individuals or firms involved with the construction, the name of the
building, the intended purpose of the building, and the expected completion date, provided such signs
do not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area per display surface, are not erected before issuance
of a Building Permit, and are removed within seven (7) days of issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy. Construction signs in residential zones shall not be illuminated or reflectorized.
Fence wraps displaying signage when affixed to perimeter fencing at a construction site are permitted
until the certificate of occupancy is issued for the final portion of any construction at that site. No
fence wrap affixed pursuant to this subsection may display any advertising other than advertising
sponsored by a person directly involved in the construction project and for which monetary
compensation for the advertisement is not paid or required.6
(e) One temporary sign may be located on the owner’s property when the property owner is opening the
property to the public; provided, however, the owner may not use this type of sign for more than three
(3) consecutive days. This Section does not authorize snipe signs.7
(f) During the 40-day period December 1 to January 10, a property owner may place unlimited
temporary signs on the property to decorate the property even if the lights might be arranged to form
a sign. This Section does not authorize snipe signs.
4 For example, two 16 square foot signs are permitted.
5 This Section offers an opportunity for a person to put a “for sale” sign on the property. A “for sale” sign will allow for
the public to look at a property when it normally wouldn’t be able to when it was not “for sale”.
6 Fence wraps were added to NC Gen Stat. 160A-381(j) in 2015.
7 This Section offers an opportunity for signs for garage sales, yard sales and the like.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 11-10
Section 11-10. Sign Area and Height Limitations.
Freestanding Signs
Projecting Signs Wall Signs
District Maximum Area
Per Display
Surface
Maximum Height
to Top of Sign
Maximum Area Per
Display Surface
Maximum Percentage
Façade Coverage
HC 100 sq/ft** 50* 32 sq. ft. 5%
RM-U 32 sq. ft. 15 ft. 32 sq. ft. 5%
OI 50 sq. ft.** 15 ft. 32 sq. ft. 5%
M-1 100 sq. ft.** 10 ft. 32 sq. ft. 5%
M-2 100 sq. ft.** 10 ft. 32 sq. ft. 5%
* Except where the sign is located within four-hundred (400) feet of an interstate right-of-way or
interchange, in which case, the maximum height shall be sixty (60) feet.
** Two free standing signs are allowed if abutting two roads.
Section 11-11. Calculating Area and Number
(a) The area of a display surface of a sign shall be computed as including the entire area, within a regular
geometric form or combination of forms, comprising of all the display area of the surface and
including all of the elements of the matter displayed and the sign frame. Structural members not
bearing advertising matter shall not be included in the computation of a sign area.
(b) For the purpose of determining number of signs, a sign shall be considered to be a single display
device containing elements organized, related, and composed to form a unit.
Section 11-11. Calculating Area and Number
(c) The area of a display surface of a sign shall be computed as including the entire area, within a regular
geometric form or combination of forms, comprising of all the display area of the surface and
including all of the elements of the matter displayed and the sign frame. Structural members not
bearing advertising matter shall not be included in the computation of a sign area.
(d) For the purpose of determining number of signs, a sign shall be considered to be a single display
device containing elements organized, related, and composed to form a unit.
Section 11-12. Nonconforming Signs
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or place any sign which does not conform to the
requirements of this Article.
(b) Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs such as repainting and electrical repairs are
permitted. However, no repair in excess of 50% of a sign’s original cost shall be made in any twelvemonth
period without complying with the provisions of this ordinance.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 11-11
(c) A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign except that the
substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards or demountable material on
nonconforming signs shall be permitted.
(d) If any sign is erected or maintained in violation of this section, the Zoning Administrator shall notify
the owner of such violation and the manner in which such violation is to be remedied. If the violation
is not remedied within a reasonable time as set forth in this notice, or the sign is not removed after
notice of violation, the City Council shall have the right to have the sign removed at the expense of
the owner for which the City shall bear no liability.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 12-1
ARTICLE XII
AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
Section 12-1 Front Yard Averaging
The front yard requirements of this ordinance for dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average
setback of existing buildings located wholly or partially within one-hundred (100) feet on either side of
the proposed dwelling and on the same side of the street in the same block and use district as such lot is
less than the minimum required front yard depth. In such case, the front yard on such lots may be less
than the required front yard but not less than the average of the existing front yard on the aforementioned
lots, or a distance of ten (10) feet from the street right-of-way, whichever is greater.
Section 12-2 Height Limitations.
The height limitations of this ordinance shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, and domes not
intended for human occupancy; monuments, water towers, observation towers, chimneys, masts, aerials
and similar structures, smoke stacks, conveyors, and flag poles, except as otherwise provided in the
vicinity of airports.
Section 12-3 Visibility at Intersections.
On a corner lot in any residential district no planting, structure, sign, fence, wall or obstruction to
vision more than three (3) feet in height measured from the center line of the street may be placed or
maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street right-of-way lines and a straight
line connecting points on said street right-of-way lines, each of which is thirty-five (35) feet distant from
the point of intersection.
Section 12-4 Yard, Area and Height Requirements
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 12-2
Table 12-4 AREA, YARD & HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
District
Minimum Lot
Size, (Sq. ft.)
Min. Lot Width
at Bldg. Line
(ft.)
Min. Front
Yard Setback
(ft.)
Min. Side Yard
Setback (ft.)
Min. Rear Yard
Setback (ft.)
Max Height
(ft.)
RA Residential Agricultural
Single Family
Two Family
2.5 acres
100
100
40
40
10(a)
10(a)
25(e)(g)
25(e)(g)
35
35
R-40 Residential
Single-Family
Two-Family
40,000
50,000
100
100
40
40
10(a)
10(a)
25(e)(g)
25(e)(g)
35
35
R-20 Residential
Single-Family
20,000
80
30
10(a)
25(e)(g)
35
R-12 Residential (3 units/acre)
Single-Family
12,000 75 30 10(a) 25(e)(g) 35
R-10 Residential (4 units/acre)
Single-Family
10,000 60 30 10(a) 25(e)(g) 35
RM Mixed Residential
Single Family
Two Family(1)
Multi Family (Special use)(1)
Townhomes
10,000 (4
units/acre)
20,000
12,000+
3,000 for each
unit over 2
Same as multifamily
60
80
N/A
N/A
30
30(d)
N/A
15
10(a)
10(a)
10(a)
10(a)
25(e)(g)
25(e)(g)
25(e)(g)
25(e)(g)
35
35
35
35 (not to
exceed 2
stories)
RM-U Mixed Residential-Urban
All Residential Uses
N/A
N/A
10
10 between
buildings
25
35
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 12-3
District
Minimum Lot
Size, (Sq. ft.)
Min. Lot Width
at Bldg. Line
(ft.)
Min. Front
Yard Setback
(ft.)
Min. Side Yard
Setback (ft.)
Min. Rear Yard
Setback (ft.)
Max Height
(ft.)
Office & Institutional
Commercial/Professional Office
N/A
75
25(d)
8(a)
20(e)(g)
50
HC Business
N/A 50 15(b)(d) 5(h) 20(e)(g) 50
M-1 Manufacturing
N/A (f) 50(c)(d) 20 20 50
M-2 Manufacturing N/A (f) 50(c)(d) 15(a) 20 50
(a) Corner lot add five (5’) feet on street side.
(b) Minimum required front yard setback shall be developed for sidewalks, grass and/or plants and the necessary entrance driveways.
(c) Except for the necessary drives and walks, the front yard shall not include off street parking, other than for visitors and office employees. All
other employees parking and loading shall be behind or beside the structure.
(d) Front yard shall also be landscaped in grass and ornamental shrubs and trees.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 12-4
(e) Detached accessory structures may be placed no closer than five (5’) feet from the rear lot line.
(f) In these zoned districts, the frontage on an individual lot on a public street shall not be below seventy-five (75’) feet.
(g) In all zoned districts, where a swimming pool is an approved accessory to a primary residence or other structure there shall be provided around
the perimeter, an enclosed fence with a minimum height of four (4’) feet, with all gates provided being self-closing and all vertical or
horizontal openings being no more than four (4”) inches, which would deter and/or prevent the accidental or unauthorized use of said
swimming pool. Fences which enclose the rear yard of the property shall be approvable if they totally secure that area in and around the
swimming pool structure.
(h) One side lot line may be zero (0’) feet while the opposite line may be no closer than fifteen (15’) feet.
(i) Fences shall be allowed in all yards, but any fence located in a front yard area shall neither exceed a height of four (4’) feet nor impede
vehicular visibility or movement at any intersection or driveway entrance nor shall it encroach upon the right-of-way of any street. Stockade
type privacy fences in residentially zoned areas shall not exceed eight (8’) feet in side and rear yard areas. All fences in side yard areas
adjoining a public street shall be set back at least 5 feet from the right-o-way of the public street to provide adequate sight visibility for
vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(j) When subdividing large lots within older residential subdivisions as per Trinity Subdivision Regulations, it shall be demonstrated by the
developer prior to plat approval by the Zoning Administrator, that all newly constructed dwellings will conform to the same setback as
existing structures located on either side of the lot being subdivided.
(k) Placement of Manufactured Homes in the RM zone must conform to Section 7-11B Manufactured home Overlay District.
(l) Requirements of Trinity’s Watershed Ordinance supersede the Zoning Ordinance in cases where the Watershed Ordinance is more restrictive.
• Note: Line of sight landscaping shall not be allowed within any public right-of-way unless written permission is granted by the City of Trinity
and the NC Department of Transportation.
o Lot areas and setbacks shall be increased if required by County Health Department regulations
o Lot areas in designated watersheds are controlled by the City of Trinity Watershed Ordinance.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 13-1
ARTICLE XIII
Parking & Transportation
Section 13-1. General Off-Street Parking Requirements.
1. Parking, Stacking and Loading Space Required: When any building or structure is erected, modified,
enlarged or increased in capacity, or any open use is established, modified or enlarged, the
requirements of this Article shall be met. For enlargements, modifications, or increases in capacity,
the requirements of this Article apply only to such enlargements, modifications, or increases in
capacity.
2. Required Number: The minimum number of required off-street parking, stacking, and loading spaces
are indicated in Section 13-4 of this Article. In cases of mixed occupancy, the minimum number of
off-street parking, stacking, and loading spaces shall be the cumulative total of individual use
requirements unless otherwise specified.
3. Handicapped Spaces: Spaces for the physically handicapped shall be provided as required by the NC
State Building Code.
4. Reduction of Minimum Requirements: Unless there is a change in use requiring a lesser number of
spaces, the number of spaces shall not be reduced below the minimum requirements of this
Ordinance.
5. Maintenance: All parking, stacking, and loading facilities shall be permanently maintained by the
owners or occupants as long as the use they serve exists.
6. Access: All parking, stacking, and loading facilities shall have vehicular access to a publicly
dedicated street, road or highway maintained by either the North Carolina Department of
Transportation or the City of Trinity.
7. Use for No Other Purpose: Land used to provide required parking, stacking, loading shall not be used
for any other purposes, except for temporary events. If such land is devoted to any other purpose, it
shall be a violation of this Zoning Ordinance.
8. Change in Size: Only those portions of existing buildings or structures enlarged after the adoption of
this Ordinance shall comply with the requirements of this section.
Section 13-2 Parking for Unlisted Uses
For any use not specifically listed in this Section, the parking, stacking, and loading requirements shall be
those of the most similar use.
Section 13-3 Parking Requirements for Change in Use
If a change in use causes an increase in the required number of off-street parking, stacking, or loading
spaces, such additional spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance;
except that if the change in use would require an increase of less than five percent (5%) in the required
number of parking spaces or fewer than five (5) spaces, no additional off-street parking shall be required.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 13-2
Section 13-4. Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
The following off-street parking shall be required
TABLE 13.4
OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
USE SPACES REQUIRED
Amusement parks, fairgrounds; skating rinks 1/200 sq. ft. of activity area
Athletic fields 1 space / each 4 fixed seats.
Without fixed seats, 2.5 spaces / 100 sq. ft.,
plus 1 space for each 100 sq. ft. of floor or
ground area used for assembly.
Auditorium; assembly halls; coliseums;
convention centers; stadiums
1/5 persons based on designed capacity of
building(s)
Automobile repair or services 3/service bay plus 1/wrecker or service
vehicle plus 2/3 employees on largest shift
Banks and financial institution *1/200 sq ft gross floor area plus stacking for
4 vehicles at each drive-through window or
automatic teller machine.
Barber and Beauty shop 3/operator
Batting cages, driving ranges; miniature golf;
shooting ranges
1/cage, tee, or firing point
Bed & breakfast; boarding and rooming house 1/bedroom plus 2/3 employees
Bowling centers 4/lane
Car Washes, full-service *Stacking for 30 vehicles or 10/approach
lane, whichever is greater plus 3 spaces in the
manual drying area plus 2/3 employees on
largest shift
Car washes, self-service 3 stacking spaces/approach lane plus 2 drying
spaces/stall
Churches 1/4 seats in main assembly room/sanctuary
Clubs, lodges, coin-operated amusement,
fitness centers; similar indoor recreation
1/200 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Communication towers; demolition debris
landfills; heliports; utility lines or substations
No required parking
Congregate care or group care facilities 1/4 beds plus 1/employee and visiting
specialist plus 1/vehicle used in operation
Convenience stores *1/200 sq ft gross floor area plus 4 stacking
spaces at pump islands
Day care, child or adult 1/employee plus 1.5 /5 children
Delivery services 2/3 employees on largest shift plus 1/vehicle
used in operation
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 13-3
TABLE 13.4
OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
USE SPACES REQUIRED
Drive-through (Not otherwise classified) *Stacking for 4 vehicles at each window
lane, or machine in addition to use
requirement
Equipment rental and leasing 1/200 sq. ft gross floor area
Fire stations; police stations 1/employee on largest shift
Flea markets; open air sales, salvage yards 2/10,000 sq. ft. site area plus 2/3 employees
on largest shift
Fuel oil sales 2/3 employees on largest shift plus 1/vehicle
used in operation
Funeral homes or crematoria 1/4 seats in main chapel plus 2/3 employees
on the largest shift plus 1/vehicle used in
operation
Furniture; floor covering sales 1/1,000 sq ft gross floor area
Furniture market showroom 1/1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
Grocery stores 1/200 sq ft gross floor area
Golf courses 4/tee
Government offices; post offices 1/150 sq. ft. of public service area plus 2/3
employees on largest shift
Home occupations minimum 1 space, maximum 3 space in
addition to required resident spaces
Hospitals 1/4 in-patient or out-patient beds plus 2/3
employees on largest shift plus 1/staff doctor
Hotels and motels containing 5,000 square feet
or less ancillary space, i.e. restaurant, meeting
rooms, lounge, lobby, or a restaurant/lounge
containing 3,000 square feet or less
1/rental unit
Hotels or motels containing more than 5,000
square feet of ancillary space, i.e. restaurant,
meeting rooms, lounge or lobby or a
restaurant/lounge containing over 3,000 square
feet
1.25/rental unit
Kennels or pet grooming 1/300 sq. ft. of sales, grooming or customer
waiting area plus 2/3 employees on largest
shift
Laboratories *2/3 employees on largest shift plus 1/250
sq. ft. of office space
Laundromats, coin operated 1/4 pieces of rental equipment
Laundry & dry cleaning services 2/3 employees on largest shift plus 1/vehicle
used in operation plus stacking for 4
vehicles/pickup station
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 13-4
TABLE 13.4
OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
USE SPACES REQUIRED
Libraries, museums and art galleries 1/450 sq. ft. gross floor area for public use
plus 2/3 employees on largest shift
Manufacturing and industrial uses 2/3 employees on largest shift plus 1/200 sq.
ft. of retail sales or customer service area
plus 1 vehicle used in operation
Medical, dental or related offices 3/examining room plus 1/employee
including doctors
Motor vehicle, motorcycle, or recreational
vehicle sales or display rental; manufactured
home sales
5 spaces plus 1/10,000 sq. ft. of display area
plus 2/3 employees on largest shift
Nursing homes, assisted living 1/4 beds plus 1/employee and visiting
specialist plus 1/vehicle used in operation
Offices (Not Otherwise Classified 1/250 sq. ft. gross floor area
Reception House 1 per 3 guest plus one per employee
Recycling Processing Facility, Indoors 1/250 sq. ft of office space, plus 1 space per
2,000 sq/ft of floor space plus 1 per vehicle
used in operation
Residences, apartments, condominiums
1 bedroom unit
2 bedroom units
3+ bedroom units
1.50/unit
1.75/unit
2.00/unit
Residences, single family detached and duplex 2/dwelling unit on the same lot
Residences, townhomes 2/unit
Restaurants *1/4 seats plus 2/3 employees on largest
shift
For drive-up service, 11 total stacking spaces
with minimum 5 spaces at or before ordering
station
Retail stores over 25,000 sq. ft. in size 1/250 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Retail sales not otherwise classified 1/200 sq. ft. gross floor area
Schools, elementary, middle & kindergartens 5 spaces, plus 1 space per classroom employee
and staff member
Schools, senior high schools 1 space per four students, plus 1 space for
each classroom, administrative and non
educational employee
Self-storage warehouses 5 spaces for employees and office customers
Service stations *3/service bay plus 1/wrecker or service
vehicle plus 2/3 employees on largest shift
plus 4 stacking spaces at pump islands
Services and repairs not otherwise classified 1/250 sq ft gross floor area plus 1/vehicle
used in operation
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 13-5
TABLE 13.4
OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
USE SPACES REQUIRED
Shopping Centers< 250,000 sq. ft. gross floor
area
1/200 sq. ft. gross floor area in main
building(s) (excluding theaters) plus parking
as required for outparcels or theaters
Shopping Center > 250,000 sq. ft. gross floor
area
1,250 spaces plus 1/225 sq. ft. gross floor
area above 250,000 sq. ft.
Swimming pools as principal use 1/100 sq. ft. of water & deck space
Theaters 1/4 seats
Transportation, warehousing and utility uses
(not otherwise classified)
2/3 employees on largest shift plus 1/vehicle
used in operation
Veterinary services 4/doctor plus 1/employee including doctors
Wholesale uses 2/3 employees on largest shift plus 1/200 sq.
ft. of retail sales or customer service area
plus 1/vehicle used in operation
*NOTE: NCDOT may require additional stacking space on state or federal highways.
Section 13-5. Off-Street Loading and Unloading Space.
All structures erected for business or industry shall provide space (see below) for off-street loading and
unloading. The space shall have access to an alley or a street. An off-street loading space shall have be a
minimum of 12 feet by 60 feet with an overhead clearance of 14 feet above street level.
Retail Operations One (1) loading space for each twenty-thousand (20,000)
square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.
Industrial and Wholesale Operations One (1) loading space for each twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.
Section 13-6 Design Standards for Parking, Stacking, and Loading
1. Design: Parking facilities shall be designed and constructed to:
a. Allow unobstructed movement into and out of each parking space without interfering
with fixed objects or vehicles;
b. Minimize delay and interference with traffic on public streets and access drives; and
c. Maximize sight distances from parking lot exits and access drives; and
d. Require all spaces in parking lots to have access from parking lot driveways and not
directly from streets.
2. Dimensional Requirements: Parking facilities shall be designed and constructed to meet minimum
parking space dimensions, aisle dimensions and other standards found in this Article.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 13-6
3. Paving
a. paved parking spaces, access drives, and loading areas shall be paved and maintained
with concrete, asphalt, or similar material of sufficient thickness and consistency to
support anticipated traffic volumes and weights;
b. Access drives shall be paved and maintained from the edge of the public road to a point
at least ten (10) feet beyond the public right-of-way line for all parking and loading
facilities, whether paved or unpaved; and
c. Where parking facilities are paved, curb and gutter or an equivalent drainage system shall
be provided except where it is determined by the Zoning Administrator that such system
is not practical for storm drainage purposes;
d. Facilities shall be graded, drained, stabilized, and maintained to minimize dust and
erosion;
e. All parking spaces and stacking lanes shall be clearly identified with paint lines, bumper
guards, curbs, or similar treatment;
f. All parking spaces shall be provided with wheel guards or curbs located so that no part of
the parked vehicle will extend beyond the property line or encroach more than two (2)
feet into a required planting area;
g. Properly constructed load bearing concrete pads for stationary refuse containers shall be
located beneath and in the approach to each container.
h. Parking lots shall be designed and constructed such that walkways shall maintain a
minimum unobstructed width of 4 feet. (Vehicle encroachment is calculated as two (2)
feet beyond curb.)
i. Parking areas shall provide for unobstructed movement into and out of each space
without interfering with fixed objects such as lighting fixtures, dumpsters, signs, or
vehicles.
j. Except for single family dwellings, duplexes, and multi-family developments of four (4)
units or less, all maneuvers associated with parking and loading must occur in the offstreet
parking area. Private alleys may be used to conduct parking maneuvers.
k. All parking areas shall provide for internal circulation such that each space is accessible
to all other parking spaces without requiring use of a public street or alley.
l. Paving shall not be required for:
i. Parking facilities used on an irregular basis for churches, private clubs, or
similar nonprofit organizations;
ii. Parking for residential uses where six (6) or fewer spaces are required;
iii. Parking areas for agricultural uses in properly zoned areas;
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 13-7
iv. Parking areas in the Heavy Manufacturing (M-1) District, or for manufacturing
and industrial uses in the Light Manufacturing (M-2) District, provided they
are constructed with gravel graded to a minimum of 4 inches of crushed rock.
v. Parking areas for tracked heavy construction equipment, skid-mounted and
similar equipment, provided they are constructed with gravel graded to a
minimum of four (4) inches of crushed rock, comparable all-weather surface;
Table 13.6 Parking Space Geometric Design Standards
a
Parking
Angle
(degrees)
b
Stall
Width (*)
c
Stall to
Curb (ft.)
d
Aisle
Width
(ft.)
e
Curb
Length
(ft.)
f1 - - - - - - - - - - - - f2
Center-to-Center Width of
Two Row Bin With Access
Road Between (ft.)
Curbto-
Curb
Overlap C-C
0
7'-6"
8'-6"
9'-0"
9'-6"
10'-0"
7.5
8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
23.0
23.0
23.0
23.0
23.0
27.0
29.0
30.0
31.0
32.0
-
-
-
-
30
7'-6"
8'-6"
9'-0"
9'-6"
10'-0"
16.5
16.9
17.3
17.8
18.2
11.0
11.0
11.0
11.0
11.0
17.5
17.0
18.0
19.0
20.0
44.0
44.8
45.6
46.6
47.8
41.0
37.4
37.8
38.4
38.7
45
7'-6"
8'-6"
9'-0"
9'-6"
10'-0"
17.0
19.4
19.8
20.1
20.5
11.0
13.5
13.0
13.0
13.0
10.5
12.0
12.7
13.4
14.1
43.0
52.3
52.6
53.2
54.0
48.1
46.3
46.2
46.5
46.9
60
7'-6"
8'-6"
9'-0"
9'-6"
10'-0"
17.7
20.7
21.0
21.2
21.2
14.0
18.5
18.0
18.0
18.0
8.7
9.8
10.4
11.0
11.5
47.4
59.9
60.0
60.4
61.0
44.0
55.6
55.5
55.6
56.0
90
7'-6"
8'-6"
9'-0"
9'-6"
10'-0"
17.0
19.0
19.0
19.0
19.0
20.0
25.0
24.0
24.0
24.0
7.5
8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0
54.0
63.0
62.0
62.0
62.0
-
-
-
-
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 13-8
(*) 9'-0" recommended
(*) 8'-6" minimum
(*) 7'-6" compact cars only, for non-required spaces only
Section 13-7. Alternatives and Incentives.
A. Purpose – The purpose of this section is to encourage the property owner to reduce the amount of
impervious surface cover needed for parking by providing a variety of alternatives and incentives.
Any parking alternative proposed or incentive utilized by the property owner must be approved by the
Zoning Administrator and shall accomplish the following:
(1) Intent. The intent of the parking requirements is preserved.
(2) Sufficient parking. The parking provided will be sufficient to serve the use for which it is
intended; and
(3) Impact. The modification will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare.
B. Shared Parking
(1) Reduction of Parking Requirements. The Zoning Administrator may authorize a
reduction of the parking requirements or parking spaces for any mixed use project or
nearby uses where peak parking demand characteristics or hours of operation are
distinctly different in accordance with this section. All reductions of parking
requirements authorized by the Zoning Administrator within the City of Trinity must also
receive approval from the City Manager.
(2) Requirements. A request for approval of shared parking shall be accompanied by such
information determined by the Zoning Administrator as necessary to evaluate the relevant
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 13-9
factors listed in the section below, including, but not limited to, a description of the uses,
a site plan, and a transportation engineering report.
(3) Accessibility. All shared parking spaces shall be located in a parking facility providing
reasonably equivalent accessibility and usability to all uses which the parking is intended
to serve.
(4) Ownership. In cases where the uses for which shared parking is requested are located on
lots under different ownership, a contract approved by the City Attorney shall be
provided.
(5) Conditions. In determining whether to approve a reduction for shared parking, the
Zoning Administrator shall consider all relevant factors, including the following:
(a). Peak Parking Demand. The characteristics of each use and the
differences in projected peak parking demand, including days or hours of
operation;
(b). Reduction in Vehicle Movements. Potential reduction in vehicle
movements afforded by multi-purpose use of the parking facility by
employees, customers, or residents of the uses served; and,
(c). Potential Improvements. Potential improvements in parking facility design,
circulation, and access afforded by a shared parking facility.
(C) Park and Shuttle Lots in Business and Industrial Zoning Districts
(1) Conditions. The Zoning Administrator may authorize any business use(s), or zoning lot
which has a minimum of one hundred and seventy-five (175) contiguous parking spaces
to establish a park and shuttle lot provided that:
(a). Maximum. Not more than ten percent (10%) of the required parking spaces for
the use(s) or for the zoning lot may be designated as a park and shuttle lot.
(b). Location. All designated park and shuttle spaces shall be located n outlying areas
of the parking lot so as not to interfere with customer or employee parking needs.
(2) Short-term Parking. All designated park and shuttle areas shall be for short-term (less
than twenty-four [24] hours) parking for commuters of any public carpooling,
vanpooling, or transit program.
(D) Reduction in the OI Districts
(1) In the OI District:
(a). Amount Required. For any permitted use in the OI District, the required amount
of parking may be reduced by (15%). This reduction shall not affect the required
disabled parking or loading spaces for that use.
(b). Location. All off-street parking shall be provided to the rear or to the side of the
principal structure with the exception of two (2) parking spaces which may be
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 13-10
located in the front of the structure. The side parking area may be no closer to
the street than the principal structure.
(E) Parking Reduction for Required Landscaping in Motor Vehicle Use Areas - For all uses, the
property owner may reduce the number of required parking spaces for the installation of required
interior planting areas up to a maximum of ten percent (10%). Up to an additional five percent
(5%) reduction is permitted where an area which would otherwise be devoted to parking cannot be
used in order to preserve an existing tree with a diameter of six (6”) inches or greater.
Section 13-8. Sidewalks, Multi-Use Paths and Bicycle Lanes
(A) Sidewalks-Residential.
A sidewalk with a minimum width of five (5) feet may be installed within the right-of-way.
New sidewalks must adjoin existing sidewalks on adjacent property. Access for handicapped
persons must be provided to side walk facilities at appropriate locations, including street
intersections.
If a developer chooses to build a sidewalk, then the location of the sidewalk should be based on
whether or not the street has a curb. If the street has a curb, then the sidewalk can be built up to
the road. If the street has no curb, then the sidewalk must have at least four (4) feet of
vegetation in between the sidewalk and the street.
(B) Sidewalks Commercial.
A sidewalk with a minimum width of five (5) feet may be installed within the public right-of-way
or on private property within a recorded public access easement. New sidewalks must be installed
to connect existing sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be constructed in compliance with the latest
version of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
If a developer chooses to build a sidewalk, then the location of the sidewalk should be based on
whether or not the street has a curb. If the street has a curb, then the sidewalk can be built up to
the road. If the street has no curb, then the sidewalk must have at least four (4) feet of vegetation
in between the sidewalk and the street.
(C) Multi-Use Paths.
These trails are designed to accommodate several different users, including walkers, joggers,
bicyclists, equestrians, and in-line skaters and would have an improved surface of concrete, asphalt,
crushed stone, compacted dirt or grass. A multi-use path with dimensions and allowed users shall
be specified by the City shall be installed within the public right-of-way or on private property
within a recorded public access easement. Multi-use paths shall be required when indicated on
official City of Trinity transportation plans/maps, pedestrian plans/maps.
1. Multi-use paths shall be either concrete, asphalt or other suitable material as specified by
the City of Trinity.
2. Multi-use path users shall be specified by the City of Trinity on a case by case basis.
(D) Bicycle Lanes.
Bicycle lanes shall be established within the right-of-way or on private property within a recorded
public access easement in accordance with approved City of Trinity transportation plans/maps.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 13-11
Unless otherwise specified, bicycle lanes shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width, well-marked
with striping and have adequate signage for the safety of pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 13-12
Section 13-9 Traffic Analysis
When sufficient information on a proposed development is available, the City may require that the
developer provide preliminary North Carolina Department of Transportation (NCDOT) review for
driveway and development entrances to NCDOT maintained roads and a proposed traffic count for the
new development or redevelopment. If required by the City, this information shall be submitted with a
preliminary plat, special use permit application or conditional rezoning application. It is recommended
that developers of new major subdivisions, multi-family developments and commercial and industrial
developments that exceed one acre in size provide the above information.
Section 13-10 Curb and Gutter
Mountable curb (such as valley curb) and gutter is required in Residential Mixed & Residential Mixed -
Urban (RM-U) zoning district and on public road ways abutting multifamily development. All construction
within a North Carolina Department of Transportation (NCDOT) right of way shall comply with NCDOT
construction standards and permits.
Section 13-11 General Parking Requirements
The purpose of this ordinance is to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of Trinity residents
and citizens residing in the City’s extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction while protecting the livelihood of
owner-operator independent truck drivers by prohibiting Tractor and Trailer parking in residential
zoning districts and terminating through attrition owner-operator Tractor and Trailer parking existing as
of March 18, 2010.
1. Definition: Tractor shall be defined as a truck with three or more axles or any truck intended for
use as an over-the-road commercial freight hauler. Trailer shall be defined as being more than 80
inches wide and more than 25 feet in length and intended to be used to transport freight when
powered by a tractor.
2. It shall be unlawful to park Tractors and/or Trailers on public streets and rights-of-way in all
zoning districts subject to the following:
A. Exceptions: Temporary parking of Tractors and/or Trailers may be permitted in
all zoning districts under certain conditions which include:
1. Loading and unloading of vehicles.
2. Emergency service vehicles in response to an urgent situation.
3. Lawn care and other home service vehicles while providing contract
services to a nearby home or property.
3. It shall be unlawful to park Trailers containing hazardous materials in all zoning districts.
4. Illicit Discharges: In conformance with the City’s adopted Stormwater Ordinance, in all zoning
districts it shall be unlawful to allow the discharge, emission, disposal, pouring, or pumping
directly or indirectly to any stormwater conveyance, the waters of the State, or upon the land in
manner and amount that the substance is likely to reach a stormwater conveyance or the water of
the State, any liquid, solid, gas, or other substance, other than stormwater.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 13-13
5. It shall be unlawful to park Tractors and/or Trailers in residential zoning districts subject to the
following:
A. Exception: Notwithstanding the provisions of any and all City ordinances,
Tractors or Tractors and Trailers may be permitted to park on property zoned
residential if ALL of the following conditions are met:
1. The owner or leaseholder of the Tractor or Tractor and Trailer is also:
i. The owner of the property or spouse of the property owner or
child of the property owner; and
ii. Resides at the property.
2. The owner or leaseholder of the Tractor or Tractor and Trailer certifies
that the Tractor or Tractor and Trailer was parked at the property
between February 16, 2010 and March 18, 2010.
3. The owner or leaseholder of the Tractor or Tractor and Trailer applied to
the City between February 16, 2010 and March 18, 2010 for a permit to
continue parking the Tractor or Tractor and Trailer at the property.
4. The owner or leaseholder of the Tractor or Tractor and Trailer possesses
a valid and current North Carolina Commercial Drivers License.
B. Permit to Park: The City will issue a permit to park a Tractor and Trailer
depending on which existed on the property between February 16, 2010 and
March 18, 2010 if all of the following conditions are met:
1. The applicant shall be in compliance with provisions 5-A 1, 2, 3, and 4
of this ordinance.
2. Permit fees shall be paid in full in accordance with the City’s adopted
Fee Schedule.
3. There shall be no outstanding City code violations existing at the
property.
4. The Tractor or Tractor and Trailer shall be properly licensed, insured,
operational, and in compliance with NC Division of Motor Vehicles
laws.
C. Applicants for Permits to Park shall present to the City Planning Department
documentation necessary to verify ownership of the Tractor no later than June 1,
2010 after which permit eligibility shall expire.
D. Permits shall not be issued for more than one Tractor and Trailer per applicant.
E. Permits to Park are not transferrable to future owners of the property or to other
properties.
___________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 13-14
F. Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the replacement of a permitted Tractor or
Trailer by the permit holder.
G. While a Permit to Park is under consideration, code enforcement action by the
City specific to the Request shall be suspended.
H. Permits to Park shall be revoked if the permit holder is issued more than two
citations for violations of this ordinance.
6. Effective Date: This ordinance shall be effective April 20, 2010.
7. Enforcement: This ordinance shall be enforced through the general penalties section of Trinity’s
Code of Ordinances.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 14 - 1
ARTICLE XIV
BUFFERING AND LANDSCAPING REQUIREMEMTS
Section 14-1 Purpose of Buffering Requirements
The purpose of this section is to protect an abutting property from less desirable characteristics of the
property for which buffering is required due to a dissimilar district, use, and/or primary transportation
route(s) thereby promoting the general public’s health and welfare. Such characteristics may include but
are not limited to visually incompatible structures and land uses, overhead lighting, wind and dust, and
increased activity associated with commercial, industrial, institutional and other land uses. In addition the
buffering/landscaping requirements of this section will encourage the preservation of existing trees and
the planting and maintenance of others, both of which constitute an important aesthetic resource for the
City of Trinity.
Section 14-2. Buffering Between Zoning Districts and/or Uses.
A buffer strip shall be provided in all Commercial, Office/Institutional, Light Industrial, and Heavy
Industrial zoning districts and/or uses. Unless an existing buffer meets requirements of this section and
sufficiently shields and protects the abutting property as determined by the Planning Director or Zoning
Administrator, buffer strips shall meet the following requirements:
1. Where the abutting lot is zoned residential or has been developed with a residential use and
shares a common lot line with a lot or one acre or greater whose use requires buffering, a
buffer of twenty feet (20’) in width shall be placed according to one or a combination of the
following methods:
(a). At least two (2) rows of evergreen trees which may be selected from the
recommended List of Recommended Species (on file with the Zoning Administrator)
shall be planted. Trees shall have a minimum height of three feet (3’) when planted.
The rows shall be spaced seven feet (7’) apart and centered within the buffer strip.
Tree spacing shall be eight feet (8’) off centered with trees in adjacent rows offset
(staggered) four feet (4’); and a solid visual barrier fence six feet (6’) in height shall
be erected around any loading, unloading, or outdoor storage areas; and
(b). Earth beams may be used in conjunction with planting to satisfy height requirements;
but slopes shall not exceed one foot (1’) to two feet (2’) horizontal.
2. Where the abutting lot is not residentially zoned or used but shares a common lot line with
the lot on one acre or greater whose use requires buffering, the required buffer strip of
twenty feet (20’) in width shall be planted:
(a). Two (2) rows of evergreen trees planted in a staggered pattern and located
approximately in the center of the buffer strip. The two (2) rows shall be no more
than seven feet (7’) apart and the trees shall be planted no more than eight feet (8’)
apart within each row. The evergreens used in this planting shall be at least three feet
(3’) in height and must be healthy, nursery grown plants which meet the requirements
set forth in the American Standard for Nursery Stock, which are staked when planted
and protected.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 14 - 2
3. If the lot whose use requires buffering is less than one acre, the buffer strip shall be a
minimum of twelve feet (12’) wide and placed in the manner(s) outlined previously.
4. The buffer strip shall be placed on the commercial, office/institutional and industrial
properties such that it fulfills the intent of this Article.
Section 14-3 Landscaping for Community Shopping, Highway Commercial and Office &
Institutional Districts
At least one (1) deciduous tree shall be planted along the street no less than ten feet (10’) off of the rightof-
way (on private property), for each forty feet (40’) of street frontage or fraction thereof for new
construction or extensive rehabilitation. Each tree shall be at least one and one-half inches (1 ½”) in
caliper and may be selected from the List of Recommended Species or otherwise approved by the
Planning and Zoning Administrator and shall be provided with adequate space for water percolation and
root growth. In lieu of this requirement, the developer shall provide a Landscaping Plan and detailed
plant list, approved by the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, which provides for a variety of
plantings which achieve the desired aesthetic goals of the buffering requirement.
Section 14-4 Buffering Between Single Family Housings & Planned Developments
In each Planned Unit Development located in any residential district where the project abuts single family
housing, a buffer shall be provided in accordance with the buffer requirements presented in Section 14-2.
Section 14-5 Buffering Off-Street Parking Areas
1. Each off-street parking area designed for one hundred (100) or more spaces, which has been issued a
zoning permit after the effective date of this section and each existing area to which spaces are added
totaling one hundred (100) or more spaces after the effective date of this ordinance shall have
provided and maintained one (1) tree for each twenty (20) spaces constructed. Areas designed and
designated for truck maneuvering are exempt from the requirement.
2. Each planting area shall have an unobstructed width dimension of not less than seven and one-half
feet (7 ½’) and shall not be less than one hundred ten (110) square feet in area for each required tree.
3. Each planting area shall be protected by curbing, ballards, or parking barriers and contain at least one
(1) tree which may be selected from the List of Recommended Species. The minimum caliper of
each tree shall not be less than one and one-half inches (1 ½”). No barrier is required if the trees are
set back at least eight feet (8’) from the edge of pavement.
4. Planting areas shall be located within the parking area as islands, or around the perimeter of the
parking area within sixteen feet (16’) of the pavement or curb. At least fifty percent (50 %) of the
planting areas shall be islands within the parking area. Curbing along the parking area perimeter is
not required if the trees are set back at least five feet (5’) from the edge of the pavement.
Section 14-6 Protection of Existing Trees in Required Buffer Strips
1. Preservation of existing trees is strongly recommended.
2. When healthy, well-shaped existing trees, three inches (3”) in caliper, are successfully preserved, a
consideration will be given to crediting said tree toward a portion of the buffer required by this
section.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 14 - 3
2. Monument trees are to be given special consideration.
3. A plan to preserve existing trees shall be prepared and submitted for approval by the Planning and
Zoning Administrator before the issuance of the Zoning Permit.
Section 14-7 Utility Equipment
1. Utility meters, transformers and fixed trash disposal receptacles which cannot be located out of sight
shall be screened by fencing or landscaping.
2. New subdivisions over 25 lots must use underground utility lines.
Section 14-8 Maintenance of Buffering
1. Evergreen trees shall be maintained so that dense branching begins at ground level and continues to
the top of each plant.
2. Unhealthy or dead plants shall be promptly replaced.
2. Each required fence shall be maintained in good repair, including periodic painting or finishing.
3. Failure to maintain the plantings, earth berms, and/or fences in good condition shall constitute a
violation of this section.
4. When attempting to comply with these requirements, the property owner shall contact all public
utility agencies in order to protect public utilities buried underground.
Section 14-9 Documentation & Variances
1. Graphic documents indicating compliance with the requirements set forth herein shall be submitted
prior to the issuance of a Zoning Permit.
2. Variances to the requirements of this section may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment for review.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 15 - 1
ARTICLE XV
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR, PERMITS REQUIRED, AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 15-1 Zoning Administrator
The City Manager shall appoint a zoning administrator to enforce this ordinance.
Section 15-2 Duties of the Zoning Administrator
The Zoning Administrator shall:
1. establish and publish application procedures for permits, appeals, and actions pursuant to this
Ordinance and forms implementing the same;
2. issue permits and certificates pursuant to this Ordinance;
3. review and approve all development plans and permits to assure that the permit requirements of
this Ordinance have been satisfied;
4. interpret the applicability of the provisions of this Ordinance in matters where the text does not
clearly provide guidance;
5. maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this Ordinance in his office(s) and make said
records open for public inspection;
6. periodically inspect properties and activities for which permits have been issued to determine
whether the use(s) is being conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance;
7. cause to be investigated violations of this Ordinance;
8. enforce the provisions of this Ordinance;
9. issue notice of corrective action(s) when required;
10. use the remedies provided in this Ordinance to gain compliance;
11. be authorized to gather evidence in support of said activities;
12. receive appeals and forward cases to the appropriate body; and perform other duties as may be
assigned by the City Council.
Section 15-3 Questions of Enforcement and Interpretation
All questions arising from the enforcement of this ordinance shall be presented initially to the Zoning
Administrator. If not satisfactorily resolved, the aggrieved party shall appeal to the Board of Adjustment.
If the matter is still not resolved, the aggrieved party's only recourse is to take the matter to court as
provided by law. The City Council shall not resolve disputed questions that may arise from the
enforcement of this ordinance. The City Council's duties shall be limited to granting of special uses
specifically assigned it by the ordinance; amending the ordinance; or repealing the entire ordinance.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 15 - 2
Section 15-4 Permits and Required Submissions
A Zoning Permit – A zoning permit issued by the Zoning Administrator is required when a building,
sign or other structures is to be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered. All buildings that
exceed 100 sq/ft shall be required to have a zoning permit. No zoning permit shall be issued except
in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance except after written order from the Board of
Adjustment.
1. Application and Site Plan - All applications for a zoning permit shall be accompanied by two
sets of site plans which show:
? dimensions and shape of the parcel to be built upon
? exact sizes, uses and locations on the parcel of buildings already existing, if any
? location and dimensions of the proposed building or alterations
? location of driveways, means of egress and ingress and parking
? signage
? landscaping and buffering
? other information necessary to determine conformance with and provide for
enforcement of this ordinance.
B Certificate of Occupancy - A certificate of occupancy issued through the Randolph County
Inspections Department is required before a building is occupied or used, erected, altered or
moved.
1. Application - A certificate of occupancy either for the whole or a part of a building shall be
applied for at the same time as the application for a zoning permit and shall be issued within
10 days after completion of the erection or structural alteration of the buildings or part of a
building. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building
or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this ordinance. If the certificate of
occupancy is denied, the Zoning Administrator shall state in writing the reasons for refusal
and the applicant shall be notified of the refusal. A record of all certificates shall be kept on
file in the office of the Zoning Administrator.
Section 15-5 Violations
Any of the following shall be a violation of this Ordinance and shall be subject to the enforcement remedies
and penalties provided by this Article and by state law.
1. Development Without Permit - To engage in any development, use, construction, remodeling or
other activity of any nature upon the land or improvements thereon subject to the jurisdiction of
this Ordinance without all required permits, certificates or other forms of authorization as set
forth in this Ordinance.
2. Development Inconsistent With Permit -To engage in any development, use, construction,
remodeling, or other activity of any nature in any way inconsistent with any approved plan,
permit, certificate, or other form of authorization granted for such activity.
3. Violation by Act or Omission - To violate, by act or omission, any term, variance or waiver,
condition, or qualification placed by the governing body or its agent boards upon any required
permit, certificate or other form of authorization for the use, development or other activity upon
land or improvements thereon.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 15 - 3
4. Use in Violation - To erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, convert, maintain or use any
building or structure or to use any land in violation of this Ordinance, or any other regulation
made under the authority conferred thereby.
Section 15-6 Enforcement Procedure
When the Enforcement Officer or his agent finds a violation of this Ordinance, it shall be his duty to notify the
owner or occupant of the land, building, structure, sign, or use of the violation. The owner or occupant shall
immediately remedy the violation.
1. Written Notice of Violation - If the owner or occupant of the land, building, sign, structure, or
use in violation fails to take prompt corrective action, the Zoning Administrator shall give the
owner or occupant written notice, by certified or registered mail to his last known address, or by
personal service or by posting notice of the violation conspicuously on the property:
(a). that the land, building, sign, structure, or use is in violation of this Ordinance
(b). the nature of the violation, and citation of the section of this ordinance violated; and
(c). the measures necessary to remedy the violation.
2. Appeal – If the owner or occupant disagrees with the Notice of Violation, he/she may appeal to
the Board of Adjustment within 10 days of receipt of a Written Notice of Violation. The Board
of Adjustment shall either find in favor of the owner/occupant or issue and Order of Corrective
Action requiring correction of the violation.
3. Failure to Comply - If the owner or occupant fails to comply with a Notice of Violation from
which no appeal has been taken, or an Order of Corrective Action following an appeal, he/she
shall be subject to such remedies and penalties as may be provided for by state law and this
Ordinance. If the owner or occupant fails to comply with the remedies and penalties
prescribed, enforcement shall be sought through an order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
4. Continuing Violation - Each day that any violation continues after receipt of the final written
notice of such violation, except when appealed, shall constitute a separate violation and a
separate offense for purposes of the penalties and remedies specified herein.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 15 - 4
Section 15-7 Technical Review Committee (TRC)
A Technical Review Committee shall be established to assist the staff, Planning Board, and City Council
in review of site development plans. The purpose of the TRC shall be to determine whether or not proposed
developments meet the standards established in the Ordinance and all other applicable regulations within
the City of Trinity and to provide guidance as how to provide for the betterment of public safety and welfare.
The TRC review of development plans shall be of a technical nature only, and shall not involve negotiation
with developers. All development requests that require review from the Planning Board and City Council
shall first be reviewed by the TRC.
1. TRC Membership - A member shall represent the TRC from City Administration, Planning
Department, Public Works, Stormwater, Local Fire Protection Agency and the NC Department of
Transportation and any other department and/or professional that would be beneficial for technical
review.
2. TRC Chair - The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall serve as chair of the TRC. A secretary
shall be appointed to compile notes on all projects reviewed by the TRC.
3. TRC Meetings - The TRC shall meet every Wednesday as needed. After receipt of a development
proposal, the TRC shall complete its review within 30 days.
4. Powers and Duties
a) To review and consider commercial, industrial, and multi-family site plans for
development within the City and its zoning limits.
b) To review and consider site plans that are a permitted use by right as per Section 6.4.
c) To review and consider site plans that requires a conditional or special use.
d) To approve, approve with conditions, table, or disapprove site plans through a majority
vote of those present at the TRC meeting. In the event of a tie, the Chair shall have the final
and deciding vote.
5. Appeal of TRC Decision - Appeals shall be to the City Council after review and recommendation
from the Planning and Zoning Board provided the appeal is made by the applicant within thirty
(30) days of the TRC determination. All decisions on appeals made by the City Council are final.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 16 - 1
ARTICLE XVI
PLANNING BOARD, BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
AND
ROLE OF THE CITY COUNCIL IN PLANNING
Section 16-1 Planning Board
A. There is hereby created a planning agency, pursuant to NCGS 160A-361 to be known as the Planning
Board.
B. Powers and Duties. The City of Trinity Planning Board shall have certain powers and duties to be
carried out in accordance with this Ordinance which include, but are not limited to the following:
(1) to review and make recommendations to the City Council on all matters relating
to land use planning and zoning within the jurisdiction of the City of Trinity,
whenever such matters require the attention of the City Council;
(2) to adopt such rules of procedure necessary for the administration of its responsibilities
consistent with this Ordinance; and
(4) to assume any other duties assigned by the City Council.
C. Number of Board Members; Appointment. The Planning Board shall consist of five (5) who shall be
citizens and residents of the City of Trinity. They shall be appointed by the City Council of the City
of Trinity.
D. Length of Terms. Length of terms for Planning Board members shall be three year staggered terms.
E. Vacancies. The City Clerk shall notify the City Council of all vacancies occurring for reasons other
than term expiration. Such vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the City Council for the period
of the unexpired term.
E. Open Meetings; Minutes - All meetings and hearings of the Planning Board shall be open to the
public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each
question and the absence or failure of any member to vote. Minutes shall be maintained by the City
Clerk and shall be available for public review.
F. Notice. The Board shall not make recommendations for a special use permit until a public hearing is
held. Notice of such public hearing shall be posted on the property for which the petition is sought
and in a local newspaper at least ten (10) days and no more than twenty-five (25) days prior to the
public hearing.
G. Conflict – Member of the Planning Board shall not vote on recommendations regarding any rezoning
map or text amendment where the outcome of the matter being considered is reasonably likely to
have a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact on the member.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 16 - 2
Section 16-2 Board of Adjustment Created.
A. A Board of Adjustment is hereby created. The individuals to serve on the City Council shall also
serve as the Board of Adjustment.
B. Number of Members; Appointment - The Board shall consist of six (6) members of the City Council.
C. Length of Terms - Upon adoption of this amendment to the Trinity City Zoning Ordinance, length of
terms for Board of Adjustment members shall coincide with length of terms for City Council
members.
D. Vacancies - Vacancies occurring for reasons other than expiration of terms shall be filled as they
occur for the period of the unexpired term.
E. Officers, Rules, and Regulations - The Board shall elect such officers, and adopt such rules and
regulations for its own government as it deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this article.
The Mayor or in his/her absence, the Mayor Pro Tempore, may administer any oaths and compel
attendance of witnesses by subpoena. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public
F. Conflict – A member of the Board shall not participate in or vote on any quasi-judicial matter in a
matter that would violate affected persons’ constitutional right to an impartial decision maker.
Impermissible conflicts include, but are not limited to, a member having a fixed opinion prior to
hearing the matter that is not susceptible to change, undisclosed ex parte communication, a close
familial, business, or other associational relationship with an affected person, or a financial interest in
the outcome of the matter. If an objection is raised to a members’ participation and that member does
not recuse himself or herself, the remaining members shall by majority vote rule on the objection.
Section 16-3 Voting
The concurring vote of four fifths (4/5) of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any
matter which it is required to pass under the Zoning ordinance or to affect any variance in the Zoning
Ordinance.
For the purpose of this section, vacant positions on the Board and members who are disqualified from
voting on a quasi-judicial matter shall not be considered members of the Board for calculation of the
requisite supermajority if there are no qualified alternates available to take the place of such members.
Section 16-4 Proceedings of the Board of Adjustment
All hearings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes, showing the vote of
each member upon each question, and the absence or failure of any member to vote.
The final disposition of each matter decided by the Board shall be by recorded resolution indicating the
reasons for the decision, based on findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall be public record.
On all appeals, applications and other matters brought before the Board of Adjustment the Board shall
inform in writing all the parties involved of its decision and the reasons for that decision.
Section 16-5 Appeals from Decisions of the Zoning Administrator
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 16 - 3
Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning
Administrator or other authorized official, based on this ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken within 15
days by filing with the Zoning Administrator a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds. The
Zoning Administrator shall immediately transmit to the Secretary of the Board all papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed was taken.
(1) Hearing - Notice and Representation. The Board of Adjustment shall schedule a hearing
of an appeal within 30 days from the filing of the notice of appeal. At least one week before
the date of the hearing, the City shall mail written notice of the hearing to all parties in interest
and to all adjoining property owners. A suitable notice shall also be published in the local
paper. At the hearing, any party may appeal in person, or by an agent or attorney.
(2) Fees. A fee established by the City Council shall be paid to cover administrative costs
for each appeal to the Board of Adjustment. Payment of the fee shall be a prerequisite to the
filing of the appeal with the Board of Adjustment.
Section 16-6 Appeal Stays All Proceedings
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning
Administrator certifies to the Board after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him by reason of
facts stated in the certificate a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property, or
because the violation charged is transitory in nature and a stay would interfere with enforcement of the
ordinance. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order issued by
the Board or by a court of record,
Section 16-7 Powers and Duties of the Board of Adjustment
The Board shall have the following powers:
(a). Administrative Review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in
any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator or other
duly authorized official.
(b). Variances. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this
ordinance that will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions a
literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance will result in undue hardship, that the
spirit of this ordinance shall be observed, substantial justice done and provided no change in
permitted uses be authorized by variance.
(c). Variances for Watershed Overlay Districts. To authorize variances from the specific
requirements of the watershed overlay districts, provided that the notice required in Section
16 - 1(G) of this Article shall also be mailed by first class mail to all other local governments
having watershed regulation jurisdiction in the particular watershed where the variance is
requested and to each entity using that water supply for consumption; provided that favorable
action by the Board of Adjustment on any major variance, as defined in this ordinance, shall
constitute a favorable recommendation but such major variance shall not become effective
unless authorized by the Environmental Management Commission in accordance with their
rules and procedures. Unfavorable action by the Board of Adjustment on a major variance
shall constitute a denial.
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 16 - 4
(d). to hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of the Flood
Control Ordinance.
Section 16-8 Variances - Determinations and Findings
When practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships would result from carrying out the strict letter of the
zoning ordinance, the board of adjustments shall have the power to vary or modify any of the regulations
or provisions of the ordinance so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety and
welfare secured, and substantial justice done. No change in permitted uses may be authorized by
variance. Appropriate conditions, which must be reasonably related to the condition or circumstance that
gives rise to the need for a variance, may be imposed on any approval issued by the Board.
These regulations may provide that the Board of Adjustments may determine and vary their application in
harmony with the general purpose and intent and in accordance with general or specific rules therein
contained, provided no change is permitted uses may be authorized by variance.
(1) Determination that Variance Will Not Violate Other Ordinance Provisions. In considering all
proposed variances to this ordinance, the Board shall, before making any finding in a specific case,
first determine that the proposed variance will not allow the establishment of a use not otherwise
permitted in a district by this ordinance; extend in area or expand a non-conforming use of land;
change the district boundaries shown on the zoning map; impair any adequate supply of light and air
to adjacent property; materially increase the public danger of fire; materially diminish or impair
established property values within the surrounding area; or in any other respect impair the public
health, safety, morals, and general welfare.
(2) Findings. A variance may be granted in an individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by
the Board of Adjustment that the following conditions exist:
(a). There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of
property in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other
lands or structures in the same district.
(b). Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the applicant any special privileges that
are denies to other residents in the district in which the property is located.
(c). A literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of
rights commonly enjoyed by other residents of the district in which the property is located.
(d). The requested variance will be in harmony with purpose and intent of this ordinance and will
not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare.
(e). The special circumstances are not the result of the applicant.
(f). The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the
land, building or structure.
(g). The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, building or structure which is not
permitted by right or by conditional use in the district involved.
(3) Conditions. In granting a variance, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions
and safeguards in conformity with this ordinance. Violations of the conditions and safeguards,
__________________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 16 - 5
when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of
this ordinance punishable under Section 18-3 of this ordinance.
Section 16-9 Re-hearings
The Board shall refuse to hear an appeal or application previously denied, if it finds there have been no
substantial changes in conditions or circumstances bearing on the appeal or application.
Section 16-10 Review by Certiorari
A decision by the Board is subject to review by certiorari as provided by law. Any appeal shall be made
to the Randolph County Superior Court within 30 days after the decision of the Board is filed with the
City or a written copy thereof is delivered to the appellant by personal service or registered mail,
whichever is later.
Section 16-11 Decisions of the Board of Adjustment
In exercising the abovementioned powers, the Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or in
part, or may modify and order requirements, decisions or determinations as ought to be made, and to that
end shall have the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken.
Section 16-12 Role of City Council in Planning
The City Council shall have certain powers and duties to be carried out in accordance with this Ordinance
which include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) to initiate and make amendments to the text of this Ordinance and to the Zoning Maps;
(2) to hear, review and adopt or reject amendments to the text of this Ordinance and to the
Zoning Map;
(3) to appoint members of the Planning Board and establish their terms, and;
(4) to take such other action not delegated to the Planning Board as the City Council may deem
desirable and necessary to implement the provision of this Ordinance.
A City Council member shall not vote on any zoning map or text amendment where the outcome of the
matter being considered is reasonably likely to have a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial
impact on the member.
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 1
ARTICLE XVII
AMENDMENTS AND CHANGES
Section 17-1 Motion to Amend.
(1) Council Authority to Amend - The City Council may, on its own motion or upon the recommendation
of the Planning Board, staff or upon petition by any person within the zoning jurisdiction, after public
notice and hearing, amend, or repeal the regulations or the maps which are a part of this ordinance.
No regulation or maps shall be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed until after a
public hearing in relation thereto, at which all parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity
to be heard.
(2) Notice and Public hearing on Amendment
Planning and Zoning Board Review
a. Posting of Property – The Zoning Administrator shall cause to be posted, all property sought
for rezoning, no less than fifteen (15) days before the next Planning Board Meeting and for the
duration of the request. Said posting shall consist of at least one public notice sign per road
frontage.
b. Mailed Notice – Notice to adjacent property owners shall be sent no less than ten (10) days
prior to the public hearing but not more than twenty (25) days.
City Council Public Hearing
c. Legal Notice - A notice of public hearing shall be given once a week for two (2) successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
d. Mailed Notice – Notice to adjacent property owners shall be sent no less than ten (10) days
prior to the public hearing but not more than twenty (25) days.
(3) Information and Fee Required from Applicant and Processing of Information - Applicants must
present the following information:
1. a completed rezoning application;
2. an accurate survey of the property to be rezoned, and;
3. a deed or legal description which establishes ownership.
4. if the proposed zoning boundary splits an existing parcel a metes and bounds description shall
be required in addition to the survey
A rezoning fee established by the City Council shall be required. Processing of zoning amendment
applications shall begin within ninety (90) days from submission to the City Clerk. However, this
requirement is not intended to prevent the Planning Board or City Council from delaying action after
review by either body. If more than one tract or parcel is being sought for rezoning at the same time
by a single applicant, each parcel having a different zone shall constitute a separate rezoning request.
(4) Planning Board Review – Subsequent to initial adoption of a zoning ordinance, all proposed
amendments to the zoning ordinance or zoning map shall be submitted to the Planning Board for
review and comments. If no written report is received from the Planning and Zoning Board within
thirty (30) days of referral of the amendments to the Board, the City Council may proceed in its
consideration of the amendment without the Planning Board report. The Council is not bound by the
recommendation, if any, of the Board.
The Planning Board shall advise and comment on whether the proposed amendment is consistent with
any comprehensive plan that has been adopted and any other officially adopted plan that is applicable.
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 2
The Planning Board shall provide a written recommendation to City Council that addresses plan
consistency and other matters as deemed appropriate by the Planning Board, but a comment by the
Planning Board that a proposed amendment is inconsistent with the comprehensive plan shall not
preclude consideration or approval of the proposed amendment by the City Council.
(5) Council Statement – Prior to adopting or rejecting any zoning amendment, City Council shall adopt a
statement describing whether its action is consistent with an adopted comprehensive plan and
explaining why the Council considerers the action taken to be reasonable and in the public interest.
(6) Withdrawal of Request - Any applicant for rezoning, may withdraw his/her petition anytime prior to
consideration by the Planning Board. If the applicant should choose to withdraw his/her petition after
being reviewed by the Planning Board but before it is to be considered by the City Council, he/she
must do so in writing no later than 5 p.m. on the first Friday following the last Planning Board
meeting where the item was dispensed. Failure to withdraw the rezoning petition by that time, shall
cause it to advance automatically to the City Council for consideration at their next regular session,
provided however that City Council may in its discretion, allow the withdrawal of a rezoning petition
at anytime for cause upon request by an applicant.
(7) Resubmission of Application - Should a petition for the amendment of these regulations and/or maps
be denied by action of the City Council, the applicant may resubmit an application for rezoning for
the same tract or parcel within the same calendar year so long as the request for rezoning is dissimilar
to the original request denied by the City Council. Should the second request be denied by the City
Council, the applicant must withhold all petitions for rezoning said tract or parcel for a period of
twelve (12) months from the date of the second denial by the City Council.
Section 17-2 Protest Against Amendment
In the case of a qualified protest petition against a zoning map amendment, that amendment shall not
become effective except by a favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the City Council. For
the purpose of this section, vacant positions on the Council and members who are excused from voting
shall not be considered member of the council for calculation of the requisite supermajority.
To qualify as a protest under this section, the petition must be signed by the owners of either, twenty
percent (20%) or more of the area included in proposed change or five percent (5%) of a 100 foot buffer
extending along the entire boundary of each discrete or separate area proposed to be rezoned. A street
right-of-way shall not be considered in computing the 100 foot buffer area as long as that street right-ofway
is 100 wide or less. When less than an entire parcel of land is subject to the proposed zoning map
amendment, the 100 foot buffer shall be measured from the property line of that parcel. In the absence of
evidence to the contrary, the City may rely on the County tax listing to determine the owners of
potentially qualifying areas.
The foregoing provisions concerning protest shall not be applicable to any amendment which initially
zones property added to the territorial coverage of the ordinance as a result of annexation or otherwise, or
to an amendment to an adopted special use district or conditional district if the amendment does not
changes the types of uses that are permitted within the district or increase the approved density for
residential development, or increase the total approved size of nonresidential development, or reduce the
size of any buffers or screening approved for the special use district or conditional district.
All protest petitions shall be on a form prescribes and furnished by the City and such form may prescribe
and reasonable information deemed necessary to permit the City to determine the sufficiency and
accuracy of the petition.
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 3
A person who has signed a protest petition may withdraw their name from the petition at any time prior to
the vote on the proposed zoning amendment. Only those protest petitions that meet the qualifying
standards set forth in G.S. 160A-385 at the time of the vote on the zoning amendment shall trigger the
supermajority voting requirement.
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 4
ARTICLE XVIII
LEGAL PROVISIONS
Section 18-1 Interpretation, Purpose and Conflict.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, prosperity,
and general welfare. It is not intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any
easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties, provided, however, that where this
ordinance imposes a greater restriction or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or
required by other ordinances, rules, regulations, or by easements, covenants or agreements, the
provisions of this ordinance shall govern, provided that nothing in the ordinance shall be
construed to amend or repeal any other existing ordinance of the City.
Section 18-2 Validity
Should any section or provisions of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such
declaration shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than
the part so declared to be invalid.
Section 18-3 Remedies
Anyone or all of the following procedures may be used to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
1. Denial of Permit or Certificate – If the violation is related to a permit that has been
issued or is pending, the Zoning Administrator may withhold or deny the permit,
certificate of occupancy or other form of authorization.
2. Conditional Permit or Temporary Certificate – If the violation is related to a permit, the
Zoning Administrator may condition the authorization of any permit or certificate upon
the correction of the deficiency, payment of civil penalties within a specified time, or the
posting of a compliance security approved by appropriate governmental authority.
3. Stop Work Orders - Whenever a building, sign, or structure, or part thereof is being
constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired in violation of this Ordinance, the Zoning
Administrator may order the work to be immediately stopped. The stop order shall be in
writing and directed to the owner, occupant, or person doing the work. The stop order
shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reasons for the stoppage, and the
conditions under which the work may be resumed. Such action shall be in accordance
with NCGS 160A-421 or 153A-361, as applicable, or the NC Building Code.
4. Revocation of Permits - The Zoning Administrator may revoke and require the return of
a permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason for the revocation.
Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the approved application,
plans, or specifications; refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of state or
local laws, or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit.
Any permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may also be
revoked.
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 5
5. Criminal Penalty - Any violation of this Ordinance shall be a misdemeanor as provided
by NCGS 14-4. Each calendar day during which a violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense.
6. Civil Penalty. Any violation of this ordinance shall also subject the offender to a civil
penalty of $50.00. If the offender fails to pay the penalty within 10 days of receiving
final written Notice of a Violation, the penalty may be recovered by the City in a civil
action in the nature of a debt. A civil penalty may not be appealed to the Board of
Adjustment if the offender received a final written notice of violation and did not
appeal to the Board of Adjustment as prescribed in Section 16-5 above. Each calendar
day during which a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
7. Injunction - Any violation of this Ordinance or of any condition, order, or requirement,
or remedy adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected, abated, mandated, or
enjoined by other appropriate proceeding pursuant to state law.
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 6
Appendix A
A LOCAL ORDINANCE REGULATING THE SITING OF WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND FACILITIES
Section 1. Purpose and Legislative Intent.
The Telecommunications Act of 1996 affirmed the City of Trinity’s authority concerning the
placement, construction and modification of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. The City
of Trinity finds that Wireless Telecommunications Facilities may pose significant concerns to the
health, safety, public welfare, character and environment of the City of Trinity and its inhabitants.
The City also recognizes that facilitating the development of wireless service technology can be
an economic development asset to the City and of significant benefit to the City and its residents.
In order to insure that the placement, construction or modification of Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities is consistent with the City’s land use policies, the City is adopting
a single, comprehensive, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities application and permit process.
The intent of this Local Ordinance is to minimize impact of Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities, establish a fair and efficient process for review and approval of applications, assure an
integrated, comprehensive review of the visual and environmental impacts of such facilities, and
protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents and Visitors of the City of Trinity.
Section 2. Title.
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Siting
Ordinance for the City of Trinity.
Section 3. Severability.
A) If any word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion of this Ordinance
or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is declared void,
unconstitutional, or invalid for any reason, then such word, phrase, sentence, part,
section, subsection, or other portion, or the proscribed Application thereof, shall be
severable, and the remaining provisions of this Ordinance, and all applications thereof,
not having been declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid, shall remain in full force and
effect.
B) Any Special Use Permit issued under this Ordinance shall be comprehensive and not
severable. If part of a permit is deemed or ruled to be invalid or unenforceable in any
material respect, by a competent authority, or is overturned by a competent authority, the
permit shall be void in total, upon determination by the City Council.
Section 4. Definitions.
For purposes of this Ordinance, and where not inconsistent with the context of a particular
section, the defined terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have
the meaning given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the
present tense include the future tense, words used in the plural number include words in
the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The
word “shall” is always mandatory, and not merely directory.
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 7
A) “Accessory Facility or Structure” means an accessory facility or structure serving or
being used in conjunction with Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, and located on
the same property or lot as the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, including but not
limited to, utility or transmission equipment storage sheds or cabinets.
B) “Applicant” means any Wireless service provider submitting an Application for a
Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
C) “Application” means all necessary and appropriate documentation that an Applicant
submits in order to receive a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
D) “Antenna” means a system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive
electromagnetic waves or radio frequency or other wireless signals.
E) “City” means the City of Trinity, North Carolina
F) “Co-location” means the use of an existing Tower or structure to support Antenna for the
provision of wireless services.
G) “Commercial Impracticability” or “Commercially Impracticable” means the
inability to perform an act on terms that are reasonable in commerce; the cause or occurrence
of which could not have been reasonably anticipated or foreseen and that jeopardizes the
financial efficacy of the project. The inability to achieve a satisfactory financial return on
investment or profit, standing alone, shall not deem a situation to be “commercial
impracticable” and shall not render an act or the terms of an agreement “commercially
impracticable”.
H) “Completed Application” means an Application that contains all information and/or
data necessary to enable an informed decision to be made with respect to an Application.
I) “Council” means the City Council of Trinity, North Carolina..
J) “DAS” or “Distributive Access System” means a technology using antenna combining
technology allowing for multiple carriers or Wireless Service Providers to us the same set of
antennas.
K) “FAA” means the Federal Aviation Administration, or its duly designated and authorized
successor agency.
L) “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission, or its duly designated and
authorized successor agency.
M) “Height” means, when referring to a Tower or structure, the distance measured from the
pre-existing grade level to the highest point on the Tower or structure, even if said highest
point is an Antenna or lightening protection device.
N) “Modification” or “Modify” means, the addition, removal or change of any of the
physical and visually discernable components or aspects of a wireless facility, such as
antennas, cabling, equipment shelters, landscaping, fencing, utility feeds, changing the color
or materials of any visually discernable components, vehicular access, parking and/or an
upgrade or change-out of equipment for better or more modern equipment. Adding a new
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 8
wireless carrier or service provider to a Telecommunications Tower or Telecommunications
Site as a co-location is a modification. A Modification shall not include the replacement of
any components of a wireless facility where the replacement is identical to the component
being replaced or for any matters that involve the normal repair and maintenance of a
wireless facility without adding, removing or changing anything.
O) “Need” means anything that is technically required for the wireless service to be
provided primarily and essentially within the City and creates the least physical and visual
impact. This does not necessarily mean the internal design standards of the applicant, as
companies’ standards can vary greatly and normally reflect preferences. Rather, Need relates
to the ability of the user-equipment to function as designed.
P) “NIER” means Non-Ionizing Electromagnetic Radiation.
Q) “Person” means any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership, joint stock
company, association of two (2) or more persons having a joint common interest, or any other
entity.
R) “Personal Wireless Facility” See definition for ‘Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities’.
S) “Personal Wireless Services” or “PWS” or “Personal Telecommunications Service”
or “PTS” shall have the same meaning as defined and used in the 1996
Telecommunications Act.
T) "Repairs and Maintenance" means the replacement or repair of any components of a
wireless facility where the replacement is identical to the component being replaced or for
any matters that involve the normal repair and maintenance of a wireless facility without the
addition, removal or change of any of the physical or visually discernable components or
aspects of a wireless facility that will add to the visible appearance of the facility as originally
permitted.
U) “Special Use Permit” means the official document or permit by which an Applicant is
allowed to file for a building permit to construct and use Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities as granted or issued by the City.
V) “Stealth” or “Stealth Technology” means to minimize adverse aesthetic and visual
impacts on the land, property, buildings and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in
generally the same area as the requested location of a Wireless Telecommunications Facility,
which shall mean using the least visually and physically intrusive facility that is not
technologically or commercially impracticable under the facts and circumstances. Stealth
technology expressly includes such technology as DAS or its functional equivalent.
W) “State” means the State of North Carolina .
X) “Stealth” or “Camouflage” means disguising a tower or wireless telecommunications
facility so as to make it less visually obtrusive and not recognizable to the average person as a
wireless telecommunications facility.
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 9
Y) “Telecommunications” means the transmission and/or reception of audio, video, data,
and other information by wire, radio frequency, light, and other electronic or electromagnetic
systems.
Z) “Telecommunication Site” See definition for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
AA) “Telecommunications Structure” means a structure used in the provision of
services described in the definition of ‘Wireless Telecommunications Facilities’.
BB) “Temporary” means temporary in relation to all aspects and components of this
Ordinance, something intended to, or that does, exist for fewer than ninety (90) days.
CC) “Tower” means any structure designed primarily to support an antenna for receiving
and/or transmitting a wireless signal.
DD) “Wireless Telecommunications Facilities” means and includes a
“Telecommunications Site” and “Personal Wireless Facility”. It means a structure,
facility or location designed, or intended to be used as, or used to support Antennas or other
transmitting or receiving devices. This includes without limit, Towers of all types, kinds and
structures, including, but not limited to buildings, church steeples, silos, water towers, signs
or other structures that can be used as a support structure for Antennas or the functional
equivalent of such. It further includes all related facilities and equipment such as cabling,
equipment shelters and other structures associated with the site. It is a structure and facility
intended for transmitting and/or receiving radio, television, cellular, SMR, paging, 911,
Personal Communications Services (PCS), commercial satellite services, microwave services
and any commercial wireless telecommunication service not licensed by the FCC.
Section 5. Overall Policy and Desired Goals for Special Use Permits for Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities.
In order to ensure that the placement, construction, and modification of Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities protects the City’s health, safety, public welfare, environmental
features, the nature and character of the community and neighborhood and other aspects of the
quality of life specifically listed elsewhere in this Ordinance, the City hereby adopts an overall
policy with respect to a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities for the
express purpose of achieving the following goals:
A) Requiring a Special Use Permit for any new, co-location or modification of a Wireless
Telecommunications Facility.
B) Implementing an Application process for person(s) seeking a Special Use Permit for
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
C) Establishing a policy for examining an application and issuing a Special Use Permit for
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities that is both fair and consistent.
D) Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the sharing and/or co-location of
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities among service providers.
E) Requiring, promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the placement, height and
quantity of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities in such a manner, including but not
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 10
limited to the use of stealth technology, to minimize adverse aesthetic and visual impacts
on the land, property, buildings, and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in
generally the same area as the requested location of such Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities, which shall mean using the least visually and physically intrusive facility that
is not technologically or commercially impracticable under the facts and circumstances.
F) In granting a Special Use Permit, the City has found that the facility shall be the most
appropriate site as regards being the least visually intrusive among those available in the
City.
Section 6. Exceptions from a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities.
A) No Person shall be permitted to site, place, build, construct, modify or prepare any site
for the placement or use of a Wireless Telecommunications Facility within the control of
the City’s Police Powers as of the effective date of this Ordinance without having first
obtained a Special Use Permit for a Wireless Telecommunications Facility as defined in
Section Four (4) of this ordinance or an administratively granted authorization granted
under Section Nine (9) of this ordinance, whichever is applicable. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in this section, no Special Use Permit shall be required for those
non-commercial exceptions noted in Section Seven (7), unless deemed in the public
interest by the City.
B) If constructed as required by permit, all legally permitted Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities that existed on or before the effective date of this Ordinance shall be allowed to
continue as they presently exist, provided however, that any visible modification of an
existing Wireless Telecommunications Facility will require the complete facility,
including the tower if applicable, and any new installation to comply with this Ordinance,
as will anything changing the structural load.
C) Any Repair and Maintenance of a Wireless Facility does not require an application for a
Special Use Permit. However, no additional construction or site modification will be
permitted.
D) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section and all subparts thereof, the colocation
and/or shared use of antennas on existing telecommunication towers or other tall
structures or compatible use structures, such as utility poles, water towers, and other
towers, shall be exempt from the Public Hearing requirement otherwise required for a
tower, and shall be subject only to an administrative review process by the City and its
designee.
Section 7. Exclusions. The following shall be exempt from this Ordinance:
A) The City’s fire Department, Police’s, Sheriff’s or other public service facilities owned
and operated by the City.
B) Any facilities expressly exempt from the City’s siting, building and permitting authority.
C) Over-the-Air reception Devices including the reception antennas for direct broadcast
satellites (DBS), multi-channel multipoint distribution (wireless cable) providers
(MMDS) receive-only equipment mounted on subscriber property, television broadcast
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 11
stations (TVBS) and other customer-end antennas that receive and transmit fixed wireless
signals that are primarily used for reception, but not including microwave dishes.
D) Facilities used exclusively for private, non-commercial radio and television reception and
private citizen’s bands, licensed amateur radio facilities shorter than 90’ and other similar
non-commercial Telecommunications.
E) Facilities used exclusively for providing unlicensed spread spectrum technologies, such
as IEEE 802.11a, b, g services (e.g. Internet Access Hot spots and Bluetooth) where the
facility does not require a new tower.
Section 8. Special Use Permit Application and Other Requirements for a New Tower or for
Increasing the Height of the Structure to be Attached to or the size of the
Profile of an attachment.
A) All Applicants for a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities or
any modification of such facility shall comply with the requirements set forth in this
Ordinance. The City Council is the officially designated agency or body of the City to
whom applications for a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
must be made, and that is authorized to review, analyze, evaluate and make decisions
with respect to granting or not granting or revoking special use permits for Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities. The City may at its discretion delegate or designate the
City’s Planning Board or other official agencies or officials of the City or expert
consultants to accept, review, analyze, evaluate and make recommendations to the City
Council with respect to the granting or not granting or revoking Special Use Permits for
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
B) The non-refundable Application fee for attaching to an existing Tower or other structure
without increasing the height shall be as set forth in the City’s Schedule of Fees.
C) All Applicants shall closely follow the instructions for preparing an Application that shall
be provided prior to the submittal of an Application or at any time upon request. Not
closely following the instructions without permission to deviate from such may result in
the Application being returned without action and forfeiting the Application fee, but not
the escrow deposit.
D) When placing wireless facilities on government-owned property or facilities, only noncommercial
wireless carriers and users are exempt from the permitting requirements of
this Ordinance.
E) The City may reject applications not meeting the requirements stated herein or which are
otherwise not complete.
F) No Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall be installed, constructed or modified
until the Application is reviewed and approved by the City, and the Special Use
Permit has been issued.
G) Any and all representations made by the Applicant to the City on the record during the
Application process, whether written or verbal, shall be deemed a part of the Application
and will be deemed to have been relied upon in good faith by the City. Any verbal
misrepresentation shall be treated as if it were made in writing.
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 12
H) An Application for a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
shall be signed on behalf of the Applicant by the person preparing the same and with
knowledge of the contents and representations made therein and attesting to the truth and
completeness of the information.
I) The Applicant must provide documentation to verify it has the right to proceed as
proposed on the Site. This requires an executed copy of the lease with the landowner or
landlord or a signed letter of agency acknowledging authorization. If the applicant owns
the site, a copy of the ownership record is required.
J) The Applicant shall include a statement in writing:
1) That the applicant’s proposed Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall be
maintained in a safe manner, and in compliance with all conditions of the Special Use
Permit, without exception, unless specifically granted relief by the City in writing, as well
as all applicable and permissible local codes, ordinances, and regulations, including any
and all applicable City, State and Federal Laws, rules, and regulations; and
2) That the construction of the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities is legally
permissible, including, but not limited to the fact that the Applicant is authorized to
do business in the State.
K) Where a certification is called for in this Ordinance, such certification shall bear the
signature and seal of a Professional Engineer licensed in the State.
L) In addition to all other required information as stated in this Ordinance, all applications
for the construction or installation of new Wireless Telecommunications Facilities or
modification of an existing facility shall contain the information hereinafter set forth.
Note that an Applicant will be granted permission for anything that it can conclusively
prove the technical need for, but that there is often a significant difference between
‘need’ and ‘want’ or ‘desire’. For example, an assertion that the ‘need’ is based on an
Applicant’s own design criteria shall not suffice to prove the technological need for what
is requested. For purposes of permitting under this Ordinance, ‘need’ shall mean what is
technologically needed for the equipment to function as designed by the manufacturer
and that anything less will result in prohibiting or acting in a manner that prohibits the
provision of service as intended and described in the narrative of the Application.
Proof of Need for the Facility
1) A detailed narrative description and explanation of the specific objective(s) for
the new facility, or the modification of an existing wireless facility, expressly
including and explaining the purpose and need for the facility, such as coverage
and/or capacity needs or requirements, and the specific geographic area of
intended coverage;
2) Technical documentation that proves the need for the Wireless
Telecommunications Facility to provide service primarily and essentially within
the City of Trinity. Such documentation shall include a propagation study of the
proposed site and all adjoining planned, proposed or existing sites, that
demonstrates a significant gap in coverage and/or, if a capacity issue is involved,
to include an analysis of the current and projected usage (traffic studies) using
generally accepted industry methods and standards so as to conclusively prove
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 13
the need for what is proposed. A desire to change, upgrade, or improve the
technology or the service shall not be deemed a need in the context of this
Ordinance;
3) All of the modeling information (i.e. data) inputted into the software used to
produce propagation studies, including, but not limited to any assumptions made,
such as ambient tree height;
4) A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the Wireless
Telecommunications Facility, as well as a copy of the five (5) and ten (10) year
build-out plan required by and filed with the FCC;
5) The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or other transmitting
equipment;
6) The maximum transmission power capability of all radios, as designed, if the
Applicant is a cellular or functional equivalent carrier, or the maximum
transmission power capability, as designed, of all transmission facilities if the
Applicant is not a cellular or functional equivalent carrier;
7) The actual intended transmission power stated as the maximum effective radiated
power (ERP) both in dBm’s and watts;
Note: In effect what is needed is the information that the Company used to make its
determination as regards the need for the facility in the first place, the need and reason
for the requested location and the need for the height requested.
Ownership and Management
8) The Name, address and phone number of the person preparing the Application;
9) The Name, address, and phone number of the property owner and the Applicant,
including the legal name of the Applicant. If the owner of the structure is
different than the applicant, the name and all necessary contact information shall
be provided;
10) The Postal address and tax map parcel number of the property;
11) A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities;
Zoning and Planning
12) The Zoning District or designation in which the property is situated;
13) The size of the property on which the structure to be attached to is located, stated
both in square feet and lot line dimensions, and a survey showing the location of
all lot lines;
14) The location, size and height of all existing and proposed structures on the
property on which the structure is located and that is the subject of the
Application;
15) If attaching to an existing Tower, a site plan showing the vertical rendition of the
Tower identifying all users and attachments to the Tower and all related fixtures,
structures, appurtenances and apparatus, including height above pre-existing
grade, materials, color and lighting;
16) If attaching to a building or other structure, a site plan showing the proposed
attachments and all related fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus,
including height above the roof or balustrade, whichever is appropriate;
17) The azimuth, size and center line height location of all proposed and existing
antennas on the supporting structure;
18) The number, type and model of the Antenna(s) proposed, along with a copy of the
specification sheet(s) for the antennas; The Type, locations and dimensions of all
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 14
proposed and existing landscaping, and fencing;
19) The number, type and design of the Telecommunications Tower(s) and
Antenna(s) proposed and the basis for the calculations of the Telecommunications
Tower’s capacity to accommodate multiple users;
20) The applicant shall disclose in writing any agreement in existence prior to
submission of the Application that would limit or preclude the ability of the
Applicant to share any new Telecommunication Tower that it constructs;
Safety
21) If attaching to an existing Tower, the age of the tower in years, including the date
of the grant of the original permit or authorization for the Tower;
22) If attaching to an existing Tower, a description of the type of tower, e.g. guyed,
self-supporting lattice or monopole;
23) If attaching to an existing Tower, the make, model, type and manufacturer of the
Tower and the structural design calculations, certified by a Professional Engineer
licensed in the State, proving the tower’s capability to safely accommodate the
facilities of the Applicant without change or modification;
24) If any change or modification of the Tower or other structure to be attached to is
needed, a detailed narrative explaining what changes are needed, why they are
needed and who will be responsible to assure that the changes are made;
25) If the structure proposed to be attached to is a Tower that has not previously been
permitted under this Law, or unless the Applicant can provide proof that this was
provided at the time of the initial application for the Tower or other structure, the
Applicant shall provide a copy of the installed foundation design, as well as a
geotechnical sub-surface soils investigation, evaluation report and foundation
recommendation for the tower site or other structure;
26) If increasing the height of an existing structure, or a Tower that is five (5) years
old or older, or for a guyed Tower that is three (3) years old or older, a copy of
the latest ANSI Report done pursuant to the latest edition of ANSI-EIA/TIA
222F – Annex E for any self-supporting Tower. If an ANSI report has not been
done pursuant to the preceding schedule, an ANSI report shall be done and
submitted as part of the Application. No Building Permit shall be issued for any
Wireless Facility where the structure being attached to is in need of remediation,
unless and until all remediation work needed has been completed or a schedule
for the remediation work has been approved by the Planning Department;
27) If not attaching to an existing Tower, a Structural Report signed by a Professional
Engineer licensed to do business in the State and bearing that engineer’s
currently valid stamp, showing the structural adequacy of the structure to
accommodate the proposed Wireless Facility(s), including any equipment shelter,
unless the equipment shelter is located on the lowest floor of a building;
28) If attaching to a structure and thereby increasing the height of the structure, other
than a Tower, to which the public has or could reasonably have or gain access to,
documentation shall be provided, including all calculations, proving that the
potential exposure to RF Radiation (i.e. NIER or Non-Ion Emitting Radiation),
will be in compliance with the most recent Federal Communications Commission
regulations governing RF Radiation and exposure thereto, and further denoting
the minimum distance from any antennas an individual may safely stand without
being exposed to RF radiation in excess of the FCC’s permitted standards and
any portion(s) of the structure that would be exposed to RF radiation in excess of
the FCC’s permitted standards . In compliance with the FCC’s regulations, in
such an instance the RF Radiation from all wireless facilities at that location shall
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 15
be included in the calculations to show the cumulative effect on any area of the
building or structure deemed accessible by the public or workers. Such report or
analysis shall be signed and sealed by a Professional Engineer licensed in the
State; or
29) In an instance involving a Tower where the new Wireless Facilities will be ten
(10) meters or more above ground level, signed documentation such as the FCC’s
“Checklist to Determine whether a Facility may Categorically Excluded” shall be
provided to verify that the Wireless Telecommunication Facility with the
proposed installation will be in full compliance with the current FCC’s RF
Emissions regulations. If not categorically excluded, a complete RF Emissions
study is required to enable verification of compliance, pursuant to subsection
(E)(21) of this section, including providing all calculations so that such may be
verified;
30) In certain instances, the City may deem it appropriate to have an RF survey of the
facility done after the construction or modification and activation of the Facility,
such to be done under the direction of the City or its designee, and an un-redacted
copy of the survey results provided, along with all calculations;
31) If any section or portion of the structure to be attached to is not in compliance
with the FCC’s regulations regarding RF radiation, that section or portion must
be barricaded with a suitable barrier to discourage approaching into the area in
excess of the FCC’s regulations, and be marked off with yellow and black plastic
chain and striped warning tape, as well as placing RF Radiation signs as needed
and appropriate to warn individuals of the potential danger;
32) A signed statement that the Applicant will expeditiously remedy any physical or
RF interference with other telecommunications or wireless devices or services.
M) The applicant will provide a written copy of an analysis, completed by a qualified
individual or organization, to determine if the proposed new Tower or existing structure
intended to support wireless facilities is in compliance with Federal Aviation
Administration Regulation Part 77 and if it requires lighting. This requirement shall also
be for any existing structure or building where the application increases the height of the
structure or building. If this analysis determines that an FAA determination is required,
then all filings with the FAA, all responses from the FAA and any related correspondence
shall be provided with the application.
N) Application for New Tower versus Co-location
1) In the case of a new Tower, the Applicant shall be required to submit a written report
demonstrating its meaningful efforts to secure shared use of existing Tower(s) or the
use of alternative buildings or other structures within the City that are at or above the
surrounding tree height or the tallest obstruction and are within one (1) mile of the
proposed tower. Copies of written requests and responses for shared use shall be
provided to the City in the Application, along with any letters of rejection stating the
reason for rejection.
2) In order to better inform the public, in the case of a new Telecommunication Tower,
the applicant shall hold a “balloon test” prior to the initial public hearing on the
application. The Applicant shall arrange to fly, or raise upon a temporary mast, a
minimum of a ten (10) foot in length brightly colored balloon at the maximum height
of the proposed new Tower.
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 16
3) At least fourteen (14) days prior to the conduct of the balloon test, a sign shall be
erected so as to be clearly visible from the road nearest the proposed site and shall be
removed no later than fourteen (14) days after the conduct of the balloon test. The sign
shall be at least four feet (4’) by eight feet (8’) in size and shall be readable from the
road by a person with 20/20 vision.
4) Such sign shall be placed off, but as near to, the public right-of-way as is possible.
5) Such sign shall contain the times and date(s) of the balloon test and the date, time and
location of the required Planning Board hearing, as well as a copy of the proposed site
plan.
6) The dates, (including a second date, in case of poor visibility or wind in excess of 15
mph on the initial date) times and location of this balloon test shall be advertised by
the Applicant seven (7) and fourteen (14) days in advance of the first test date in a
newspaper with a general circulation in the City and as agreed to by the City of Trinity.
The Applicant shall inform the City in writing, of the dates and times of the test, at
least fourteen (14) days in advance. The balloon shall be flown for at least four (4)
consecutive hours between 10:00 am and 2:00 p.m. on the dates chosen. The primary
date shall be on a weekend, but the second date, in case of poor visibility on the initial
date, may be on a weekday. A report with pictures from various locations of the
balloon shall be provided with the application.
7) The Applicant shall notify all property owners and residents located within onethousand
five hundred feet (1,500) of the nearest property line of the subject property
of the proposed construction of the Tower and Wireless Facility and of the date(s) and
time(s) of the balloon test. Such notice shall be provided at least fourteen (14) days
prior to the conduct of the balloon test and shall be delivered by US Certified Mail.
8) The Tower shall be structurally designed to accommodate at least five (5) additional
Antenna Arrays equivalent to those of the Applicant as regards the load and stress
created on the tower, and located as close to the Applicant’s Antenna as possible
without causing interference. A claim of interference because of a need to have
greater than six feet (6’) of vertical clearance between facilities, measured from the
vertical centerline of one array to the vertical centerline of another, must be proven
by technical data and not merely verbal or written assertions. This requirement may
be waived, provided that the Applicant, in writing, demonstrates that the provisions
of future shared usage of the Tower is not technologically feasible, is Commercially
Impracticable or creates an unnecessary and unreasonable burden, based upon:
a) The kind of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities site and structure
proposed;
b) Available space on existing and approved Towers;
c) The need for more than six feet (6’) of vertical clearance between antenna
arrays, measured from the vertical centerline of one array to the vertical
centerline of another, such that there would not be adequate vertical space to
accommodate a total of four (4) carriers.
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 17
9) The owner of a proposed new Tower, and his/her successors in interest, shall
negotiate in good faith for the shared use of the proposed Tower by other Wireless
service providers in the future, and shall:
a) Respond within 60 days to a request for information from a potential shareduse
Applicant;
b) Negotiate in good faith concerning future requests for shared use of the new
Tower by other Telecommunications providers;
c) Allow shared use of the new Tower if another Telecommunications provider
agrees in writing to pay reasonable charges. The charges may include, but
are not limited to, a Pro rata share of the cost of site selection, planning,
project administration, land costs, site design, construction and maintenance
financing, return on equity, less depreciation, and all of the costs of adapting
the Tower or equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing
electromagnetic interference;
d) Failure to abide by the conditions outlined above may be grounds for
revocation of the Special Use Permit.
O) The Applicant shall provide certification with documentation (i.e. structural analysis)
including calculations that the Telecommunication Facility tower and foundation and
attachments, rooftop support structure, water tank structure, or any other supporting
structure as proposed to be utilized are designed and will be constructed to meet all local,
state and federal structural requirements for loads, including wind and ice loads and
including, but not limited to all applicable ANSI (American National Standards Institute)
and other safety-related requirements and guidelines.
P) All proposed Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall contain a demonstration that
the Facility be sited so as to create the least visual intrusiveness reasonably possible given
the facts and circumstances involved, and thereby have the least adverse visual effect on
the environment and its character, on existing vegetation, and on the residences in the
area of the Wireless Telecommunications Facility. The City expressly reserves the right
to require the use of Stealth or Camouflage technology or techniques such as DAS
(Distributive Antenna System technology) or its functional equivalent to achieve this goal
and such shall be subject to approval by the Council.
Q) If the application is for a new tower, or a new antenna attachment to an existing structure
other than a tower, or for a modification that noticeably changes the appearance of the
structure, the Applicant shall furnish a Visual Impact Assessment, which shall include:
1) If a new tower or increasing the height of an existing structure is proposed, a
computer generated “Zone of Visibility Map” at a minimum of one mile radius from
the proposed structure shall be provided to illustrate locations from which the
proposed installation may be seen, with and without foliage;
2) Pictorial representations (photo simulations) of “before and after” views from key
viewpoints inside of the City as may be appropriate and required, including but not
limited to state highways and other major roads; state and local parks; other public
lands; historic districts; preserves and historic sites normally open to the public; and
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 18
from any other location where the site is visible to a large number of visitors,
travelers or residents. Guidance will be provided concerning the appropriate key
sites at the pre-application meeting. The applicant shall provide a map showing the
locations of where the pictures were taken and the distance(s)of each location from
the proposed structure;
3) A written description of the visual impact of the proposed facility, including, as
applicable, the tower base, guy wires, fencing and accessory buildings from abutting
and adjacent properties and streets as relates to the need or appropriateness of
screening.
R) The Applicant shall demonstrate and provide in writing and/or by drawing how it
shall effectively screen from view the base and all related equipment and structures
of the proposed Wireless Telecommunications Facility.
S) The Wireless Telecommunications Facility and any and all accessory or associated
facilities shall maximize the use of building materials, colors and textures designed to
blend with the structure to which it may be affixed and/or to harmonize with the
natural surroundings. This shall include the utilization of stealth or camouflage or
concealment technology as may be required by the City.
T) All utilities at a Wireless Telecommunications Facilities site shall be installed
underground and in compliance with all Laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of
the City, including specifically, but not limited to, the National Electrical Safety
Code and the National Electrical Code where appropriate.
U) At a Wireless Telecommunications Facilities site an access road, turn around space
and parking shall be provided to assure adequate emergency and service access.
Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private, shall be made to the
extent practicable. Road construction shall at all times minimize ground disturbance
and the cutting of vegetation. Road grades shall closely follow natural contours to
assure minimal visual disturbance and reduce soil erosion.
V) All Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall be constructed, operated,
maintained, repaired, provided for removal of, modified or restored in strict
compliance with all current applicable technical, safety and safety-related codes
adopted by the City, State, or United States, including but not limited to the most
recent editions of the ANSI Code, National Electrical Safety Code and the National
Electrical Code, as well as accepted and responsible workmanlike industry practices
and recommended practices of the National Association of Tower Erectors. The
codes referred to are codes that include, but are not limited to, construction, building,
electrical, fire, safety, health, and land use codes. In the event of a conflict between
or among any of the preceding the more stringent shall apply.
W) A holder of a Special Use Permit granted under this Ordinance shall obtain, at its
own expense, all permits and licenses required by applicable law, ordinance, rule,
regulation or code, and must maintain the same, in full force and effect, for as long as
required by the or other governmental entity or agency having jurisdiction over the
applicant.
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 19
X) There shall be a pre-application meeting for all intended applications. The purpose of
the pre-application meeting will be to address issues that will help to expedite the
review and permitting process and certain issues or concerns the City may have. A
pre-application meeting shall also include a site visit, if there has not been a prior site
visit for the requested facility. Costs of City consultants to prepare for and attend the
pre-application meeting will be borne by the applicant and paid for out of the
required escrow deposit.
Y) An Applicant shall submit to the City the number of completed Applications
determined to be needed at the pre-application meeting. However, applications will
not be provided to the City, other than for staff, until the application is deemed
complete.
Z) If the proposed site is within three (3) miles of another municipality or City, written
notification of the Application shall be provided to the legislative body of all such
adjacent municipalities as applicable and/or requested.
AA) The holder of a Special Use Permit shall notify the City of any intended Modification
of a Wireless Telecommunication Facility and shall apply to the City to modify,
relocate or rebuild a Wireless Telecommunications Facility.
BB) An application to increase the height of a Tower or other structure shall be deemed a
new tower and shall not qualify for treatment as an attachment to an existing Tower
or other structure under this Section.
Section 9. Requirements for an application to attach to an Existing Tower or other
Structure without increasing the height of the Tower or structure being
attached to or increasing the size of the profile of the structure.
A) If attached to an existing structure, unless the City Council deems doing so to be in the
public interest, it shall be impermissible for a wireless carrier’s facilities and equipment
to be relocated from one structure to another without proof that not to do so would
prohibit or serve to prohibit the provision of service in the service area served by the
existing wireless facility.
B) The non-refundable Application fee for attaching to an existing Tower or other structure
without increasing the height shall be as set forth in the City’s Schedule of Fees.
C) To prevent the taxpayers from having to pay for the expert technical assistance needed by
the City that is necessitated by the application, an Applicant shall be required to place
with the City an escrow deposit of no less than $6,500. After all invoices have been paid
and the Certificate of Completion or Occupancy has been granted, any unexpended
balance of the escrow deposit shall be returned to the Applicant upon request.
D) An application to increase the height of a Tower or other structure shall be deemed a new
tower and shall not qualify for treatment as an attachment to an existing Tower or other
structure under this Section.
E) There shall be no public hearing required for an application to attach to an existing tower
or other structure or to modify an existing Wireless Telecommunications Facility, as long
as there is no proposed increase in the height of the Tower or other structure to be
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 20
attached to, including attachments thereto, unless for good cause such shall be required
by the City Council or Planning Director. Instead, the Special Use Permit or other
appropriate authority shall be issued by the appropriate department head.
F) An Application for a Special Use Permit for attaching wireless facilities to an existing
structure, including but not limited to cellular or PCS facilities and microwave facilities,
shall be contain the following information and comply with the following requirements.
G) Documentation shall be provided proving that the Applicant has the legal right to proceed
as proposed on the Site, including an executed copy of the lease with the owner of the
facility proposed to be attached to, or a letter of agency, showing the right of the
Applicant to attach to the structure.
H) A Pre-Application meeting shall be held and at or before the Pre-Application meeting, the
Applicant shall be provided instructions for completing an Application. Said instructions
are to be controlling as regards the form and substance of the issues addressed in the
Instructions and must be followed.
I) The Applicant shall include a written statement that:
1) The Applicant’s proposed Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall be maintained in
a safe manner, and in compliance with all conditions of all applicable permits and
authorizations, without exception, as well as all applicable and permissible local codes,
ordinances, and regulations, including any and all applicable City, State and Federal
Laws, rules, and regulations; and
2) The construction of the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities is legally
permissible, including, but not limited to the fact that the Applicant is authorized
to do business in the State.
J) An application for attaching to an existing structure or for modifying an existing facility
without increasing the height of the structure shall contain the following information.
Proof of Need for the Facility
1) A detailed narrative description and explanation of the specific objective(s) for
the new facility, or the modification of an existing wireless facility, expressly
including and explaining the purpose and need for the facility, such as coverage
and/or capacity needs or requirements, and the specific geographic area of
intended coverage;
2) Technical Documentation that proves the need for the Wireless
Telecommunications Facility to provide service primarily and essentially within
the City. Such documentation shall include a propagation study of the proposed
site and all adjoining planned, proposed or existing sites, that demonstrates a
significant gap in coverage and/or, if a capacity issue is involved, to include an
analysis of the current and projected usage (traffic studies) using generally
accepted industry methods and standards so as to conclusively prove the need for
what is proposed. The City may require the provision of all technical or
engineering data and information used by the Applicant to make it’s
determination as regards the need for the facility or the change to the existing
facility.
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 21
3) All of the modeling information (i.e. data) inputted into the software used to
produce the propagation studies, including, but not limited to any assumptions
made, such as ambient tree height;
4) A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the Wireless
Telecommunications Facility, as well as a copy of the five (5) and ten (10) year
build-out plan required by the FCC;
5) The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or other transmitting
equipment;
6) The maximum transmission power capability of all radios, as designed, if the
Applicant is a cellular or functional equivalent carrier, or the maximum
transmission power capability, as designed, of all transmission facilities if the
Applicant is not a cellular or functional equivalent carrier;
7) The actual intended transmission power stated as the maximum effective radiated
power (ERP), both in dBm’s and watts;
Note: In effect what is needed is the information that the Company used to make its
determination as regards the need for the facility in the first place, the need and reason
for the requested location and the need for the height requested.
Ownership and Management
8) The Name, address and phone number of the person preparing the Application;
9) The Name, address, and phone number of the property owner and the Applicant,
including the legal name of the Applicant. If the owner of the structure is
different than the applicant, the name and all necessary contact information shall
be provided;
10) The Postal address and tax map parcel number of the property;
11) A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities.
Zoning and Planning
12) The Zoning District or designation in which the property is situated;
13) The size of the property on which the structure to be attached to is located, stated
both in square feet and lot line dimensions, and a survey showing the location of
all lot lines;
14) The location, size and height of all existing and proposed structures on the
property on which the structure is located and that is the subject of the
Application;
15) If attaching to an existing Tower, a site plan showing the vertical rendition of the
Tower identifying all users and attachments to the Tower and all related fixtures,
structures, appurtenances and apparatus, including height above pre-existing
grade, materials, color and lighting;
16) If attaching to a building or other structure, a site plan showing the proposed
attachments and all related fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus,
including height above the roof or balustrade, whichever is appropriate;
17) The azimuth, size and center line height location of all proposed and existing
antennae on the supporting structure;
18) The number, type and model of the Antenna(s) proposed, along with a copy of
the specification sheet(s) for the antennas;
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 22
Safety
19) If attaching to an existing Tower, the age of the tower in years, including the date
of the grant of the original permit or authorization for the Tower;
20) If attaching to an existing Tower, a description of the type of tower, e.g. guyed,
self-supporting lattice or monopole;
21) If attaching to an existing Tower, the make, model, type and manufacturer of the
Tower and the structural design calculations, certified by a Professional Engineer
licensed in the State, proving the tower’s capability to safely accommodate the
facilities of the Applicant without change or modification, taking into account the
geotechnical situation and the foundation design;
22) If any change or modification of the Tower or other structure to be attached to is
needed, a detailed narrative explaining what changes are needed, why they are
needed and who will be responsible to assure that the changes are made;
23) If the structure proposed to be attached to is a Tower that has not previously been
permitted under this Law, or unless the Applicant can provide proof that this was
provided at the time of the initial application for the Tower or other structure, the
Applicant shall provide a copy of the installed foundation design, as well as a
geotechnical sub-surface soils investigation, evaluation report and foundation
recommendation for the tower site or other structure;
24) If attaching to an existing Tower, a copy of the latest ANSI Inspection Report
done pursuant to the latest edition of ANSI-EIA/TIA 222F – Annex E for any
self-supporting Tower that is five (5) years old or older or for any guyed Tower
that is three (3) years old or older. If an ANSI Inspection report has not been
done pursuant to the preceding schedule, an ANSI report shall be done and
submitted as part of the Application;
25) If not attaching to an existing Tower, but rather a different type of structure, a
Structural Report signed by a Professional Engineer licensed to do business in the
State and bearing that engineer’s currently valid stamp, showing the structural
adequacy of the structure to accommodate the proposed Wireless Facility(s),
including any equipment shelter, unless the equipment shelter is located on the
ground or on the lowest floor of a building;
26) If attaching to a structure other than a Tower, to which the public has or could
reasonably have or gain access to, an Applicant shall provide documentation,
including all calculations, proving that the potential exposure to RF Radiation
(i.e. NIER or Non-Ion Emitting Radiation), will be in compliance with the most
recent Federal Communications Commission regulations governing RF Radiation
and exposure thereto, and further denoting the minimum distance from any
antennas an individual may safely stand without being exposed to RF radiation in
excess of the FCC’s permitted standards and any portion(s) of the structure that
would be exposed to RF radiation in excess of the FCC’s permitted standards . In
compliance with the FCC’s regulations, in such an instance the RF Radiation
from all wireless facilities shall be included in the calculations to show the
cumulative effect on any area of the building or structure deemed accessible by
the public. Such report or analysis shall be signed and sealed by a Professional
Engineer licensed in the State; or
27) In an instance on a Tower where the new Wireless Facilities will be ten (10)
meters or more above ground level, signed documentation such as the FCC’s
“Checklist to Determine whether a Facility may Categorically Excluded” shall be
provided to verify that the Wireless Telecommunication Facility with the
proposed installation will be in full compliance with the current FCC’s RF
Emissions regulations. If not categorically excluded, a complete RF Emissions
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 23
study is required to enable verification of compliance, pursuant to subsection
(E)(21) of this section, including providing all calculations so that such may be
verified;
28) If any section or portion of the structure to be attached to is not in compliance
with the FCC’s regulations regarding RF radiation, that section or portion must
be barricaded with a suitable warning barrier to discourage approaching into the
area in excess of the FCC’s regulations, and be marked off with yellow and black
striped warning tape or a suitable warning barrier, as well as placing RF
Radiation signs as needed and appropriate to warn individuals of the potential
danger;
29) A signed statement that the Applicant will expeditiously remedy any physical or
RF interference with other telecommunications or wireless devices or services.
K) To protect the nature and character of the area and create the least visually intrusive
impact reasonably possible under the facts and circumstances, any attachment to a
building or other structure with a facie, the antennas shall be mounted on the facie, unless
it can be proven that such will prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of
service, and all such attachments and exposed cabling shall use camouflage or stealth
techniques to match as closely as possible the color and texture of the structure to which
such equipment is attached.
L) If attaching to a water tank, mounting on the top of the tank or the use of a corral shall
only be permitted if the Applicant can prove that to locate elsewhere will prohibit or have
the effect of prohibiting the provision of service. The provisions of the preceding
subsection (J) of this section shall also apply to any attachment to a water tank.
M) The Applicant shall provide a certification by a Professional Engineer licensed in the
State, along with documentation (a structural analysis), including calculations, that prove
that the tower or other structure and its foundation as proposed to be utilized are designed
and were constructed to meet all local State, Federal and ANSI structural requirements
for loads, including wind and ice loads and the placement of any equipment on the roof a
building after the addition of the proposed new facilities.
N) If the Application is to attach to or modify existing facilities on a Tower, the applicant
shall provide signed documentation of the Tower condition; specifically a report done
pursuant to the latest edition of ANSI-EIA/TIA 222F (or 222G if adopted by the State) –
Annex E for any self-supporting Tower that is five (5) years old or older or for a guyed
Tower that is three (3) years old or older. Any deficiencies, other than strictly cosmetic
ones, must be completed or remedied prior to the issuance of a Building Permit for the
attachment of any component of the proposed Wireless Facilities.
O) So as to be the least visually intrusive reasonably possible given the facts and
circumstances involved, and thereby have the least adverse visual effect and create the
least intrusive or lowest profile or visual silhouette reasonably possible, unless it can be
proven that such would be technologically impracticable So as minimize the visual
profile of the antennas all antennas attached to a tower or other structure shall be flush
mounted or as near to flush mounted as is possible without prohibiting or having the
effect of prohibiting the provision of service, or prove technically, with hard data and a
detailed narrative, that flush mounting can not be used and would serve to prohibit or
have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service.
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 24
P) Unless it is deemed inappropriate or unnecessary by the City given the facts and
circumstances, the Applicant shall demonstrate and provide in writing and/or by drawing
how it shall effectively screen from view the base and all related equipment and
structures of the proposed Wireless Telecommunications Facility up to a height of ten
(10) feet.
Q) The Wireless Telecommunications Facility and any and all accessory or associated
facilities shall maximize the use of building materials, colors and textures designed to
blend with the structure to which it may be affixed and/or to harmonize with the natural
surroundings. This shall include the utilization of stealth, camouflage or concealment
technology as may be required by the City and as is not impracticable under the facts and
circumstances.
R) All utilities installed for a new Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall be installed
underground and in compliance with all Laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the
City, including specifically, but not limited to, the National Electrical Safety Code and
the National Electrical Code where appropriate.
S) If deemed necessary or appropriate, an access road, turn around space and parking shall
be provided to assure adequate emergency and service access. Maximum use of existing
roads, whether public or private, shall be made to the extent practicable. Road
construction shall at all times minimize ground disturbance and the cutting of vegetation.
Road grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual disturbance
and reduce soil erosion and shall comply with any local or State regulations for the
construction of roads. If the facility currently has an access road or turn around space, but
such is deemed in disrepair or in need of remedial work to make it serviceable and safe
and in compliance with any applicable regulations, the Application shall contain a
commitment to remedy or restore the road or turn around space so that it is serviceable
and safe and in compliance with applicable regulations.
T) The Applicant, and the owner of record of any structure or tower attached to, shall,
jointly or separately, at its cost and expense, be required to place with the City a bond, or
other form of security acceptable to the City as to type of security and the form and
manner of execution, in an amount of at least $25,000 for attaching to an existing
structure or existing tower and with such sureties as are deemed sufficient by the City to
assure the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of this Law and conditions of
any Special Use Permit issued pursuant to this Law. Said bond or other security shall also
serve as a Removal Security to prevent the taxpayers from bearing the cost of removal in
the event of the abandonment or cessation of use for more than ninety (90) consecutive
days. The full amount of the bond or security shall remain in full force and effect
throughout the term of the Special Use Permit and/or until any necessary site restoration
is completed to restore the site to a condition comparable to that which existed prior to
the issuance of the original Special Use Permit.
Section 10. Location of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
Applicants for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall locate, site and erect said Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities in accordance with the following priorities, one (1) being the
highest priority and five (5) being the lowest priority. There shall be no towers permitted in
Residential zoning districts except RA (Residential Agricultural).
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 25
1) On existing structures on publicly-owned property without increasing the height of
the tower or structure.
2) On publicly-owned properties or facilities.
3) On existing Towers or other structures without increasing the height of the tower or
structure.
4) On properties in areas zoned for Commercial or Business use.
5) In areas zoned for Agricultural use.
6) In areas zoned for Residential use.
B) If the proposed site is not proposed for the highest priority listed above, then a detailed
explanation and justification must be provided as to why a site of any higher priority
designations was not selected. The person seeking such an exception must satisfactorily
demonstrate the reason or reasons why such a permit should be granted for the proposed
site, and the hardship that would be incurred by the Applicant if the permit were not
granted for the Wireless Facility as proposed.
C) An Applicant may not by-pass sites of higher priority by stating the site proposed is the
only site leased or selected or because there is an existing lease with a landowner. An
Application shall address co-location as an option. If such option is not proposed, the
applicant must explain to the reasonable satisfaction of the City why co-location is
commercially impracticable or otherwise impracticable. Agreements between providers
limiting or prohibiting co-location shall not be a valid basis for any claim of commercial
impracticability or hardship.
D) Notwithstanding the above, the City may approve any site located within an area in the
above list of priorities, provided that the City finds that the proposed site is in the best
interest of the health, safety and welfare of the City and its inhabitants and will not have a
deleterious effect on the nature and character of the community and neighborhood.
Conversely, the City may direct that the proposed location be changed to another location
that is more in keeping with the goals of this Ordinance and the public interest as
determined by the Council.
E) If appropriate, based on selecting a site of lower priority, a detailed written explanation as
to why sites of a higher priority were not selected shall be included with the Application,
including the technical justification for such.
F) Notwithstanding that a potential site may be situated in an area of highest priority or
highest available priority, the City may disapprove an Application for any of the
following reasons:
1) Conflict with safety and safety-related codes and requirements;
2) Conflict with the historic nature or character of a neighborhood or district;
3) The use or construction of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities which is contrary
to an already stated purpose of a specific zoning or land use designation;
4) The placement and location of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities which would
create an unacceptable risk, or the reasonable probability of such, to residents, the
public, employees and agents of the City, or employees of the service provider or
other service providers;
5) The placement and location of a Wireless Telecommunications Facility would result
in a conflict with, compromise in or change of the nature or character of the
surrounding area;
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 26
6) Conflicts with the provisions of this Ordinance;
7) Failure to submit a complete Application as required under this Ordinance.
G) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Ordinance, for good cause shown, such
as the ability to utilize a shorter or less intrusive facility elsewhere and still accomplish
the primary service objective, the City may require the relocation of a proposed site,
including allowing for the fact that relocating the site chosen by the Applicant may
require the use of more than one (1) site to provide substantially the same service if the
relocation could result in a less intrusive facility or facilities, singly or in combination, so
long as such does not prohibit or serve to prohibit the provision of service.
Section 11. Shared use of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities and other structures.
A) Unless such is proven to be technologically impracticable, the City requires Wireless
Facilities to be located on existing Towers or other suitable structures without increasing
the height of the tower or structure, as opposed to the construction of a new Tower. The
Applicant shall submit a comprehensive report inventorying all existing Towers and other
suitable structures within one (1) mile of the location of any proposed new Tower, unless
the Applicant can show that some other distance is more appropriate and reasonable and
demonstrate conclusively why an existing Tower or other suitable structure cannot be
used.
B) An Applicant intending to locate on an existing Tower or other suitable structure shall be
required to document the intent of the existing owner to permit its use by the Applicant.
C) Such shared use shall consist only of the minimum Antenna array technologically
required to provide service primarily and essentially within the City, to the extent
practicable, unless good cause is shown.
Section 12. Height of Telecommunications Tower(s).
A) All new towers shall be of the monopole type, unless such is able to be proven to be
technologically impracticable. No new towers of a lattice or guyed type shall be
permitted, unless relief is otherwise expressly granted.
B) The Applicant shall submit documentation justifying the technical need by the service
provider for the total height of any Tower, Facility and/or Antenna requested and the
basis therefore. To enable verification of the need for the requested height,
documentation in the form of propagation studies must include all backup data used to
produce the studies at the height requested and at a minimum of ten feet (10’) lower
height. Such documentation will be analyzed in the context of the justification of the
height needed to provide service primarily and essentially within the City, to the extent
practicable, unless good cause is shown.
C) The maximum permitted total height of a new Tower shall be one hundred twenty feet
(120’) above pre-construction ground level, unless it can be proven that such height
would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service in the intended
service area. The 120’ maximum permitted height is not as-of-right height, but rather the
maximum permitted height, absent proof of the technological need for a greater height.
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 27
D) Notwithstanding the one hundred twenty feet (120’) maximum permitted height,
Telecommunications Towers and Facilities shall be no taller than the minimum height
technologically necessary to enable the provision of wireless service coverage or capacity
as needed within the City, and only within the City.
E) Spacing or the distance between towers shall be such that the service may be provided
without exceeding the maximum permitted height.
Section 13. Visibility of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
A) Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall not be artificially lighted or marked, except
as required by Ordinance.
B) Stealth: All new Wireless Telecommunications facilities, including but not limited to
towers, shall utilize Stealth or Camouflage techniques and technology, unless such can be
shown to be either Commercially or Technologically Impracticable.
C) Dual Mode: In order to minimize the number of antenna arrays and thus the visual
impact, the City may require the use of dual mode antennas to be used, including by two
different carriers, unless it can be proven that such will not work technologically and that
such would have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service.
D) Tower Finish/Color: Towers shall be galvanized and/or painted with a rust-preventive
paint of an appropriate color to harmonize with the surroundings and shall be maintained
in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
E) Lighting: If lighting is required, Applicant shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient
lighting of as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is permissible under State and
Federal regulations. All towers requiring lighting shall be lighted so as to effectively
eliminate the ground scatter effect of the lighting and so as to prevent the light from being
seen from the ground.
F) Flush Mounting: All new or replacement antennas, except omni-directional whip
antennas, shall be flush-mounted on any tower or other structure, unless the Applicant
can prove that it is technologically impracticable. If not flush-mounted, the antennas shall
be attached so as to create the smallest profile reasonably possible under the facts and
circumstances, unless it can be proven that to do so would prohibit or have the effect of
prohibiting the service.
G) Placement on Building – Facie: If attached to a building, all antennas shall be mounted on
the facie of the building and camouflaged so as to match the color and, if possible, texture
of the building or in a manner so as to make the antennas as visually innocuous and
undetectable as is possible given the facts and circumstances involved.
H) Lighting – Preventing Ground Scatter Effect: For any Wireless Facility for which lighting
is required under the FAA’s regulations, or that for any reason has lights attached, all
such lighting shall be affixed with technology that enables the light to be seen as intended
from the air, but that prevents the ground scatter effect so that it not able to be seen from
the ground to a height of at least 12 degrees vertical for a distance of at least 1 mile in a
level terrain situation. Such device must be compliant with or not in conflict with FAA
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 28
regulations. A physical shield may be used, as long as the light is able to be seen from the
air, as intended by the FAA.
I) In the event a tower that is lighted is modified, at the time of the modification the City
may require that the Tower be retrofitted with the technology set forth in the preceding
subsection (F).
Section 14. Security of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
All Wireless Telecommunications Facilities and Antennas shall be located, fenced or otherwise
secured in a manner that prevents unauthorized access. Specifically:
A) All Antennas, Towers and other supporting structures, including guy anchor points and
wires, shall be made inaccessible to individuals and constructed or shielded in such a
manner that they cannot be climbed or collided with; and
B) Transmitters and Telecommunications control points shall be installed in such a manner
that they are readily accessible only to persons authorized to operate or service them.
Section 15. Signage.
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall contain a sign no larger than four (4) square feet in
order to provide adequate notification to persons in the immediate area of the presence of RF
radiation or to control exposure to RF radiation within a given area. A sign of the same size is
also to be installed to contain the name(s) of the owner(s) and operator(s) of the Antenna(s) as
well as emergency phone number(s). The sign shall be on the equipment shelter or cabinet of the
Applicant and be visible from the access point of the site and must identify the equipment owner
of the shelter or cabinet. On tower sites, an FCC registration site, as applicable, is also to be
present. The signs shall not be lighted, unless applicable law, rule or regulation requires lighting.
No other signage, including advertising, shall be permitted.
Section 16. Lot Size and Setbacks.
A) All proposed Towers and any other proposed Wireless Telecommunications Facility
attachment structures shall be set back from abutting parcels, recorded rights-of-way and
road and street lines by the greater of the following distances: A distance equal to the
height of the proposed Tower or Wireless Telecommunications Facility structure plus ten
percent (10%) of the height of the Tower or structure, otherwise known as the Fall Zone,
or the existing setback requirement of the underlying zoning district, whichever is
greater. Any Accessory structure shall be located so as to comply with the applicable
minimum setback requirements for the property on which it is situated. The fall zone or
setback shall be measured from the nearest portion of the right-of-way of any public road
or thoroughfare and any occupied building or domicile. Further, the nearest portion of
any access road to a wireless facility shall be no less than fifteen (15) feet from the
nearest property line.
B) There shall be no development of habitable buildings within the Fall Zone or setback area
set forth in the preceding subsection (A).
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 29
Section 17. Retention of Expert Assistance and Reimbursement by Applicant.
A) The City may hire any consultant and/or expert necessary to assist the City in reviewing
and evaluating the Application, including the construction and modification of the site,
once permitted, and any site inspections.
B) To prevent the taxpayers from having to bear the cost related to the issue of the regulation
of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, an Applicant shall deposit with the City
funds sufficient to reimburse the City for all reasonable costs of i) consulting and expert
evaluation and consultation with the City or the Applicant in connection with the
submission and/or review of any Application ii), including any requests for waiver,
relief or exemption, any lease negotiations and any pre-submittal review requested by
the applicant, all of which are deemed part of the pre-approval evaluation, and including
the construction and modification of the site, once permitted. The initial deposit shall be
at least $6,500 or other greater amount as may be set forth in the City’s Schedule of Fees.
The placement of the $6,500 with the City shall precede the pre-application meeting or
any work being done as regards processing an application. The City of Trinity will
maintain a separate escrow account for all such funds. The City of Trinity’s
consultants/experts shall invoice the City for its services in reviewing the Application,
including the construction and modification of the site, once permitted. If at any time
during the process this escrow account has a balance less than $2,500.00, the Applicant
shall immediately, upon notification by the City, replenish said escrow account so that it
has a balance of at least $5,000.00. Such additional escrow funds shall be deposited with
the City before any further action or consideration is taken on the Application. In the
event that the amount held in escrow is more than the amount of the actual invoicing at
the conclusion of the project, the remaining balance shall be promptly refunded to the
Applicant upon written request.
B) To prevent the taxpayers from having to bear any cost related to the issue of the
regulation of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, no work shall be done on an
application for which the full amount of the escrow deposit as set forth in the preceding
subsection (B) of this section has not been placed with the City. In the event the escrow
deposit minimum balance as set forth in this subsection (B) is not maintained, all work on
the Application shall cease until the deposit is replenished as required.
C) The total amount of the funds needed as set forth in subsection (B) of this section may
vary with the scope and complexity of the project, the completeness of the Application,
necessary discussions with the Applicant and other information as may be needed to
complete the necessary review, analysis and inspection of any construction or
modification.
D) Records of all outside costs associated with the review and permitting process shall be
maintained and available for public inspection, in compliance with applicable law.
Section 18. Public Hearing and Notification Requirements.
A) Prior to the approval of any Application for a Special Use Permit for a new tower or for any
facility that increases the height or profile of the structure to which it is to be attached, a
public hearing shall be held by the City, notice of which shall be published in accordance
with the City’s Zoning Ordinance. In order that the nearby landowners are aware of the
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 30
public hearing, all landowners within one-thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of any
property line of the lot or parcel on which the new Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
are proposed shall be notified of the public hearing.
B) The City shall schedule the public hearing referred to in Subsection (A) of this section
once it finds the Application is complete and is not required to set a date if the
Application is not complete. The City, at any stage prior to issuing a Special Use Permit,
may require such additional information as it deems necessary as such relates to the issue
of the siting, construction or modification of a Wireless Telecommunications Facility.
Section 19. Action on an Application for a Special Use Permit for Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities.
A) The City will undertake a review of an Application pursuant to this Article in a timely
fashion, consistent with its legal responsibilities, and shall act within a reasonable period
of time given the relative complexity of the Application and the circumstances, with due
regard for the public’s interest and need to be involved, and the Applicant’s desire for a
timely action on the Application. The City shall comply with the FCC’s regulations
regarding the maximum permitted time to act on an application.
B) The City may refer any Application or part thereof to any advisory or other entity of its
choice for a non-binding recommendation.
C) After the public hearing and after formally considering the Application, the City may
approve, approve with conditions, or deny a Special Use Permit. Its decision shall be in
writing and shall be supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The
burden of proof for the grant of the permit shall always be upon the Applicant.
D) If the City approves the Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities,
then the Applicant shall be notified of such approval in writing within ten (10) calendar
days of the City’s action, and the Special use Permit or other appropriate authorization
shall be issued within thirty (30) days after such approval. Except for necessary building
permits, and subsequent Certificates of Compliance, once a Special Use Permit has been
granted hereunder, no additional permits or approvals from the City, such as site plan or
zoning approvals, shall be required by the City for the Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities covered by the Special Use Permit.
E) If the City denies the Special Use Permit or other appropriate authorization for Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities, then the Applicant shall be notified of such denial in
writing within ten (10) calendar days of the City’s action and shall set forth in writing the
reason or reasons for the denial.
Section 20. Extent and Parameters of Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities.
The extent and parameters of a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
shall be as follows:
A) Such Special Use Permit shall not be assigned, transferred or conveyed without the
express prior written notification to the City.
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 31
B) In the event of a violation of this Ordinance, following an opportunity to cure and, if not
cured within the time frame set forth in the notice of violation, a hearing shall be held
upon due prior notice to the Applicant. Following such hearing, if found to be in violation
of this Ordinance, the Special Use Permit may be revoked, canceled, or terminated for a
violation of the conditions and provisions of the Special Use Permit, or for a material
violation of this Ordinance or other applicable law, rule or regulation.
C) Notice of a violation and of the date, time and place of a hearing shall be provided by
registered mail to the last known address of the holder of the Special Use Permit.
Section 21. Application Fee.
At the time that a person submits an Application for a Special Use Permit or other appropriate
authorization for a new Tower or a co-located facility, such person shall pay a non-refundable
application fee as set forth in the City’s Fee Schedule as may be amended or changed from time
to time.
Section 22. Removal and Performance Security.
The Applicant and the owner of record of any proposed tower or other support structure shall, at
its cost and expense, be required to file with the City a bond, or other form of security acceptable
to the City as to the type of security and the form and manner of execution, in an amount of at
least $75,000.00 for i) the removal of the tower or structure with such sureties as are deemed
sufficient by the City and ii) to assure the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of this
Ordinance and conditions of any Special Use Permit or any other applicable permit or
authorization issued pursuant to this Ordinance. The full amount of the bond or security shall
remain in full force and effect throughout the term of the Special Use Permit to assure faithful
performance under this Ordinance and in the event of abandonment until any necessary site
restoration is completed to restore the site to a condition comparable to that which existed prior to
the issuance of the original Special Use Permit.
Section 23. Reservation of Authority to Inspect Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
In order to verify that the holder of a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities and any and all lessees, renters, and/or licensees of Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities, place and construct such facilities, including Towers and Antennas, in accordance with
all applicable technical, safety, fire, building, and zoning codes, Laws, ordinances and regulations
and other applicable requirements, the City may inspect all facets of said permit holder’s, renter’s,
lessee’s or licensee’s placement, construction, modification and maintenance of such facilities,
including, but not limited to, Towers, Antennas and buildings or other structures constructed or
located on the permitted site.
Section 24. Liability Insurance.
A) A holder of a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall secure
and at all times maintain public liability insurance for personal injuries, death and
property damage, and umbrella insurance coverage, for the duration of the Special Use
Permit in amounts as set forth below:
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 32
1) Commercial General Liability covering personal injuries, death and property
damage: $1,000,000 per occurrence/$2,000,000 aggregate; and
2) Automobile Coverage: $1,000,000.00 per occurrence/ $2,000,000 aggregate; and
3) A $3,000,000 Umbrella coverage; and
4) Workers Compensation and Disability: Statutory amounts.
B) For a Wireless Telecommunications Facility on City property, the Commercial General
Liability insurance policy shall specifically include the City and its officers, employees,
committee members, attorneys, agents and consultants as additional insureds.
C) The insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or representative of an insurance
company licensed to do business in the State and with a Best’s rating of at least A.
D) The insurance policies shall contain an endorsement obligating the insurance company to
furnish the City with at least thirty (30) days prior written notice in advance of the
cancellation of the insurance.
E) Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the City at least
fifteen (15) days before the expiration of the insurance that such policies are to renew or
replace.
F) Before construction of a permitted Wireless Telecommunications Facilities is initiated,
but in no case later than fifteen (15) days after the grant of the Special Use Permit, the
holder of the Special Use Permit shall deliver to the City a copy of each of the policies or
certificates representing the insurance in the required amounts.
G) A Certificate of Insurance that states that it is for informational purposes only and does
not confer rights upon the City shall not be deemed to comply with this Section.
Section 25. Indemnification.
A) Any application for Wireless Telecommunication Facilities that is proposed for City
property, pursuant to this Ordinance, shall contain a provision with respect to
indemnification. Such provision shall require the applicant, to the extent permitted by the
Ordinance, to at all times defend, indemnify, protect, save, hold harmless, and exempt the
City, and its officers, employees, committee members, attorneys, agents, and consultants
from any and all penalties, damages, costs, or charges arising out of any and all claims,
suits, demands, causes of action, or award of damages, whether compensatory or
punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at law or in equity, which might arise out
of, or are caused by, the placement, construction, erection, modification, location,
products performance, use, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement,
removal, or restoration of said Facility, excepting, however, any portion of such claims,
suits, demands, causes of action or award of damages as may be attributable to the
negligent or intentional acts or omissions of the City, or its servants or agents. With
respect to the penalties, damages or charges referenced herein, reasonable attorneys’ fees,
consultants’ fees, and expert witness fees are included in those costs that are recoverable
by the City.
B) Notwithstanding the requirements noted in subsection (A) of this section, an
indemnification provision will not be required in those instances where the City itself
applies for and secures a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 33
Section 26. Fines.
A) In the event of a violation of this Ordinance or any Special Use Permit issued pursuant to
this Ordinance, the City may impose and collect, and the holder of the Special Use Permit
for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall pay to the City, fines or penalties as set
forth below.
B) If the holder of a Special Use Permit fails to comply with provisions of this Ordinance
such shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance and shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $350 per day per violation following due and proper notice and, further, each day
or part thereof that a violation remains uncured after proper notice shall constitute a
separate violation, punishable separately.
C) Notwithstanding anything in this Ordinance, the holder of the Special Use Permit for
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities may not use the payment of fines, liquidated
damages or other penalties, to evade or avoid compliance with this Ordinance or any
section of this Ordinance. An attempt to do so shall subject the holder of the Special Use
Permit to termination and revocation of the Special Use Permit. The City may also seek
injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of this Ordinance, without limiting
other remedies available to the City.
Section 27. Default and/or Revocation.
If a Wireless Telecommunications Facility is repaired, rebuilt, placed, moved, re-located,
modified or maintained in a way that is inconsistent or not in compliance with the
provisions of this Ordinance or of the Special Use Permit, then the City shall notify the
holder of the Special Use Permit in writing of such violation. A Permit holder in
violation may be considered in default and subject to fines as in Section 24 and if a
violation is not corrected to the satisfaction of the City in a reasonable period of time the
Special Use Permit is subject to revocation.
Section 28. Removal of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
A) The owner of any tower or wireless facility shall be required to provide a minimum of
thirty (30) days written notice to the City Clerk prior to abandoning any tower or
wireless facility.
B) Under the following circumstances, the City may determine that the health, safety, and
welfare interests of the City warrant and require the removal of Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities.
1) Wireless Telecommunications Facilities with a permit have been abandoned
(i.e. not used as Wireless Telecommunications Facilities) for a period
exceeding ninety consecutive (90) days or a total of one hundred-eighty
(180) days in any three hundred-sixty five (365) day period, except for
periods caused by force majeure or Acts of God, in which case, repair or
removal shall commence within 90 days;
2) Permitted Wireless Telecommunications Facilities fall into such a state of
disrepair that it creates a health or safety hazard;
3) Wireless Telecommunications Facilities have been located, constructed, or
modified without first obtaining, or in a manner not authorized by, the
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 34
required Special Use Permit, or any other necessary authorization and the
Special Permit may be revoked.
C) If the City makes such a determination as noted in subsection (A) of this section, then the
City shall notify the holder of the Special Use Permit for the Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities within forty-eight (48) hours that said Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities are to be removed, the City may approve an interim
temporary use agreement/permit, such as to enable the sale of the Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities.
D) The holder of the Special Use Permit, or its successors or assigns, shall dismantle and
remove such Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, and all associated structures and
facilities, from the site and restore the site to as close to its original condition as is
possible, such restoration being limited only by physical or commercial impracticability,
within ninety (90) days of receipt of written notice from the City. However, if the owner
of the property upon which the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities are located
wishes to retain any access roadway to the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, the
owner may do so with the approval of the City.
E) If Wireless Telecommunications Facilities are not removed or substantial progress has
not been made to remove the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities within ninety (90)
days after the permit holder has received notice, then the City may order officials or
representatives of the City to remove the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities at the
sole expense of the owner or Special Use Permit holder.
F) If, the City removes, or causes to be removed, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities,
and the owner of the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities does not claim and
remove it from the site to a lawful location within ten (10) days, then the City may take
steps to declare the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities abandoned, and sell them
and their components.
G) Notwithstanding anything in this Section to the contrary, the City may approve a
temporary use permit/agreement for the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, for no
more than ninety (90) days, during which time a suitable plan for removal, conversion, or
re-location of the affected Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall be developed by
the holder of the Special Use Permit, subject to the approval of the City, and an
agreement to such plan shall be executed by the holder of the Special Use Permit and the
City. If such a plan is not developed, approved and executed within the ninety (90) day
time period, then the City may take possession of and dispose of the affected Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities in the manner provided in this Section and utilize the bond
in Section 21.
Section 29. Relief.
Any Applicant desiring relief, waiver or exemption from any aspect or requirement of this
Ordinance may request such at the pre-Application meeting, provided that the relief or exemption
is contained in the submitted Application for either a Special Use Permit, or in the case of an
existing or previously granted Special Use Permit a request for modification of its Tower and/or
facilities. Such relief may be temporary or permanent, partial or complete. However, the burden
of proving the need for the requested relief, waiver or exemption is solely on the Applicant to
prove. The Applicant shall bear all costs of the City in considering the request and the relief,
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 35
waiver or exemption. No such relief or exemption shall be approved unless the Applicant
demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that, if granted, the relief, waiver or exemption
will have no significant affect on the health, safety and welfare of the City, its residents or other
service providers.
Section 30. Periodic Regulatory Review by the City of Trinity.
A) The City may at any time conduct a review and examination of this entire Ordinance.
B) If after such a periodic review and examination of this Ordinance, the City determines
that one or more provisions of this Ordinance should be amended, repealed, revised,
clarified, or deleted, then the City may take whatever measures are necessary in
accordance with applicable Ordinance in order to accomplish the same. It is noted that
where warranted, and in the best interests of the City, the City may repeal this entire
Ordinance at any time.
C) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (A) and (B) of this Section, the City may
at any time and in any manner (to the extent permitted by Federal, State, or local law),
amend, add, repeal, and/or delete one or more provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 31. Adherence to State and/or Federal Rules and Regulations.
A) To the extent that the holder of a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities has not received relief, or is otherwise exempt, from appropriate State and/or
Federal agency rules or regulations, then the holder of such a Special Use Permit shall
adhere to, and comply with, all applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of
any State or Federal agency, including, but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC.
Specifically included in this requirement are any rules and regulations regarding height,
lighting, security, electrical and RF emission standards.
B) To the extent that applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any State or
Federal agency, including but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC, and specifically
including any rules and regulations regarding height, lighting, and security are changed
and/or are modified during the duration of a Special Use Permit for Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities, then the holder of such a Special Use Permit shall
conform the permitted Wireless Telecommunications Facilities to the applicable changed
and/or modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision within a maximum of twenty-four
(24) months of the effective date of the applicable changed and/or modified rule,
regulation, standard, or provision, or sooner as may be required by the issuing entity.
Section 32. Reservation of Police Powers.
The City expressly reserves and preserves its inherent police powers as may be to administer or
enforce this Ordinance and nothing shall in any way diminish or lessen said powers and authority.
Section 33. Conflict with Other Laws.
Where this Ordinance differs or conflicts with other Laws, rules and regulations, unless the right
to do so is preempted or prohibited by the City, State or federal government, this Ordinance shall
apply.
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 36
Section 34. Effective Date.
This Ordinance shall be effective immediately upon passage, pursuant to applicable legal and
procedural requirements.
Section 35. Authority.
This Local Ordinance is enacted pursuant to applicable authority granted by the State and federal
government.
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 37
INDEX
SECTION 1. PURPOSE AND LEGISLATIVE INTENT. .................................................................. 6
SECTION 2. TITLE. .......................................................................................................................... 6
SECTION 3. SEVERABILITY .......................................................................................................... 6
SECTION 4. DEFINITIONS. ............................................................................................................. 6
SECTION 5. OVERALL POLICY AND DESIRED GOALS FOR SPECIAL USE PERMITS FOR
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. ..................................................................... 9
SECTION 6. EXCEPTIONS FROM A SPECIAL USE PERMIT FOR WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. ....................................................................................... 10
SECTION 7. EXCLUSIONS. THE FOLLOWING SHALL BE EXEMPT FROM THIS
ORDINANCE: ................................................................................................................................. 10
SECTION 8. SPECIAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS FOR A
NEW TOWER OR FOR INCREASING THE HEIGHT OF THE STRUCTURE TO BE ATTACHED
TO. .................................................................................................................................................. 11
SECTION 9. REQUIREMENTS FOR AN APPLICATION TO ATTACH TO AN EXISTING
TOWER OR OTHER STRUCTURE WITHOUT INCREASING THE HEIGHT OF THE TOWER
OR STRUCTURE BEING ATTACHED TO. ................................................................................... 19
SECTION 10. LOCATION OF WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. .................. 24
SECTION 11. SHARED USE OF WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES AND
OTHER STRUCTURES. ................................................................................................................ 26
SECTION 12. HEIGHT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER(S). ............................................ 26
SECTION 13. VISIBILITY OF WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. .................. 27
SECTION 14. SECURITY OF WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. .................. 28
SECTION 15. SIGNAGE. ............................................................................................................... 28
SECTION 16. LOT SIZE AND SETBACKS. .................................................................................. 28
SECTION 17. RETENTION OF EXPERT ASSISTANCE AND REIMBURSEMENT BY
APPLICANT. .................................................................................................................................. 29
SECTION 18. PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS. ............................... 29
SECTION 19. ACTION ON AN APPLICATION FOR A SPECIAL USE PERMIT FOR WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. ....................................................................................... 30
SECTION 20. EXTENT AND PARAMETERS OF SPECIAL USE PERMIT FOR WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. ....................................................................................... 30
SECTION 21. APPLICATION FEE. ............................................................................................... 31
SECTION 22. REMOVAL AND PERFORMANCE SECURITY. .................................................... 31
SECTION 23. RESERVATION OF AUTHORITY TO INSPECT WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. ....................................................................................... 31
SECTION 24. LIABILITY INSURANCE. ........................................................................................ 31
SECTION 25. INDEMNIFICATION. ............................................................................................... 32
SECTION 26. FINES. ..................................................................................................................... 33
SECTION 27. DEFAULT AND/OR REVOCATION. ...................................................................... 33
SECTION 28. REMOVAL OF WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES .................... 33
_____________________________________________________________________
Trinity Zoning Ordinance Page 17 - 38
SECTION 29. RELIEF. ................................................................................................................... 34
SECTION 30. PERIODIC REGULATORY REVIEW BY THE CITY OF TRINITY. ........................ 35
SECTION 31. ADHERENCE TO STATE AND/OR FEDERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS. ... 35
SECTION 32. RESERVATION OF POLICE POWERS. ................................................................ 35
SECTION 33. CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS. .......................................................................... 35
SECTION 34. EFFECTIVE DATE. ................................................................................................. 36
SECTION 35. AUTHORITY. ........................................................................................................... 36