VALDESE, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2019 S-15 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance of 5-6-19
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TOWN OFFICIALS
   MAYOR
   John F. “Chip” Black, Jr.
   TOWN COUNCIL
   Roy F. Sweezy   Andy Thompson
   Keith Ogle   Frances Hildebran
   Susan Stevenson, Mayor Pro Tem
   DEPUTY TOWN CLERK   ATTORNEY
   Courtney Kennedy   Marc Mitchell, P.A. Attorney-at-law
   TOWN MANAGER
   Seth Eckard
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE REVISING,  CONSOLIDATING, ELABORATING  AND ADDING TO THE
ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN OF VALDESE, NORTH  CAROLINA
Be it ordained  by the Town  Council  of the Town of Valdese that:
Section  1. The following compilation of ordinances,  set out immediately after
the Char­ ter and  Related  State  Laws portions  of this volume and
designated  as Division II, Parts  I through  9 inclusive, is hereby adopted 
as the official Code  of Ordinances  of the Town  of Valdese, North  Carolina.
Section 2. (a) All ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the town
enacted on or before ________________, 1978 and not included  within this code,
or recognized and continued in force  by  reference  therein,  are  hereby 
repealed  from  and  after  the effective date  of  this ordinance,  except as
provided  in section  3.
(b) To the extent  that ordinances or portions of ordinances included within
this code are the same in substance  as ordinances in effect prior to the
adoption of this code, it is intended that they be treated as continuations and
not as new enactments  or amendments, in order that all rights and 
liabilities  that  have accrued  are preserved and  may be enforced.
Section 3. This code of ordinances contains all of the general and permanent
ordinances of the town, but it does not contain,  and  is not intended  to
affect, the following classes or ordinances  or actions  having the effect of
ordinances:
1.    Annexation ordinances;
2.    Budget ordinances or amendments thereto;
3.    Bond orders  and  ordinances;
4.    Ordinances  granting  a franchise;
5.    Ordinances  or  resolutions  pertaining  to  the  exercise  of  the 
power  of eminent domain;
6.    Ordinances  or resolutions  pertaining  to the levy of special
assessments;
7.    Ordinances  amending  the charter  of the town, pursuant  to article 5,
part 4 of chapter 160A, General  Statutes of North  Carolina;
8.    Ordinances, resolutions  or orders  naming,  renaming  or closing a
street
9.    Ordinances  or  resolutions  establishing  or amending  the  boundaries 
of wards  or election districts;
10.   Ordinances establishing  or amending  the boundaries  of zoning
districts;
11.    Resolutions  of any type;
12.   Ordinances establishing  or  amending  a  position  classification  and 
pay  plan  for municipal  employees; and
13.   Ordinances of any type which are not normally or customarily  codified,
including but  not  limited  to,  ordinances of limited  interest  or 
ordinances  of a  transitory nature.
Section 4. No provision  of this ordinance  is intended,  nor shall be
construed, to affect in any way any rights or interests (whether  public or
private):
(a) Now vested or accrued, in whole or in part, the validity of which might be
sustained or preserved by reference to any provision of an ordinance repealed
by the adoption of this code. (b)  Derived  from,  or  which might  be
sustained  or  preserved  in reliance  upon,  action heretofore taken pursuant 
to or within the scope of any ordinance  repealed by the adoption of this code.
Section  5. No action  or proceeding  of any nature (whether  civil or
criminal,  judicial or administrative or otherwise) pending on the effective
date of this ordinance  by or against the Town of Valdese or any of its
departments or agencies shall be abated or otherwise affected by the adoption
of this code.
Section 6. Ifany portion  of this code or the application thereof to any person
or circum­ stance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other 
provisions  or applications of this code which can be given effect without  the
valid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this code are
declared  to be severable.
Section  7. Ordinances  which are adopted after the cut-off date specified in
section 2 shall be forwarded  to theN orth Carolina  League of Municipalities
for codification into this volume. The league is hereby authorized to make all
necessary editorial  changes to codify such ordi­ nances appropriately.
Section 8. A copy of this code shall be kept on file in the office of the town
clerk and it shall be  the  express  duty  of  the  clerk,  or  someone 
authorized by the  clerk,  to  insert  in  their designated  places all duly
adopted  amendments to this code, and to extract from this code all provisions
which may be from time to time duly repealed.  A copy of this code shall be
avail­ able for all pesons desiring to examine it during reasonable  times,
under the supervision of the town clerk.
Section  9. Itshall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions 
or dele­ tions  any  part  or  portion  of this code,  or  to alter  or tamper 
with the code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the ordinances  of the
Town of Valdese to be misrepresented there­ by. Any person violating this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided  in
section 14-4 of the General  Statutes  of North  Carolina.
Section 10. This ordinance,  and  the code of ordinances which it adopts, 
shall be in full force and affect from and after  the day of ________  19_.
Adopted  this day of ______________ 19_.
ATTEST:
TOWN  OF VALDESE
BY:  _____________________
Mayor
Clerk
DIVISION I THE CHARTER AND OTHER RELATED LAWS
THE CHARTER
CHAPTER 847, SESSION  LAWS 1977
ARTICLE I
Incorporation, Corporate Powers and Boundaries
Section 1.1   Incorporation.
Section 1.2   Powers.
Section 1.3   Corporate  limits.
ARTICLE II
Mayor and Town Council
Section 2.1   Governing body.
Section 2.2   Town council: composition; terms of  office.
Section 2.3   Mayor: term of office: duties.
Section 2.4   Mayor  pro tempore.
ARTICLE III
Elections
Section 3.1   Regular municipal elections: conduct and method of  election.
Section 3.2   Election wards; ward boundaries.
Section 3.3   Election of  council members.
Section 3.4   Election of  the  mayor.
ARTICLE IV
Organization and Administration
Section 4.1   Form of  government.
Section 4.2   Administrative officers and employees.
Section 4.3   Consolidation of  administrative functions.
ARTICLE V
Alcoholic  Beverage Control
Section 5.1   Election authorized.
Section 5.2   Petition procedure.
Section 5.3   Election procedure: determination  of  results.
Section 5.4   Board of  alcoholic control: organization: use  of  funds.
Section 5.5   Subsequent elections.
Section 5.6   Limitations on  holding elections.
ARTICLE VI
Special Provisions
Section 6.1   Assessments for  street and sidewalk improvements: petition 
unnecessary.
Section 6.2   Power of  eminent domain.
Section 6.3   Economic development.
ARTICLE I
Incorporation, Corporate Powers and Boundaries
Section 1.1   Incorporation.
The Town of Valdese, North Carolina, in the County of Burke, and the
inhabitants thereof, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and
corporate, under the name and style of the "Town of Valdese," hereinafter at
times referred to as the "town."
Section 1.2   Powers.
The Town of Valdese shall have and may exercise all of the powers, duties,
rights, privileges and immunities, which are now, or hereafter may be,
conferred, either expressly or by implication, upon the Town of Valdese,
specifically, or upon municipal corporations, generally, by this charter, by
the State Constitution, or by general or local law.
State Law Reference:Corporate powers generally, G.S. 160A-11, 12.
Section 1.3   Corporate limits.
The corporate limits of the Town of Valdese shall be those existing at the time
of ratification of this charter, as the same are set forth on the official map
of the town, and as the same may be altered from time to time in accordance
with law. An official map or description showing the current town boundaries,
shall be maintained permanently in the office of the town clerk, and shall be
available for public inspection. Immediately upon alteration of the corporate
limits made pursuant to law, the appropriate changes to the official map or
description of the town shall be made.
State Law Reference: Corporate houndarics. G.S.  160A-21.
ARTICLE II
Mayor and Town Council
State Law Reference:  Mayor and council, G.S. 160A-66 et seq.
Section 2-1   Governing body.
   The mayor and town council, elected and constituted as herein set forth,
shall be the governing body of the town.  On behalf of the town, and in
conformity with applicable laws, the mayor and council may provide for the
exercise of all municipal powers, and shall be charged with the general
government of the town.
Section 2.2   Town council; composition; terms of office.
   The town council shall be composed of five (5) members, each of whom shall
be elected for terms of four (4) years in the manner provided by Article III of
this charter, provided they shall serve until their successors are elected and
qualified.
Section 2.3   Mayor; term of office; duties.
   The mayor shall be elected in the manner provided by Article II of this
charter to serve for a term of four years, or until his successor is elected
and qualified.  The mayor shall be the official head of the town government and
shall preside at all meetings of the council.  He shall have the right to vote
only when there is an equal number of votes in the affirmative and the negative
on any motion before the council.  The mayor shall exercise such powers and
perform such duties as presently are or hereafter may be conferred upon him by
the General Statutes of North Carolina, by this charter, and by the ordinances
of the town.  (Amended by Session Law 2000-28 of 1999, passed 6-29-2000)
Section 2.4   Mayor pro tempore.
   In accordance with applicable state laws, the town council shall appoint one
of its members to act as mayor pro tempore to perform the duties of the mayor
in the mayor’s absence or disability.  The mayor pro tempore as such shall have
no fixed term of office, but shall serve in such capacity at the pleasure of
the remaining members of the council.
ARTICLE III
Elections
Section 3.1   Regular municipal elections; conduct and method of election.
   Regular municipal elections shall be held in the town every two (2) years in
odd-numbered years and shall be conducted in accordance with the uniform
municipal election laws of North Carolina.  The mayor and members of the
council shall be elected according to the nonpartisan plurality method of
election.
Section 3.2   Election wards; ward boundaries.
   (a)   The town shall continue to be divided into five (5) single-member
election wards, numbered one through five, respectively.
   (b)   The election ward boundaries shall be those existing at the time of
the ratification of this charter, as the same are set forth by an official
written description.  The official written description of the election ward
boundaries shall be maintained permanently in the office of the town clerk, and
shall be available for public inspection.
   (c)   The town council is authorized, in accordance with state law, to
revise from time to time the election ward boundaries of the town.  Upon
alteration of the ward boundaries pursuant to law, the board shall cause to be
made the appropriate changes in the official written description of the
election ward boundaries.
Section 3.3   Election of council members.
   At the regular municipal elections in 1977 and quadriennially thereafter,
there shall be elected three (3) council members to represent, respectively,
election wards one, two and three, as hereinabove provided.  At the regular
municipal elections in 1979, and quadriennially thereafter, there shall be
elected two (2) council members to represent, respectively, election wards four
and five as hereinabove provided.  Each candidate for the office of council
member shall have been a resident of the ward from which he is a candidate for
a period of not less than 30 days next preceding the date of the election.
Candidates for council member shall be voted upon by the voters of the town
voting at large.
Section 3.4   Election of the mayor.
   At the regular municipal election in 2001, and quadrennially thereafter,
there shall be elected a mayor to serve a term of four years.  The mayor shall
be elected by the voters of the town voting at large.  (Amended by Session Law
2000-28 of 1999, passed 6-29-2000)
State Law Reference: Uniform Municipal Election Laws, G.S. 163-279 et seq.
ARTICLE IV
Organization and Administration
Section 4.1   Form of government.
   The town shall operate under the council-manager form of government, in
accordance with Part 2 of Article 7 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes.
State Law Reference: Council-manager form of government, G.S. 160A-147 et seq.
Section 4.2   Administrative officers and employees.
   Consistent with applicable state laws, the town council and town manager may
establish positions, provide for the appointment of administrative officers and
employees, and generally organize the town government in order to promote the
orderly and efficient administration of the affairs of the town.
Section 4.3   Consolidation of administrative functions.
   The town council and town manager may consolidate any two (2) or more
administrative positions in the town government or may assign the functions of
any position to the holder or holders of any other position, subject to the
Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act, and other applicable state
laws.
ARTICLE V
Alcoholic Beverage Control
Section 5.1   Election authorized.
   (a)   Subject to the limitations of Section 5.6 hereof, an election may at
any time be called in the town upon written request of the town council or upon
a petition to the appropriate board of elections conducting elections for the
town on the question of submitting to the qualified voters of the town the
question of establishing and operating in the town an alcoholic beverage
control store, or stores, as herein provided.
   (b)   The election shall be called in the town by theappropriate board of
elections upon the writtenrequest of the town council or upon a petitiontothe
board of elections signed by a number of voters of the town equal to at least
20 percent of the number of registered voters of the town according to the
registration figures certified by the State Board of Elections on the date the
petition is presented to the appropriate board of elections. In calling the
special election, the board of elections shall give at least 30 days'  public
notice of the election before the closing of the registration books for such
election, and the regis­ tration books shall close at the same time as for a
regular town election.  A  new registration of voters for special alcoholic
beverage control elec­ tions is not required,  and all qualified electors who
are properly registered prior to the registra­ tion for the special election, 
as well as those electors who register for the special alcoholic beverage
control election, shall be entitled to vote in the election.
Section 5.2   Petition procedure.
Unless otherwise specified in this article, the procedural requirements
relating to the petition shall be as provided in G.S. 18A-52(b), (c), (d), and
(e), except the question shall be 'For' or 'Against' municipal alcoholic
beverage control stores.
Section 5.3   Election procedure;  determination of results.
   (a)   The appropriate board of elections shall im­ mediately call an
election pursuant to the provi­ sions of G.S. 18A-52, subsections (a) through
(i), Which are hereby adopted, except that subsection (j) shall allow the
presentation of one or more of the following.
   (1)   'For' or 'Against' Off-Premises Sales Only of Unchilled Unfortified
Wine.
   (2)   'For' or 'Against' Off-Premises Sales Only of Unchilled Malt
Beverages.
   (b)   This section shall in no way be construed as to limit the provisions
of G.S.  18A-52,  but is solely to allow the additional questions as to on­
chilled malt beverages or wine to be presented to the voters in addition to
those contained in sub­ section (j),  pursuant to the 1973 amendment of the
North Carolina Legislature,  or to be in addition to any questions which might
later be allowed by the legislature.
   (c)   Those favoring the setting up and operation of alcoholic beverage
control stores in the Town of Valdese shall place a mark in the voting square
to the left of the words 'For Municipal Alcoholic Beverage Control Stores' 
printed on the ballot, and those opposed to setting up and operating al­
coholic beverage control stores in the Town of Valdese shall place a mark in
the voting square to to the left of the words'Against Municipal Alco­ holic
Beverage Control Stores',  printed on the same ballot. If a majority of the
votes cast in such election shall be for municipal alcoholic beverage control
stores, then an alcoholic beverage control store,  or alcoholic beverage
control stores,  may be set up and operated in the Town of Valdese as herein
provided. If a majority of the votes cast at the election are against municipal
alcoholic bev­ erage control stores,  then no alcoholic beverage control store
shall be set up or operated in the Town of Valdese under the provisions of this
article.
Section 5.4   Board of alcoholic control; organization; use of funds.
   (a)    If the operation of a municipal alcoholic beverage control store is
authorized under the provisions of this article,  the mayor and council shall
immediately create a town board of alcoholic control to be composed of a
chairman and two (2) other members who shall be well known for their
character,  ability and business acumen.  Said board shall be known and
designated as "The Town of Valdese Board of Alcoholic Control." The chairman of
said board shall be designated by the mayor and town council and shall serve
for his first term a period of three (3) years; one member shall serve for his
first term a period of two (2) years; the other member shall serve for a term
of one (I) year. All terms shall begin with the date of their appointment and
after such terms shall have expired,  the successors in office shall serve for
a period of three (3) years. The successors and any vacancies occurring in the
Town Board of Alcoholic Control shall be named or filled by the mayor and the
council of the town.
   (b)   The board of alcoholic control shall have all the powers and duties
imposed by the General Statutes on county boards of alcoholic control and shall
be subject to the powers and authority of the State Board of Alcoholic Control
the same as county boards of alcoholic control, as provided in the General
Statutes. The town board of alcoholic control and the operation of any town
liquor store authorized under the provisions of this section shall be subject
to and in pursuance with the provisions of Chapter 18A of the General Statutes,
except to the extent which the same article. Wherever the term "county" board
of alcoholic control appears in Chapter 18A, it shall include the Town of
Valdese board of alcoholic control. The net profits remaining after the first
deducting necessary working capital, salaries and expenses,  including those
sums expended for law enforcement and for education on the excessive use of
alcoholic beverages and for the rehabilita­ tion of alcoholics as required by
G.S. 18A-17, shall be distributed not less than annually as follows:
   (1)   10 percent of the net profits paid into the general fund of Burke
County to be used only for capital outlay for the county public schools;
   (2)   90 percent of the net profits paid into the general fund of the Town
of Valdese to be appropriated by the governing body of the town for any proper
governmental purpose.
Section 5.5   Subsequent elections.
The appropriate board of elections shall, upon request by the town council or
receipt of a petition signed by 20 percent of all registered voters of the
town, call a subsequent election, to be conducted in accordance with Sections
5.1  through 5.4 hereof, for the purpose ofvoting'For' or'Against' liquor
control stores. If,after the establishment of an alcoholic beverage control
store or stores in the town under the provisions of this article, a subsequent
election shall be held and, if, at such election a majority of the votes shall
be cast "Against Municipal Alcoholic Beverage Control Stores," the board of
alcoholic control shall, within three (3) months from the canvassing of such
votes and the declaration of the result there­ of, close such store or stores
and shall thereafter cease to operate the same. Within three (3) months
therefrom the board shall dispose of all alcoholic beverages on hand, all
fixtures, and all other property in the hands and under the control of the
board of alcoholic control and convert the same into cash and turn the same
over to the town finance officer. Thereafter, all Public, Public­Local, Private
and Session Laws applicable to the sale of intoxicating beverages within the
town in force and effect prior to the authorization to oper­ ate a municipal
alcoholic beverage control store shall be in full force and effect as if such
election had not been held,  until and unless another election is held under
the provisions of this article in which a majority of the votes shall be
cast"For Municipal Alcoholic Beverage Control Stores."
Section 5.6   Limitations on holding elections.
No election shall be called and held in the town under the provisions of this
article within three (3) years from the holding of the last election there­
under. It shall be the duty of the board of elections for the Town of Valdese
to order the special liquor election herein authorized within 60 days after
request by the town council or after the filing of a sufficient petition
requesting the same, but no election under this act shall be held on the day of
any biennial county or town general election or primary election,  or within 45
days of any such election.
Section 6.1   Assessments for street and sidewalk improvements; petition
unnecessary.
   (a)   In addition to any authority which is now or may hereafter be granted
by general law to the town for making street improvements, the town council is
hereby authorized to make street im­ provements and to assess the cost thereof
against abutting property owners in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
   (b)   The town council may order street improvements and assess the cost
thereof against the abutting property owners,  exclusive of the costs incurred
at street intersections, according to one or more of the assessment bases set
forth in Article 10 of Chapter 160A of theNorth Carolina General Statutes
without the necessity of a petition,  upon the finding by the board as a fact:
   (1)   that the street improvement project does not exceed 1,200 linear feet,
and
   (2)   that such street or part thereof is unsafe for vehicular traffic,  and
it is in the public interest to make such improvement, or
   (3)   that it is in the public interest to connect two streets, or portions
of a street already improved, or
   (4)   that it is in the public interest to widen a street, or part thereof,
which is already improved, provided,  that assessments for widening any street
or portion of street without a petition shall be limited to the cost of
widening and otherwise improving such street in accordance with the street
classification and improvement standards established by the town's thoroughfare
or major street plan for the particular street or part thereof to be widened
and improved under the authority granted by this article:
   (c)    For the purposes of this section the term "street improvement" shall
refer to the initial im­ provement of an unimproved, unpaved street, including
initial acquisition of rights-of-way, grading, surfacing, and the construction
of curb and gutter and street drainage facilities.  For the purposes of this
section, the term "sidewalk improvement" shall refer to the initial acquisition
of rights-of-way, laying out,  grading and surfacing of new sidewalks. The
provisions of this section are not intended to refer to those activities that
are normally included under the city's [town's] facing and repairs, curb and
gutter and sidewalk maintenance and repairs.
   (d)   rn addition to any authority which is now or may hereafter be granted
by general law to the town for making sidewalk improvements, the town council
is hereby authorized without the necessity of a petition, to make or to order
to be made sidewalk improvements or repairs according to standards and
specifications of the town, and to assess the total cost thereof against
abutting property owners,  according to one or more of the assessment bases set
forth in Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes; 
provided, however,  that regardless of the assessment basis or bases employed, 
the board of commissioners [town council] may order the cost of sidewalk
improvements made only on one side of a street to be assessed against property
owners abutting both sides of such street.
   (e)    In ordering street and sidewalk improvements without a petition and
assessing the cost thereof under authority of this article, the board of
commissioners [town council]  shall comply with the procedure provided by
Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes,  except those provisions
relating to the petition of property owners and the sufficiency thereof.
   (f)   The effect of the act of levying assessments under the authority of
this article shall for all purposes be the same as if the assessments were
levied under authority of Article 110 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes.
Section 6.2   Power of eminent domain.
The procedures provided in Article 9 of Chapter 136 of the General Statutes, as
specifically authorized by G.S.  136-66.3(c), shall be applicable to the town
in the case of acquisition of lands, easements, privileges, rights-of-way and
other interest in real property for streets,  sewer lines, water lines,
electric power lines, and other utility lines in the exercise of the power of
eminent domain. The town,  when seeking to acquire such property or rights or
easements therein or thereto, shall have the right and authority, at its option
and election, to use the provisions and procedures as authorized and provided
in G.S. 136-66.3(c) and Article 9 of Chapter 136 of the General Statutes for
any of such purposes without being limited to streets constituting a part of
the State Highway System;  provided, however,  that the provisions of this
section shall not apply with regard to properties owned by public service
corpo­ rations as defined in G.S. 160A-243(c), unless (1) the exercise of such
power of eminent domain is either consented to by the owner of the property to
be acquired by the town, or (2)  it is first adjudicated after notice and a
hearing that such acq uisition will not prevent or unreasonably impair the
continued devotion to the public use of such properties and the operation by
such public service corporation.
Section 6.3   Economic development.
   (a)   As used in this section, the term ""economic development project"
means an economic capital development project within a certain defined area or
areas of the town as established by the town council comprising one or more
lots,  buildings, or other improvements and including any public or private
facilities. Said project may include programs or facilities for improving
downtown redevelopment, 'pocket of proverty'  or other federal or state
assistance programs which the town council determines to be in need of economic
capital development or revitalization and which qualify for capital assistance
under applicable federal or state programs. (b) (1) In addition to any other
authority granted by law, the Town of Valdese may accept grants, expend funds,
make grants, or loans, acquire property and participate in economic development
projects which the town council determines will enhance the economic
development and revitalization of the town in accordance with the authority
granted herein.  Such project may include both public and private lots,
buildings or facilities financed in whole or in part by federal or state grants
(including but not limited to urban development action grants)  and may include
any capital expenditures which the town council finds necessary to comply with
conditions in any federal or state grant agreements and which the town council
finds will complement the project and improve the public tax base and general
economy of the town. Such projects may be partially financed with town funds
received from federal or state sources and being granted or loaned to the
private owner for said construction or renovation; in addition, other town
funds from any sources may be used for acquisition, construction, leasing and
operation of facilities by the town for the general public and for capital
improvements to public facilities which will support and enhance the private
facilities and the general economy of the town.
   (2)   When the town council finds that it will promote the economic
development or revitalization of the town, the town may acquire, construct, and
operate or participate in the acquisition, construction,  ownership and
operation of an economic development project or of specific buildings or
facilities within such a project and may comply with any state or federal
government grant requirements in connection therewith. The town may enter into
binding contracts with one or more private parties or governmental units with
respect to acquiring, constructing, owning oroperating such a project. Such a
contract may,  among other provisions, specify the responsibilities of the town
and the developer or developers and operators or owners of the project,
including the financing of the project. Such a contract may be entered into
before the acquisition of any real property necessary to the project by the
town or the developer or other parties.
   (c)   An economic development project may be constructed on property
acquired by the developer or developers, or on property directly acquired by
the town, or on property acquired by the Redevelopment Commission while
exercising powers, duties and responsibilities pursuant to G.S. 160A-505.
   (d)   In connection with an economic development project, the town may
convey interests in property owned by it, including air rights over public
facilities, as follows:
   (1)   If the property was acquired under the urban redevelopment law, the
property interests may be conveyed in accordance with said law.
   (2)   If the property was acquired by the town directly, the town may convey
property interests by any procedures set forth in its charter or the general
law or by private negotiation or sale.
   (e)   The town may contract for the operation of any public facility or
facilities included in an economic development project by a person,
partnership, firm or corporation, public or private. In addition, the town, 
upon consideration, may contract through lease or otherwise whereby it may
operate privately constructed parking facilities to serve the general public. 
Such a contract shall include provisions sufficient to assure that any such
facility or facilities are operated for the benefit of the citizens of the
town.  (Ratified 2/17/83)
RELATED LOCAL LAWS
(Reserved)
State Laws Governing The Organization And Procedures Of The Governing Body
ARTICLE 5.
FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
PART 1.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Section 160A-60.   Qualifications for appointive office.
Residence within a city shall not be a qualification for or prerequisite to
appointment to any city office not filled by election of the people, unless the
charter or an ordinance provides otherwise. City councils shall have authority
to fix qualifications for appointive offices, but shall have no authority to
waive qualifications for appointive offices fixed by charters or general laws.
Section 160A-61   Oath of office.
Every person elected by the people or appointed to any city office shall,
before entering upon the duties of the office, take and subscribe the oath of
office prescribed in Article VI,  Section 7  of the Constitution.  Oaths of
office shall be administered by some person authorized by law to administer
oaths, and shall be filed with the city clerk .
Section 160A-62   Officers to hold over until successors qualified.
All city officers, whether elected or appointed, shall continue to hold office
until their successors are chosen and qualified .  This section shall not apply
when an office or position has been abolished, when an appointed officer or
employee has been discharged, or when an elected officer has been removed from
office .
Section 160A-62   Vacancies.
A vacancy that occurs in an elective office of a city shall be filled by
appointment of the City Council.  If the term of the office expires immediately
following the next regular city election, of if the next regular city election
will be held within 90 days after the vacancy occurs, the person appointed to
fill the vacancy shall serve the remainder of the unexpired term.  Otherwise, a
successor shall be elected at the next regularly scheduled city election that
is held more than 90 days after the vacancy occurs, and the person appointed to
fill the vacancy shall serve only until the elected successor takes office .   
The elected successor shall then proceed to fill the remainder of the unexpired
term.  If the number of vacancies on the council is such that a quorum of the
council cannot be obtained,  the mayor shall appoint enough members to make up
a quorum, and the council shall then proceed to fill the remaining vacancies. 
If the number of vacancies on council is such that a quorum of the council
cannot be obtained and the office of mayor is vacant, the Governor may fill the
vacancies upon the request of any remaining member of the council, or upon the
petition of any five registered voters of the city.  Vacancies in appointive
offices shall be filled by the same authority that makes the initial
appointment.  This section shall not apply to vacancies in cities that have not
held a city election, levied any taxes, or engaged in any municipal functions
for a period of five years or more.
In cities whose election are conducted on a partisan basis, a person appointed
to fill a vacancy in an elective office shall be a member of the same political
party as the person whom he replaces if that person was elected as the nominee
of a political party.
Section 160A-64   Compensation of mayor and council.
   (a)   The council may fix its own compensation and the compensation of the
mayor and any other elected officers of the city by adoption of the annual
budget ordinance, but the salary of an elected officer other than a member of
the council may not be reduced during the then-current term of office unless he
agrees thereto. The mayor, councilmen, and other elected officers are entitled
to reimbursement for actual expenses incurred in the course of performing their
official duties at rates not in excess of those allowed to other city officers
and employees, or to a fixed allowance, the amount of which shall be
established by the council ;  for travel and other personal expenses of
office;  provided,  any fixed allowance so established during a term of office
shall not be increased during such term of office.
   (b)   All charter provisions in effect as of January 1, 1972, fixing the
compensation or allowances of any city officer or employee are repealed,  but
persons holding office or employment on January 1, 1972 shall continue to
receive the compensation and allowances then prescribed by law until the
council provides otherwise in accordance with this section or G.S. 160A-162.
Section 160A-65   Repealed by Session Laws 1975, c . 514  ,  s. 17.
Part 2.
Mayor and Council.
Section 160A-66   Composition of council.
Unless otherwise provided by its charter, each city shall be governed by a
mayor and a council of three members, who shall be elected from the city at
large for terms of two years.
Section 160A-67   General powers of mayor and council.
Except as otherwise provided by law,  the government and general management of
the city shall be vested in the council. The powers and duties of the mayor
shall be such as are conferred upon him by law, together with such other powers
and duties as may be conferred upon him by the council pursuant to law. The
mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the city for the purpose of
service of civil process, and for all ceremonial purposes.
Part 3.
Organization and Procedures of the Council
Section 160A-68   Organizational meeting of council.
   (a)   The council may fix the date and time of its organizational meeting. 
The organizational meeting may be held at any time after the results of the
municipal election have been officially determined and published pursuant to
municipal Subchapter IX of Chapter 163 of the General Statutes but not later
than the date and time of the first regular meeting of the council in December
after the results of the municipal election have been certified pursuant to
that Subchapter.  If the council fails to fix the date and time of its
organizational meeting, then the meeting shall be held on the date and at the
time of the first regular meeting in December after the results of the
municipal election have been certified pursuant to Subchapter IX of Chapter 163
of the General Statutes.
   (b)   At the organizational meeting, the newly elected mayor and councilmen
shall qualify by taking the oath of office prescribed in Article VI, Section 7
of the Constitution.  The organization of the council shall take place
notwithstanding the absence, death, refusal to serve, failure to qualify,  or
nonelection of one or more members, but at least a quorum of the members must
be present.
   (c)    All local acts or provisions of city,  charters which prescribed a
particular meeting day or date for the organizational meeting of a council are
hereby repealed.
* * *
Section 160A-70   Mayor pro tempore;  disability of mayor.
At the organizational meeting, the council shall elect from among its members a
mayor pro tempore to serve at the pleasure of the council. A councilman serving
as mayor pro tempore shall be entitled to vote on all matters and shall be
considered a councilman for all purposes, including the determination of
whether a quorum is present. During the absence of the mayor,  the council may
confer upon the mayor pro tempore any of the powers and duties of the mayor. If
the mayor should become physically or mentally incapable of performing the
duties of his office, the council may by unanimous vote declare that he is
incapacitated and confer any of his powers and duties on the mayor pro tempore.
Upon the mayor's declaration that he is no longer incapacitated, and with the
concurrence of a majority of the council, the mayor shall resume the exercise
of his powers and duties. In the event both the mayor and the mayor pro tempore
are absent from a meeting, the council may elect from its members a temporary
chairman to preside in such absence.
Section 160A-71.   Regular and special meetings; recessed and adjourned
meetings; procedure.
   (a)   The council shall fix the time and place for its regular meetings.  If
no action has been taken fixing the time and place for regular meetings,  a
regular meeting shall be held at least once a month at 10:00 A.M.  on the first
Monday of the month.
   (b)   (1)   The mayor,  the mayor pro tempore,  or any two members of the
council may at any time call a special council meeting by signing a written
notice stating the time and place of the meeting and subjects to be
considered.    The notice shall be delivered to the mayor and each councilman
or left at his usual dwelling place at least six hours before the meeting. Only
those items of business specified in the notice may be transacted at a special
meeting, unless all members are present or have signed a written waiver of
notice.    In addition to the procedures set out in this subsection or any city
charter,  a person or persons calling a special meeting of a city council shall
comply with the notice requirements of Article 33C of General Statutes Chapter
143.
   (2)   Special meetings may be held at any time when the mayor and all
members of the council are present and consent thereto, or when those not
present have signed a written waiver of notice.
   (3)   During any regular meeting, or any duly called special meeting, the
council may call or schedule a special meeting, provided that the motion or
resolution calling or scheduling any such special meeting shall specify the
time, place and purpose or purposes of such meeting and shall be adopted during
an open session.
   (b1)   Any regular or duly called special meeting may be recessed to
reconvene at a time place certain, or may be adjourned to reconvene at a time
and place certain, by the council.
   (c)   The council may adopt its own rules of procedure, not inconsistent
with the city charter, general law, or generally accepted principles of
parliamentary procedure.
Section 160A-72.   Minutes to be kept; ayes and noes.
Full and accurate minutes of the council proceedings shall be kept, and shall
be open to the inspection of the public. The results of each vote shall be
recorded in the minutes, and upon the request of any member of the council, the
ayes and noes upon any question shall be taken.
Section 160A-74   Quorum.
A majority of the actual membership of the council plus the mayor, excluding
vacant seats shall constitute a quorum.  A member who has withdrawn from a
meeting without being excused by a majority vote of the remaining members
present shall be counted as present for purposes of determining whether or not
a quorum is present.
Section 160A-75   Voting.
No member shall be excused from voting except upon matters involving the
consideration of his own financial interest or official conduct.  In all other
cases, a failure to vote by a member who is physically present in the council
chamber, or who has withdrawn without being excused by a majority vote of the
remaining members present,  shall be recorded as an affirmative vote.  The
question of the compensation and allowances of members of the council is not a
matter involving a member's own fmancial interest or official conduct.
An affirmative vote equal to a majority of all the members of the council not
excused from voting on the question in issue (including the mayor's vote in
case of an equal division) shall be required to adopt an ordinance, take any
action having the effect of an ordinance, authorize or commit the expenditure
of public funds, or make, ratify, or authorize any contract on behalf of the
city.  In addition, no ordinance nor any action having the effect of any
ordinance may be finally adopted on the date on which it is introduced except
by an affirmative vote equal to no greater than two thirds of all the actual
membership of the council, excluding vacant seats (not including the mayor
unless he has the right to vote on all questions before the council).  For
purposes of this section, and ordinance shall be deemed to have been introduced
on the date the subject matter is first voted on by the council.
* * *
Section 160A-80   Power of investigation; subpoena power.
   (a)   The council shall have power to investigate the affairs of the city,
and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the
production of evidence.
   (b)    If a person fails or refuses to obey a subpoena issued pursuant to
this section, the council may apply to the General Court of Justice for an
order requiring that its order be obeyed, and the court shall have jurisdiction
to issue these orders after notice to all proper parties.  No testimony of any
witnesses before the council pursuant to a subpoena issued in exercise of the
power conferred by this section may be used against him on the trial of any
civil or criminal action other than a prosecution for false swearing committed
on the criminal action other than a prosecution for false searing committed on
the examination.    If any person,  while under oath at an investigation by the
council, willfully swears falsely, he is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
   (c)   Repeated by Session Laws 1991 c. 512, s. 1, effective July 2, 1991.
Section 160A-81   Conduct of public hearings.
Public hearings may be held at any place within the city or within the county
in which the city is located.  The council may adopt reasonable rules governing
the conduct of public hearings,  including but not limited to rules (i)  fixing
the maximum time allotted to each speaker, (ii) providing for the designation
of maximum spokesman for groups of persons supporting or opposing the same
positions,  (iii)  providing for the selection of delegates from groups of
persons supporting or opposing the same positions when the number of persons
wishing to attend the hearing exceeds the capacity of the hall, and (iv)
providing for the maintenance of order and decorum in the conduct of the
hearing.
The council may continue any public hearing without further advertisement.  If
a public hearing is set for a given date and a quorum of the council is not
then present, the hearing shall be continued until the next regular council
meeting without further advertisement.
* * *
ARTICLE 8
Delegation and Exercise of the General Police Power
Section 160A-175   Enforcement of ordinances.
   (a)   A city shall have power to impose fines and penalties for violation of
its ordinances, and may secure IDJUnctions and abatement orders to further
insure compliance with its ordinances as provided by this section.
   (b)    Unless the council shall otherwise provide, violation of a city
ordinance is a misdemeanor or infraction as provided by G.S. 14-4. An ordinance
may provide by express statement that the maximum fine, term of imprisonment,
or infraction penalty to be imposed for a violation is some amount of money or
number of days less than the maximum imposed by G.S. 14-4.
   (c)   An ordinance may provide that violation shall subject the offender to
a civil penalty to be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature if
the offender does not pay the penalty within the prescribed period of time
after he has been cited for violation of the ordinance.
   (c1)   An ordinance may provide for the recovery of a civil penalty by the
city for violation of the fire prevention code of the State Building Code as
authorized under G.S. 143-139.
   (d)     An ordinance may provide that it may be enforced by an appropriate
equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction. In such case, 
the General Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders as
may be appropriate,  and it shall not be a defense to the application of the
city for equitable relief that there is an adequate remedy at law.
   (e)    An ordinance that makes unlawful a condition existing upon or use
made of real property may be enforced by injunction and order of a abatement,
and the General Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders. 
  When a violation of such an ordinance occurs the city may apply to the
appropriate division of the General Court of Justice for a mandatory or
prohibitory mJunction and order of abatement commanding the defendant to
correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the unlawful use of the property.
The action shall be governed in all respects by the laws and rules governing
civil proceedings, including the Rules of Civil Procedure in general and Rule
65 in particular.
In addition to an injunction, the court may enter an order of abatement as a
part of the judgement in the cause. An order of abatement may direct that
buildings or other structures on the property be closed,  demolished, or
removed;  that fixtures,  furniture, or other movable property be removed from
buildings on the property;  that grass and weeds be cut;  that improvements or
repairs be made; or that any other action be taken that is necessary to bring
the property into compliance with the ordinance. If the defendant fails or
refuses to comply with an injunction or with an order of abatement within the
time allowed by the court,  he may be cited for contempt,  and the city may
execute the order of abatement. The city shall have a lien on the property for
the cost of executing an order of abatement in the nature of a mechanic's and
materialman's lien. The defendant may secure cancellation of an order of
abatement by paying all costs of the proceedings and posting a bond for
compliance with the order. The bond shall be given with sureties approved by
the clerk of superior court in an amount approved by the judge before whom the
matter is heard and shall be conditioned on the defendant's full compliance
with the terms of the order of abatement within a time fixed by the judge.
Cancellation of an order of abatement shall not suspend or cancel an injunction
issued in conjunction therewith.
   (f)   Subject to the express terms of the ordinance, a city ordinance may be
enforced by any one, all, or a combination of the remedies authorized and
prescribed by this section.
   (g)   A city ordinance may provide, when appropriate, that each day's
continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct offense.
DIVISION II
CODE OF GENERAL ORDINANCES
PART 1
INTRODUCTION
Chapter 1.   Use of the Code and Penalties
CHAPTER 1
Use of the Code and Penalties
Section
1-1001   Definitions and rules of construction.
Section
1-1002   Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.
Section
1-1003   Section designations.
Section
1-1004   Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinances.
Section
1-1005   Criminal  penalty; not exclusive remedy; continuing violations.
Section
1-1006   Severability of parts of code.
Section
1-1007   Damaging ordinances prohibited.
Section 1-1001   Definitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances, the following
definitions and rules of construction shall be observed unless inconsistent
with the manifest intent of the town council or the context clearly requires
otherwise.
   Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day
is Saturday or Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
   Council. The words "the council" or "council" shall mean the town council of
the Town of Valdese.
   County. The words "the county" or "county" shall mean the County of Burke,
in the State of North Carolina, except as otherwise provided.
   Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
neuter.
   Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers.
   Mayor. The words "the mayor" or "mayor" shall mean the mayor of the Town of
Valdese.
   Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
   Number. Words used in the smgular mclude the plural, and words used in the
plural include the singular number.
   Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all
cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in
such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words
"affirm" and "affirmed."
   Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or land, shall include any
part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land.
   Person. The word "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership,
association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an
individual.
   Personal property. The words "personal property" include every species of
property except real property as herein defined.
   Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next
before and next after respectively.
   Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property.
   Real property. The words "real property" shall include lands, tenements and
hereditaments.
   Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the
curb line and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   Signature, subscription. The words "signa­ ture" or "subscription" include a
mark when the person cannot write.
   State. The word "state" shall be construed to mean the State of North
Carolina except as otherwise provided.
   Street. The word "street" shall mean and include any public way, road,
highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, land, viaduct, or bridge
and the approaches thereto within the town.
   Tenant, occupant. The words "tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or
land shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building
or land whether alone or with others.
   Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as
the past and present.
   Town. The words "the town" shall mean the Town of Valdese, in the County of
Burke and State of North Carolina, except as otherwise provided.
   Writing. The words "writing" and "written" shall include printing and any
other mode of representing words and letters.
   Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year except as otherwise
provided.
Section 1-1002   Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as
ordinances adopted prior to this code and included herein, shall be con­
sidered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
Section 1-1003   Section designations.
The headings of the several sections of this code printed in bold-face type are
intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall
not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the
section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of
such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
Section 1-1004   Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinances.
The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision
contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued, any offense committed,
any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the
repeal took effect or the ordinance expired.
When an ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous
ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect.
Section 1-1005   Criminal penalty; not exclusive remedy; continuing violations.
   (a)   ln accordance with G.S. 160A-75, and unless this code provides
otherwise, violation of any provision hereof shall be a misdemeanor as provided
in G.S. 14-4, punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding $50 or by
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days. An ordinance may provide by express
statement that the maximum fine or term of imprisonment to be imposed for its
violation shall be some figure or number of days less than the maximum
penalties prescribed by G.S. 14-4.
   (b)   By express statement, an ordinance contained herein may provide for
its enforcement by other remedies, as authorized in G.S. 160-175, including the
imposition of civil fines, the ordering of appropriate equitable relief,
including injunctions, or a combination of such remedies.
   (c)   An ordinance may provide, when appropriate, that each day's continuing
violation shall be a separate and distinct offense.
Editorial Note: G.S. 160A-175, authorizing municipalities to employ alternate
remedies in the enforcement of local ordinances, is set out in the Related
State Laws portion of this code. See page S-1 and following.
Section 1-1006   Severability of parts of code.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable and if
any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be
declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree
of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity
shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs
and sections of this code since the same would have been enacted by the council
without the incor­ poration in this code of any such unconstitu­ tional or
invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
Section 1-1007   Damaging ordinances prohibited.
No person shall tear or deface any of the town ordinances.
PART 2
Government and Administration
Chapter 1.   Town Council
Chapter 2.   Administrative Organization
Chapter 3.   Departmental Operating Organization (Reserved)
Chapter 4.   Financial Administration
Chapter 5.   Social Security and Retirement
Chapter 6.   Personnel Administration
Chapter 7.   Boards and Commissions
Chapter 8.   Elections
CHAPTER 1
Town Council
ARTICLE A
General
Section
2-1001   Composition of governing body.
Section
2-1002   Oaths of office.
Section
2-1003   Power to pass ordinances, resolutions, etc.
Section
2-1004   Powers with regard to town manager and as to bond employees.
Section
2-1005   Chief executive of town.
Section
2-1006   Duties of mayor generally.
Section
2-1007 through section 2-1010 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Meetings
Section
2-1011   Regular meetings; time and place.
Section
2-1012   Special meetings; notice.
Section
2-1013   Adjourned meetings.
Section
2-1014   Presiding officer.
Section
2-1015   Order of business.
Section
2-1016   Rules of procedure generally.
Section
2-1017   Quorum.
Section
2-1018   Previous questions.
Section
2-1019   Motions having precedence.
Section
2-1020   Motion to adjourn.
Section
2-1021   Committees generally.
Section
2-1022   When board elections to be by ballot.
Section
2-1023   Resignation of members.
Section
2-1024   When mayor may vote.
Section
2-1025   Mayor pro tempore.
Section
2-1026   Vacancies in office.
Section
2-1027   Members moving from town.
Section
2-1028 through section 2-1030 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Ordinances
Section
2-1031   Effective date.
Section
2-1032   Ordinances confined to one subject.
Section
2-1033   Official copy.
Section
2-1034   Ordinance book.
ARTICLE A
General
Section 2-1001   Composition  of governing body.
The governing body shall consist of a mayor and town council of five (5)
members, who shall be elected in accordance with the general laws of the state
applicable to municipal elections.
Charter Reference: Composition of governing hoard, charter sec.
Section 2-1002   Oaths of office.
The mayor and each councilman-elect shall, before entering upon the duties of
his office, take and subscribe, before some person lawfully entitled to
administer oaths, an oath or affirmation to support the constitution of the
United States and the constitution of the state and the laws made pursuant
thereto; and to faithfully perform the duties of their office; which oath or
affirmation shall be entered upon the minutes of the town council subscribed as
aforesaid and attested by the officer administering the same.
State Law Reference: G.S. 160A-61 (See Related Suite Laws)
Section 2-1003   Power to pass ordinances, resolutions, etc.
The council shall have power to pass ordinances, resolutions or bylaws, for the
better government of the town, not inconsistent with the charter or laws of the
land.
State Law Reference: G.S. 160A-174.
Section 2-1004   Powers with regard to town manager and as to bond employees.
The council shall have power to prescribe the duties and fix the compensation
of the town manager and to set the bonds of all employees of the town. (As
amended 11/3/80)
Section 2-1005   Chief executive of town.
The mayor shall be chief executive of the town. (Code 1970. Sec. 2-24)
Stale Law Reference: Duties of the mayor: G.S. 160A-69.
Section 2-1006   Duties of mayor generally.
   It shall be the duty of the mayor to:
   (a)   Keep himself informed as to the town's business.
   (b)   Preside over the meetings of the town council.
   (b)   Appoint such committees and outline their powers and duties as the
council may direct.
   (d)   Make such recommendations as he deems necessary or expedient to the
council.
   (e)   Appear on behalf of the town at public occasions.
State Law Reference: Powers and duties of mayor conferred by law and by council
pursuant to law: G.S. 160A-67.
Section 2-1007 through section 2-1010 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Meetings
Section 2-1011   Regular meetings: time and place.
   There shall be a regular meeting of the council at the town hall, on the
first Monday in each month, at 6:00 p.m., unless another place, date or time
shall be designated, in which case, each member of the council shall be so
notified. (As amended by Ord. of 3/3/80; Ord. of 8/3/15)
Section 2-1012   Special meetings; notice.
   Special meetings of the council may be held according to the procedures of
G.S. 160A-71.
State Law Reference: Special meetings: G.S. 160A-71(b). (See Related State Laws
portion of this Code)
Section 2-1013   Adjourned meetings.
   If a quorum shall fail to attend any regular or special meeting of the
council, or if for any reason the meeting shall fail to complete the
transaction of the business before the meeting, the meeting may be adjourned to
any date prior to the next regular meeting agreed upon by a majority of the
members present.
Section 2-1014   Presiding officer.
   The mayor, when present, shall preside at all meetings of the council. In
case of the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tempore shall preside, and in
the absence of both, some member of the board may be designated by the members
present as presiding officer for that meeting.
State Law Reference: Mayor to preside over meetings: voting right. G.S. 160A-
69: 160A-70 mayor pro tempore.
Section 2-1015   Order of business.
   (a)   The order of business at all regular meetings of the council shall be
as follows:
   (1)   Reading of minutes of last meeting.
   (2)   Corrections, if any, made in same.
   (3)   Reports of committees.
   (4)   Unfinished business.
   (5)   Reading any communication by the town clerk.
   (6)   New business.
   (b)   If the council directs any matter to be the special business of a
future meeting, the same shall have precedence over all other business at such
meeting.
   (c)   No proposition shall be entertained by the mayor until it has been
seconded, and every proposition shall, when required by the mayor or any
member, be reduced to writing.
Section 2-1016   Rules of procedure generally.
Except as otherwise provided by this code or by ordinance, the procedure of the
council shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order.
Section 2-1017   Quorum.
A majority of the actual membership of the council shall constitute a quorum.
State Law Reference: Majority of the actual membership of the governing body
constitutes a quorum. G.S. 160A-74. (See Related State Laws)
Section 2-1018   Previous questions.
The previous question may be called at any time by a majority of the members of
the board present. The "ayes" and "nayes" may be called for by any member.
(Code 1970, Sec. 2-14)
Section 2-1019   Morions having precedence.
   (a)   When a question is under consideration, no motion shall be received,
except as follows:
   (1)   To lay on the table.
   (2)   To postpone to a time certain.
   (3)   To postpone indefinitely.
   (4)   To refer to a committee.
   (5)   To amend.
   (6)   To strike out or insert.
   (7)   To divide.
   (b)   Motions for any of these purposes shall have precedence in the order
named. (Code 1970, Sec. 2-15)
Section 2-1020   Motion to adjourn.
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be decided without
debate. (Code 1970, Sec. 2-16)
Section 2-1021   Committees generally.
All committees shall, unless otherwise ordered, be appointed by the mayor. All
reports of committees shall be in writing, if required by the Mayor, and
committeemen shall receive such compensation for extra and special service as
the board may designate.
Section 2-1022   When board elections to be by ballot.
All elections by the board shall be by ballot, if required by any two (2)
members present. (Code 1970, Sec. 2-18)
Section 2-1023   Resignation of members.
Resignation of any member of the council shall be in writing and the
resignation shall lie on the table until the next regular meeting unless
considered by unanimous consent.
Section 2-1024   When mayor may vote.
When there is an equal division of the board upon any question, or in the
election of officers, the mayor may vote to break a tie, but shall have no vote
under any other circumstances. (Code 1970, Sec. 2-20)
State Law Reference: G.S. 160A-79.
Section 2-1025   Mayor pro tempore.
At the first meeting after their election the council shall select one of their
member to act as mayor pro tempore during his term of office, and he shall, in
case of sickness or absence of the mayor, perform all the duties of the mayor,
and shall be compensated for his services as prescribed by the council.
State Law Reference: G.S. I60A-70. (See Related State Laws)
Section 2-1026   Vacancies in office.
Any vacancy caused by the death, resignation or disqualification of a member of
the council shall be filled by a majority vote of the council.
State Law Reference: G.S. I60A-63. (See Related State Laws)
Section 2-1027   Members moving from town.
If any member of the council shall move his residence from the town, his office
shall at once be declared vacant, and shall be filled as provided by section
2-1026.
Section 2-1028 through section 2-1030 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Ordinances
Section 2-1031   Effective date.
All ordinances shall be effective after the ratification thereof except
ordinances specifying some other effective date or ordinances required by state
law to be effective only after having met specific date requirements.
Section 2-1032   Ordinances confined to one subject.
All ordinances shall be confined to one subject except appropriation ordinances
which shall be confined to the subject of appropriation only.
Section 2-1033   Official copy.
A true copy of an ordinance, which has been duly enacted by the council, signed
by the mayor, and attested to by the clerk shall be known as an official copy
of any ordinance for the town. All ordinances or a true copy thereof shall be
inserted in this code in the proper chapter.
Section 2-1034   Ordinance book.
The clerk shall file a true copy of each ordinance, until it is codified in
this code, in an ordinance book separate and apart from the council's minute
book. The ordinance book shall be appropriately indexed and maintained for
public inspection in the office of the clerk.
State Law Reference: For similar requirements on the ordinance book, see G.S.
160A-78.
CHAPTER 2
Administration Organization
ARTICLE A
Administrative Offices
Section
2-2001   Appointment of town manager, qualifications generally.
Section
2-2002   Manager to be chief administrative officer.
Section
2-2003   Residence to be chief administrative officer.
Section
2-2004   Council members not eligible to be manager.
Section
2-2005   Term of manager; removal.
Section
2-2006   Powers as to town officers and employees-generally
Section
2-2007   Same; removals.
Section
2-2008   Same; council not to interfere.
Section
2-2009   Duties of manager generally.
Section
2-2010   Appointment of town clerk.
Section
2-2011   Duties of clerk generally.
Section
2-2012   Appointment of town treasurer.
Section
2-2013   Duties of treasurer generally.
Section
2-2014   Appointment of town attorney.
Section
2-2015   Duties of town attorney generally.
Section
2-2016   Appointment of town tax collector.
Section
2-2017   Duties of town tax collector generally.
Section
2-2018   Appointment of town engineer.
Section
2-2019   Duties of town engineer generally.
Section
2-2020   Appointment of superintendent of public work.
Section
2-2021   Duties of superintendent of public works generally.
Section
2-2022   Appointment of town accountant.
Section
2-2023   Duties of town accountant generally.
Section
2-2024 through section 2-2030 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Other Administrative Provisions
Section
2-2031   Interest of town officers or employees in town contracts.
Section
2-2032   Consolidation of offices.
Section
2-2033   Town office hours.
Appendix A   Town of Valdese Personnel Policy
ARTICLE A
Administrative Offices
Section 2-2001   Appointment of town manager; qualification generally.
   The council shall appoint an officer whose title shall be town manager. He
shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and administrative
qualifications with special reference to his actual experience in, or his
knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to the duties of his office as
outlined in this article. (Code 1970, Sec. 2-28)
Section 2-2002   Manager to be chief administrative officer.
The manager shall be the chief administrative officer and the head of the
administrative branch of the town government. (Code 1970, Sec. 2-29)
State Law Reference: Powers and duties of the manager. G.S. 160A-148
Section 2-2003   Residence qualifications of manager.
   At the time of the town manager’s appointment, the manager need not be a
resident of the town or the State. During the manager’s tenure of office, the
manager shall reside within the town; provided, however, after a town manager
has been appointed and has established residency within the town, the town
council in its discretion may waive this residency requirement upon such terms
and conditions as the town council may determine. (Code 1970, Sec. 2-30; Res.
of 3/3/14)
Section 2-2004   Council members not eligible to be manager.
   No person elected to membership on the council shall, subsequent to such
election, be eligible for appointment as manager until one (1) year has elapsed
following the expiration of the term for which he was elected.
State Law Reference: For similar state law provisions on ineligibility of broad
members to be manager, see G. S. 160A-151.
Section 2-2005   Term of manager; removal.
   The manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term but may be removed by
a majority vote of the council. At least 30 days before the removal may become
effective the manager shall be furnished with a formal statement in the form of
a resolution passed by a majority vote of the members of the council.
Section 2-2006   Powers as to town officers and employees - generally.
   The manager shall be responsible to the council for the proper
administration of all affairs of the town placed in his charge, and to that
end, subject to the provisions of the charter and except as otherwise provided
in this code or by ordinance or resolution, he shall have the power to appoint
and remove all officers and employees in administrative service, of the town,
except those whose appointment is otherwise provided for under the General
Statutes or the charter of the town; but the manager may authorize the head of
a department or office responsible to him to appoint and remove subordinates in
such department or office. Appointments made by, or under the authority of, the
manager shall be on the basis of executive and administrative ability and of
the training and experience of such appointees in the work which they are to
perform. Subject to the personnel policy, set forth in Part 2, Ch. 2, Art. B,
Appendix A, all such appointments shall be without definite term except
provisional, temporary or emergency service.
Section 2-2007   Same: removals.
   Subject to the provisions of the personnel policy, set forth in Part 2, Ch.
2, Art. B, Appendix A, any officer or employee to whom the manager, or a head
of a department or office may appoint a successor, may be removed by the
manager or other appointing officer at any time. In the event a department head
is dismissed, he shall possess the right to appeal such dismissal to the
council within 30 days. Otherwise. and subject to the provisions of the
personnel policy the decision of the manager, or other appointing officer,
shall be final and there shall be no appeal therefrom to any other office, body
or court whatsoever.
Section 2-2008   Same; council not to interfere.
   Neither the council nor any of its committees or members shall direct or
request the appointment of any person to, or his removal from, office by the
manager or any of his subordinates, or in any manner take part in the
appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administrative service
of the town. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members
shall deal with the administrative service solely through the manager and
neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate
of the manager either publicly or privately.
Section 2-2009   Duties of manager generally.
   It shall be the duty of the manager to:
   (1)   Act as director of finance and purchasing agent.
   (2)   Act as chief conservator of the peace within the town.
   (3)   Supervise the administration of the affairs of the town.
   (4)   See that the provisions of this code and other ordinances of the town
and the laws of the state are enforced.
   (5)   Make such recommendations to the council concerning the affairs of the
town as may seem to him desirable.
   (6)   Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs
of the town.
   (7)   Prepare and submit to the council the annual budget estimate.
   (8)   Prepare and submit to the council such report as may be required by
that body.
   (9)   Perform such other duties as may be required of him by ordinance or
resolution of the council.
   (10)   Delegating authority to purchase apparatus, supplies, materials or
equipment.
   (a)   Graft of Authority. Subject to the restrictions and conditions
hereinafter provided, when purchasing apparatus, supplies, materials or
equipment for use by the Town of Valdese, in addition to such authority as may
be provided by law and/or otherwise delegated by the Town Council, the Town
Manager shall have the authority to:
   1.   prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans and/or specifications setting
forth a complete description of the item(s) to be purchased and the
characteristics, features and/or requirements therefore;
   2.   include, where appropriate, in specifications for the item(s) to be
purchased an opportunity for bidders to purchase as trade-in specified personal
property owned by the Town of Valdese;
   3.   advertise, or otherwise secure bids, for such items(s), if required
under applicable law;
   4.   award contracts for the purchase of the item(s) and, where applicable,
award contracts for the purchase of the item(s) and the sale of trade-in
property;
   5.   reject bids;
   6.   readvertise to receive bids;
   7.   waive bid bond or deposit requirements,
   8.   waive performance and payment bond requirements, and,
   9.   execute and deliver the purchase contract(s).
   (b)   Report. At the first meeting of the Town Council following the award
of any contracts pursuant to this Ordinance, the Town Manager shall submit a
report to the Town Council summarizing the bids received and the contract(s)
awarded. Such report shall be included in the minutes of the meeting at which
it is received.
   (c)   Extent of Authority. Except in cases of sole source purchases pursuant
to NC General Statute 143-129(f) and cases of purchases from established
contracts pursuant to NC General Statute 143-129(g), unless otherwise provided
by law, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the purchase of all
apparatus, supplies, materials or equipment required for use by the Town of
Valdese.
   (d)   No Limitation of Other Authority. The provisions of this chapter are
not intended to limit, restrict or revoke, in any manner, authority otherwise
granted and/or delegated to the Town Manager by statute, law or action of the
Town Council.
   (e)   Appropriation Required. No purchase shall be made by the Town Manager
under authority of this chapter unless an appropriation of such purpose has
been authorized in the annual budget, or by supplemental appropriation or
budget appropriation amendment duly adopted by the Town Council.
   (f)   Application of General Statutes. In acting pursuant to the authority
delegated by this chapter, the Town Manager shall comply with the requirements
of Article 8, Chapter 143 of the North Carolina General Statutes, as from time
to time amended, modified, supplemented, revised, or superseded, to the same
extent as would have otherwise applied to the Town Council.
   (g)   Authority. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of NC
General Statute 143-129(a). (Ord. of 2-23-98)
   (11)   Prescribing procedures for disposing of personal property valued at
less than $5,000.
   (a)   The Town Manager is hereby authorized to dispose of any surplus
personal property owned by the town, whenever he or she determines, in his or
her discretion that:
   1.   the item or group of items has a fair market value of less than five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00);
   2.   the property is no longer necessary for the conduct of public business;
and,
   3.   sound property management principles and financial considerations
indicate that the interests of the town would best be served by disposing of
the property.
   (b)   The Town Manager may dispose of any such surplus personal property by
any means which he or she judges reasonably calculated to yield the highest
attainable sale price in money or other consideration, including but not
limited to the methods of sale provided in Article 12 of NC General Statutes,
Chapter 160A. Such sale may be public or private, and with or without notice
and minimum waiting period.
   (c)   The surplus property shall be sold to the party who tenders the
highest offer, or exchange for any property or services useful to the town if
greater value may be obtained in that manner, and the Town Manager is hereby
authorized to execute and deliver any applicable title documents. If no offers
are received within a reasonable time, the Town Manager may retain the
property, obtain any reasonably available salvage value, or cause it to be
disposed of as waste material. No surplus property may be donated to any
individual or organization except by resolution of the Town Council.
   (d)   The Town Manager shall keep a record of all property sold under
authority of this chapter and that record shall generally describe the property
sold or exchanged, to whom it was sold, or with whom exchanged, and the amount
of money or other consideration received for each sale or exchange.
   (e)   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of NC General
Statutes 160A-266(c). (Ord. of 2-23-98)
State Law Reference: Duties of manager, G.S. 160A-148.
Section 2-2010   Appointment of town clerk.
   The town council shall appoint a town clerk to perform the duties-specified
below.
Section 2-2011   Duties of clerk generally.
   It shall be the duty of the clerk to:
   (1)   Act as secretary to the council.
   (2)   Keep a true record of all the proceedings of the council.
   (3)   Keep the original of all ordinances in a book especially provided for
that purpose.
   (4)   Act as custodian for all the books, papers, records and journals of
the council.
   (5)   Perform other duties as may be required of him by law or by the
council.
State Law Reference: Duties of clerk specified. G.S. 160A-71.
Section 2-2012   Appointment of town treasurer.
   The town manager shall appoint a town treasurer to perform the duties
specified below.
Section 2-2013   Duties of treasurer generally.
   It shall be the duty of the treasurer to:
   (1)   Receive and faithfully keep moneys which he shall receive on behalf of
the town.
   (2)   Keep an accurate account of all moneys deposited with him or by him
and disbursed by him for the town.
   (3)   Supply the council with such information as it may require of him
relative to finances.
   (4)   Make a semiannual report to the council of all receipts and
disbursements of funds of the town.
   (5)   Honor all orders drawn on him signed by the assistant treasurer,
attested by the treasurer and under the seal of the town, and for which purpose
an appropriation has been made, that are presented to him.
State Law Reference: Duties of finance officer or treasurer. G.S. 159-25.
Section 2-2014   Appointment of town attorney.
   The town council shall appoint a town attorney to perform the duties
specified below.
Section 2-2015   Duties of town attorney generally.
   It shall be the duty of the attorney to:
   (1)   Prosecute for and defend suits against the town.
   (2)   Advise the mayor. manager, council, or any other officer of the town
in regard to matters connected with the town's business.
   (3)   Attend meetings of the council when requested to do so by it.
   (4)   Draw such deeds, contracts, bonds, notes and other legal papers as may
be required for the proper conduct of the town's business.
   (5)   Draw all ordinances granting franchises.
   (6)   Approve all ordinances as to form before their introduction.
State Law Reference: Duties of town attorney. G.S. 160A-173.
Section 2-2016   Appointment of town tax collector.
   The town council shall provide for the appoint­ ment of a tax collector to
perform the duties specified below.
Section 2-2017   Duties of town tax collector generally.
   It shall be the duty of the tax collector to:
   (1)   Collect all taxes due the town.
   (2)   Make an accounting to the town treasurer at the end of each month.
   (3)   Pay over to the treasurer such moneys as are collected by him for the
account of each separate fund according to the tax levy.
   (4)   Deliver a list of all unpaid taxes with the reason therefor as
ascertainable to the council.
   (5)   Supply the manager and council with such information as they may
require of him relative to his department.
   (6)   Make a monthly report to the council listing therein all funds
collected by him.
   (7)   Act as registrar of motor vehicles as provided in section
7-1011 et seq.
State Law Reference:Duties of tax collector. G.S. 105-349.350.
Section 2-2018   Appointment of town engineer.
   The town manager shall appoint a town engineer to perform the duties
specified below.
Section 2-2019   Duties of town engineer generally.
   It shall be the duty of the town engineer to:
   (1)   Make an accurate survey of the town with respect to zoning
requirements and town limits and keep the same up to date.
   (2)   Do such futher acts as the council or the manager shall require.
Section 2-2020   Appointment of superintendent of public works.
   The town manager shall appoint a superinten­ dent of public works to perform
the duties specified below.
Section 2-2021   Duties of superintendent of public works generally.
   It shall be the duty of the superintendent of public works to:
   (1)   Supervise and maintain the public works department.
   (2)   Supervise the construction and maintenance of streets.
   (3)   Supervise the construction and maintenance of water and sewer lines.
   (4)   Supervise the collection and disposal of all garbage and rubbish.
   (5)   Supervise the maintenance of all town vehicles.
   (6)   Do such other and further acts as the council or the manager may
require. (As amended 11/3/80)
Section 2-2022   Appointment of town accountant.
   The town council shall. on the recommendation of the manager, appoint an
accountant for the town.
Section 2-2023   Duties of town accountant generally.
   It shall be the duty of the town accountant to:
   (1)   Regularly audit and report true findings of all town departments as
often as the council shall prescribe.
   (2)   Do such other and further acts as the council or the manager may
require.
Section 2-2024 through section 2-2030 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Other Administrative Provisions
Section 2-2031   Interest of town officers or employees in town contracts.
   No member of the council or other officer or employee of the town shall be
pecuniarily in­ terested, directly or indirectly, in any contract made or
entered into by the council. nor in any matter where the rights or liabilities
of the town are, or may be, involved.
State Law Reference: Conflicts of interest. G.S. 14-234.
Section 2-2032   Consolidation of offices.
   Except as otherwise provided by law, the council may in its discretion
consolidate any two (2) or more offices and assign the duties of both offices
to one (1) or more persons
Section 2-2033   Town office hours.
   The town office will be open from 8:00a.m. to 5:00p.m. Monday through
Friday. The office will be closed on Saturday, Sunday and on all legal
holidays. (Code 1970, Sec. 2-1)
APPENDIX A
Town of Valdese Personnel Policy
Valdese, North Carolina
November, 2007
BE IT RESOLVED by the Town Council of the Town of Valdese that the following
policies apply to the appointment, classification, benefits, salary, promotion,
demotion, dismissal, and conditions of employment of the employees of the Town
of Valdese.
      Page
ARTICLE I.   GENERAL PROVISIONS   2-8.2
   Section 1.   Purpose of the Policy   2-8.2   
   Section 2.   At Will Employment   2-8.2
   Section 3.   Merit Principle   2-8.2
   Section 4.   Responsibilities of the Town Council   2-8.2
   Section 5.   Responsibilities of the Town Manager   2-8.2
   Section 6.   Responsibilities of the Human Resources Officer   2-8.3
   Section 7.   Application of Policies, Plan, Rules and Regulations   2-8.3
   Section 8.   Departmental Rules and Regulations   2-8.3
   Section 9.   Definitions   2-8.3
ARTICLE II.   POSITION CLASSIFICATION PLAN   2-8.4
   Section 1.   Purpose   2-8.4
   Section 2.   Composition of the Position Classification Plan   2-8.4
   Section 3.   Use of the Position Classification Plan   2-8.3
   Section 4.   Administration of the Position Classification Plan   2-8.4
   Section 5.   Authorization of New Positions and the Position Classification
Plan   2-8.5
   Section 6.   Request for Reclassification   2-8.5
ARTICLE III.   THE PAY PLAN   2-8.5
   Section 1.   Definition   2-8.5
   Section 2.   Administration and Maintenance   2-8.5
   Section 3.   Starting Salaries   2-8.5
   Section 4.   Trainee Designation and Provisions   2-8.6
   Section 5.   Probationary Pay Increases   2-8.6
   Section 6.   Performance Pay   2-8.6
   Section 7.   Performance Pay Bonus   2-8.6
   Section 8.   Salary Effect of Promotions, Demotions, Transfers and
Reclassifications   2-8.6
   Section 9.   Salary Effect of Salary Range Revisions   2-8.7
   Section 10.   Transition to a New Salary Plan   2-8.7
   Section 11.    Effective Date of Salary Changes   2-8.7
   Section 12.   Overtime Pay Provisions   2-8.7
   Section 13.   Call-back and Stand-by Pay   2-8.8
   Section 14.   Payroll Deduction   2-8.8
   Section 15.   Hourly Rate of Pay   2-8.8
   Section 16.   Pay for Interim Assignment in a Higher Level
Classification   2-8.8
   Section 17.   Longevity Pay   2-8.8
ARTICLE IV.   RECRUITMENT AND EMPLOYMENT   2-8.9
   Section 1.   Equal Employment Opportunity Policy   2-8.9
   Section 2.   Implementation of Equal Employment   2-8.9
   Section 3.   Recruitment, Selection and Appointment   2-8.9
   Section 4.   Probationary Period   2-8.10
   Section 5.   Promotion   2-8.10
   Section 6.   Demotion   2-8.10
   Section 7.   Transfer   2-8.11
ARTICLE V.   CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT   2-8.11
   Section 1.   Work Schedule   2-8.11
   Section 2.   Political Activity   2-8.11
   Section 3.   Outside Employment   2-8.11
   Section 4.   Dual Employment   2-8.12
   Section 5.   Employment of Relatives   2-8.12
   Section 6.   Harassment   2-8.12
   Section 7.   Acceptance of Gifts and Favors   2-8.12
   Section 8.   Performance Evaluation   2-8.12
   Section 9.   Safety   2-8.13
   Section 10.   Direct Deposit   2-8.13
   Section 11.   Use of Town Supplies and Equipment   2-8.13
   Section 12.   Use of Tobacco Products Regulated   2-8.13
ARTICLE VI.   EMPLOYEE BENEFITS   2-8.14
   Section 1.   Eligibility   2-8.14
   Section 2.   Group Health and Hospitalization Insurance   2-8.14
   Section 3.   Group Life Insurance   2-8.14
   Section 4.   Other Optional Group Insurance Plans and Benefits   2-8.14
   Section 5.   Retirement   2-8.14
   Section 6.   Supplemental Retirement Benefits   2-8.14
   Section 7.   Social Security   2-8.14
   Section 8.   Workers’ Compensation   2-8.14
   Section 9.   Unemployment Compensation   2-8.15
   Section 10.   Tuition Assistance Program   2-8.15
   Section 11.   Law Enforcement Separation Allowance   2-8.15
ARTICLE VII.   HOLIDAYS AND LEAVES OF ABSENCE   2-8.16
   Section 1.   Policy   2-8.16
   Section 2.   Holidays   2-8.16
   Section 3.   Holidays: Effect on Other Types of Leave   2-8.16
   Section 4.   Holidays: Compensation When Work is Required or Regularly
Scheduled Off for Shift Personnel   2-8.16
   Section 5.   Vacation Leave   2-8.16
   Section 6.   Vacation Leave: Use by Probationary Employees   2-8.16
   Section 7.   Vacation Leave: Accrual Rate   2-8.16
   Section 8.   Vacation Leave: Maximum Accumulation   2-8.16
   Section 9.   Vacation Leave: Manner of Taking   2-8.17
   Section 10.   Vacation Leave: Payment upon Separation or Retirement   2-8.17
   Section 11.   Vacation Leave: Payment upon Death   2-8.17
   Section 12.   Sick Leave   2-8.17
   Section 13.   Sick Leave: Accrual Rate, Accumulation, and Manner of
Taking   2-8.17
   Section 14.   Transfer of Sick Leave from Previous Employer   2-8.18
   Section 15.   Sick Leave:   Medical Certification   2-8.18
   Section 16.   Leave Pro-rated   2-8.18
   Section 17.   Family and Medical Leave   2-8.18
   Section 18.   Medical and Family Leave Certification   2-8.19
   Section 19.   Leave Without Pay   2-8.19
   Section 20.   Family Medical Leave and Leave Without Pay: Retention and
Continuation of Benefits   2-8.19
   Section 21.   Workers’ Compensation Leave   2-8.20
   Section 22.   Military Leave   2-8.20
   Section 23.   Reinstatement Following Military Service   2-8.20
   Section 24.   Civil Leave   2-8.20
   Section 25.   Parental School Leave   2-8.21
   Section 26.   Adverse Weather and Emergency Conditions Policy   2-8.21
ARTICLE VIII. SEPARATION AND REINSTATEMENT   2-8.22
   Section 1.   Types of Separations   2-8.22
   Section 2.   Resignation   2-8.22
   Section 3.   Reduction in Force   2-8.22
   Section 4.   Disability   2-8.22
   Section 5.   Voluntary Retirement   2-8.22
   Section 6.   Death   2-8.22
   Section 7.   Dismissal   2-8.22
   Section 8.   Reinstatement   2-8.22
   Section 9.   Rehiring   2-8.22
ARTICLE IX.   UNSATISFACTORY JOB PERFORMANCE AND DETRIMENTAL PERSONAL
CONDUCT   2-8.23
   Section 1.   Disciplinary Action for Unsatisfactory Job Performance   2-8.23
   Section 2.   Unsatisfactory Job Performance Defined   2-8.23
   Section 3.   Communication and Warning Procedures   2-8.23
         Preceding Disciplinary Action for Unsatisfactory Job Performance   2-
8.23
   Section 4.   Disciplinary Action for Detrimental Personal Conduct   2-8.23
   Section 5.   Detrimental Personal Conduct Defined   2-8.23
   Section 6.   Pre-dismissal Conference   2-8.24
   Section 7.   Non-Disciplinary Suspension   2-8.24
   Section 8.   Substance Abuse Policy   2-8.24
ARTICLE X.   GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE AND ADVERSE ACTION APPEAL   2-8.25
   Section 1.   Policy   2-8.25
   Section 2.   Grievance Defined   2-8.25
   Section 3.   Purposes of the Grievance Procedure   2-8.25
   Section 4.   Procedure   2-8.25
   Section 5.   Role of the Human Resources Officer   2-8.26
   Section 6.   Grievance and Adverse Action Appeal Procedure for
Discrimination   2-8.26
ARTICLE XI.   RECORDS AND REPORTS   2-8.27
   Section 1.   Public Information   2-8.27
   Section 2.   Access to Confidential Records   2-8.27
   Section 3.   Personnel Actions   2-8.27
   Section 4.   Records of Former Employees   2-8.27
   Section 5.   Remedies of Employees Objecting to Material in File   2-8.27
   Section 6.   Examining and/or Copying Confidential Material without
Authorization   2-8.28
   Section 7.   Destruction of Records Regulated   2-8.28
ARTICLE XII.   IMPLEMENTATION OF POLICIES   2-8.28
   Section 1.   Conflicting Policies Repealed   2-8.28
   Section 2.   Separability   2-8.28
   Section 3.   Effective Date   2-8.28
   Section 4.   Amendments   2-8.28
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1.   Purpose of the policy.
   It is the purpose of this policy and the rules and regulations set forth to
establish a fair and uniform system of personnel administration for all
employees of the town under the supervision of the Town Manager. This policy is
established under authority of Chapter 160A, Article 7, of the General Statutes
of North Carolina.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 2.   At will employment.
   The Town of Valdese is an at will employer. Nothing in this policy creates
an employment contract or term between the town and its employees. No person
has the authority to grant any employee any contractual rights of employment.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 3.   Merit principle.
   All appointments and promotions shall be made solely on the basis of merit.
All positions requiring the performance of the same duties and fulfillment of
the same responsibilities shall be assigned to the same class and the same
salary range. No applicant for employment or employee shall be deprived on
employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affected as an employee because
of such individual’s race, color, religion, sex, national origin, political
affiliation, non-disqualifying disability, or age.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 4.   Responsibilities of the Town Council.
   The Town Council shall be responsible for establishing and approving
personnel policies, the position classification and pay plan, and may change
the policies and benefits as necessary. They also shall make and confirm
appointments when so specified by the general statutes.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 5.   Responsibilities of the Town Manager.
   (1)   The Town Manager shall be responsible to the Town Council for the
administration and technical direction of the personnel program. The Town
Manager shall appoint, suspend, and remove all Town officers and employees
except those elected by the people or whose appointment is otherwise provided
for by law. The Town Manager shall make appointments, dismissals and
suspensions in accordance with the Town Charter and other policies and
procedures spelled out in other Articles in this Policy.
   (2)   The Town Manager shall:
   (a)   Recommend rules and revisions to the personnel system to the Town
Council for consideration;
   (b)   Make changes as necessary to maintain an up to date and accurate
position classification plan;
   (c)   Recommend necessary revisions to the pay plan;
   (d)   Determine which employees shall be subject to the overtime provisions
of FLSA;
   (e)   Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Town Council not
inconsistent with this Policy; and
   (f)   Appoint an employee to the role of Human Resources Officer; in the
absence of a Human Resources Officer, the Town Manager shall fulfill the role.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 6.   Responsibilities of the Human Resources Officer.
   The responsibilities of the Human Resources Officer are to make
recommendations to the Town Manager on the following:
   (a)   Recommend rules and revisions to the personnel system to the Town
Manager for consideration;
   (b)   Recommend changes as necessary to maintain an up to date and accurate
position classification plan;
   (c)   Recommend necessary revisions to the pay plan;
   (d)   Recommend which employees shall be subject to the overtime provisions
of FLSA;
   (e)   Maintain a roster of all persons in the municipal service;
   (f)   Establish and maintain a list of authorized positions in the municipal
service at the beginning of each budget year which identifies each authorized
position, class title of position, salary range, any changes in class title and
status, position number and other such data as may be desirable or useful;
   (g)   Develop and administer such recruiting programs as may be necessary to
obtain an adequate supply of competent applicants to meet the needs of the
town;
   (h)   Develop and coordinate training and educational programs for town
employees;
   (i)   Investigate periodically the operation and effect of the personnel
provisions of this policy; and
   (j)   Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Town Manager not
inconsistent with this policy.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 7.   Application of policies, plan, rules and regulations.
   The personnel policy and all rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto
shall be binding on all town employees. The Town Manager, Town Attorney,
members of Town Council and advisory boards and commissions will be exempted
except in sections where specifically included. An employee violating any of
the provisions of this policy shall be subject to appropriate disciplinary
action, as well as prosecution under any civil or criminal laws which have been
violated.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 8.   Departmental rules and regulations.
   Because of the particular personnel and operational requirements of the
various departments of the town, each department is authorized to establish
supplemental written rules and regulations applicable only to the personnel of
that department. All such rules and regulations shall be subject to the
approval of the Town Manager, and shall not in any way conflict with the
provisions of this policy, but shall be considered as a supplement to this
policy.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 9.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this policy, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   (1)   Full-time employee. An employee who is in a position which is
authorized for an average work week of at least thirty-seven and one half
(37.5) hours and budgeted for at least twelve (12) months.
   (2)   Part-time employee. An employee who is in a position which is
authorized for an average work week of at least twenty (20) hours but less than
thirty-seven and one half (37.5) hours and budgeted for at least twelve (12)
months.
   (3)   Permanent position. A position authorized for the budget year for a
full twelve (12) months and budgeted for twenty (20) or more hours per week.
All town positions are subject to budget review and approval each year by the
Town Council and all employees’ work and conduct must meet town standards.
Therefore, reference to “permanent” positions or employment should not be
construed as a contract or right to perpetual funding or employment.
   (4)   Probationary employee. An employee appointed to a full or part-time
position who has not yet successfully completed the designated probationary
period.
   (5)   Regular employee. An employee appointed to a full or part-time
position who has successfully completed the designated probationary period.
   (6)   Temporary employee. An employee appointed to a position for which
either the average work week required by the town over the course of a year is
less than twenty (20) hours, or continuous employment required by the town is
less than twelve (12) months (someone who works less than one thousand (1000)
hours or less than twelve (12) months per year.)
   (7)   Trainee. An employee status when an applicant is hired (or employee
promoted) who does not meet all of the requirements for the position. During
the duration of a trainee appointment, the employee is on probationary status.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
ARTICLE II.
POSITION CLASSIFICATION PLAN
Section 1.   Purpose.
   The position classification plan provides a complete inventory of all
authorized and permanent positions in the town service, and an accurate
description and specification for each class of employment. The plan
standardizes job titles, each of which is indicative of a definite range of
duties and responsibilities.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 2.   Composition of the position classification plan.
   The classification plan shall consist of:
   (a)   A grouping of positions in classes which are approximately equal in
difficulty and responsibility which call for the same general qualifications,
and which can be equitably compensated within the same range of pay under
similar working conditions;
   (b)   Class titles descriptive of the work of the class;
   (c)   Written specifications for each class of positions; and
   (d)   An allocation list showing the class title of each position in the
classified service.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 3. Use of the position classification plan.
   The classification plan is to be used:
   (a)   As a guide in recruiting and examining applicants for employment;
   (b)   In determining lines of promotion and in developing employee training
programs;
   (c)   In determining salary to be paid for various types of work;
   (d)   In determining personnel service items in departmental budgets; and
   (e)   In providing uniform job terminology.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 4.   Administration of the position classification plan.
   The Town Manager, assisted by the Human Resources Officer shall allocate
each position covered by the classification plan to its appropriate class, and
shall be responsible for the administration of the position classification
plan. The Town Manager shall periodically review portions of the classification
plan and make minor revisions to insure that classifications accurately reflect
current job duties and responsibilities. The Town Manager shall also
periodically review the entire classification plan and, when needed, recommend
major changes to the Town Council.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 5. Authorization of new positions and the position classification plan.
   New positions shall be established upon recommendation of the Town Manager
and approval of the Town Council. New positions shall be recommended to the
Town Council with a recommended class title. The position classification plan,
along with any new positions or classifications shall be approved by the Town
Council and on file with the Human Resources Officer. Copies will be available
to all town employees for review upon request.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 6. Request for reclassification.
   (a)   Any employee who considers the position in which classified to be
improper shall submit a request in writing for reclassification to such
employee’s immediate supervisor, who shall immediately transmit the request
through the department head to the Human Resources Officer. Upon receipt of
such request, the Human Resources Officer shall study the request, determine
the merit of the reclassification, and recommend any necessary revisions to the
classification and pay plan to the Town Manager. The Town Manager will respond
to this request within ten (10) working days.
   (b)   Department heads are responsible for identifying changes in job duties
that may result in a position being mis-classified and making the Manager aware
of the need for a review of the position classification.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
ARTICLE III.
THE PAY PLAN
Section 1.   Definition.
   The pay plan includes the basic salary schedule and the “List of Classes
Arranged by Grades” adopted by the Town Council. The salary schedule consists
of minimum or beginning, maximum, and intervening rates of pay for all classes
of positions.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 2.   Administration and maintenance.
   (a)   The Town Manager, assisted by the Human Resources Officer, shall be
responsible for the administration and maintenance of the pay plan. All
employees covered by the pay plan shall be paid at a rate listed within the
salary range established for the respective position classification, except for
employees in trainee status or employees whose existing salaries are above the
established maximum rate following transition to a new pay plan. Each year, the
Town Manager shall recommend a cost of living or market adjustment amount based
on an analysis of the consumer price increase and of the increases in other
local governments. When cost of living or market adjustments are approved by
the Council, the salary plan should adjust by that amount so that hiring rates
and maximum rates of pay remain competitive in the market.
   (b)   The pay plan is intended to provide equitable compensation for all
positions, reflecting differences in the duties and responsibilities, the
comparable rates of pay for positions in private and public employment in the
area, changes in the cost of living, the financial conditions of the town, and
other factors. To this end, from time to time the Town Manager shall request
the Human Resources Officer to make comparative studies of all factors
affecting the level of salary ranges and may make minor adjustments in the
allocation of positions to salary grades. Approximately every three to five
years the town will conduct a comprehensive classification and pay study to
update the plan insuring internal equity and external competitiveness. When
major adjustments encompassing numerous positions are needed, or when a general
adjustment is needed to the pay plan, the Town Manager shall recommend such
changes in salary ranges as appear to be warranted to the Town Council. The
Town Council shall adopt the “Assignment of Classes to Grades and Ranges,”
including any minor adjustments made by the Town Manager during the previous
budget year, annually as part of the budget process.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 3.   Starting salaries.
   All persons hired or promoted into positions approved in the position
classification plan shall be compensated at the hiring rate for the
classification in which they are employed; however, exceptionally well
qualified applicants may be paid above the hiring rate of the established
salary range upon recommendation of the hiring department head and Human
Resources Officer and approval of the Town Manager.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 4.   Trainee designation and provisions.
   (a)   Applicants being considered for employment or town employees who do
not meet all of the requirements for the position for which they are being
considered may be hired, promoted, demoted, or transferred to a “trainee”
status. In such cases, a plan for training, including a time schedule, must be
prepared by the department head. “Trainee” salaries shall be one (1) or (no
more than) two (2) grades below the hiring rate established for the position
for which the person is being trained. A new employee designated as “trainee”
shall concurrently serve a probationary period. However, probationary periods
shall be no less than six (6) months and trainee periods may extend from three
(3) to eighteen (18) months. A trainee shall remain a probationary employee
until the trainee period is satisfactorily completed.
   (b)   If the training is not successfully completed to the satisfaction of
the town, the trainee shall be transferred, demoted, or dismissed. If the
training is successfully completed, the employee shall be paid at least at the
hiring rate established for the position for which the employee was trained.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 5.   Probationary pay increases.
   Employees hired or promoted shall receive a salary increase within the range
of five percent (5%) if the employee is below the midpoint of the salary range,
and two and one half percent (2.5%) if the employee is above midpoint of the
salary range upon successful completion of probation. Employees serving a
twelve (12)-month probationary period (police, fire, department heads and part-
time employees) are eligible for consideration for this pay increase after six
(6) months of successful employment.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 6.   Performance pay.
   An annual performance evaluation shall be scheduled for each employee as
close as is practicable to the employee’s anniversary date. Consultation
between the employee and supervisor regarding performance at times other than
the annual performance evaluation is anticipated and encouraged under this
policy and shall be considered to supplement rather than replace the annual
performance evaluation. Upward movement within the established salary range for
an employee is not automatic but rather based upon specific performance-related
reasons. Employees may be considered for advancement within the established
salary range based on the quality of their overall performance. Procedures for
determining performance levels and performance pay increases shall be
established in procedures approved by the Town Manager. Performance pay is
subject to annual appropriation.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 7.   Performance pay bonus.
   Employees who are at the maximum of the salary range for their position
classification are eligible to be considered for a performance bonus at their
regular performance evaluation time. Performance bonuses shall be awarded based
upon the performance of the employee as described in the performance evaluation
and shall be the same percentage of annual salary as employees within the
salary range with the same performance level. Performance bonuses do not become
part of base pay and shall be awarded in a lump sum payment.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 8.   Salary effect of promotions, demotions, transfers and
reclassifications.
   (a)   Promotions. When an employee is promoted, the employee’s salary shall
normally be advanced to the hiring rate of the new position, or to a salary
which provides an increase of at least five percent (5%) over the employee’s
salary before the promotion, provided, however, that the new salary may not
exceed the maximum rate of the new salary range. The purpose of the promotion
pay increase is to recognize and compensate the employee for taking on
increased responsibility.
   (b)   Demotions. When an employee is demoted to a position for which
qualified, the salary shall be set at the rate in the lower pay range which
provides a salary commensurate with the employee’s qualifications to perform
the job when the demotion is not the result of discipline. If the current
salary is within the new range, the employee’s salary may be retained at the
previous rate, if appropriate. Consideration should be given to whether the
employee is receiving the same pay for decreased workload or responsibility
level and action should be appropriate to this consideration. If the demotion
is the result of discipline, the salary shall be decreased at least five
percent (5%), but may be no greater than the maximum of the new range.
   (c)   Transfers. The salary of an employee reassigned to a position in the
same class or to a position in a different class within the same salary range
shall not be changed by the reassignment.
   (d)   Reclassifications. An employee whose position is reclassified to a
class having a higher salary range shall receive a pay increase of five percent
(5%) or an increase to the hiring rate of the new pay range, whichever is
higher if the employee’s salary is below midpoint of the new range. If the
employee has completed probation, the employee’s salary shall be advanced to at
least the minimum (probation completion) amount in the new range. If the
position is reclassified to a lower pay range, the employee’s salary shall
remain the same. If the employee’s salary is above the maximum established for
the new range, the salary of that employee shall be maintained at the current
level (no salary increases including merit pay, cost of living, etc.) until the
range is increased above the employee’s salary.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 9.   Salary effect of salary range revisions.
   (a)   When a class of positions is assigned to a higher salary range,
employees in that class shall receive a pay increase of at least five percent
(5%), or to the hiring rate of the new range, whichever is higher if the
employee’s current salary is below the midpoint of the new salary range. If the
employee has passed probation, the employee’s salary shall be advanced at least
to the probation completion amount (minimum rate) in the new range.
   (b)   When a class of positions is assigned to a lower salary range, the
salaries of employees in that class will remain unchanged. If this assignment
to a lower salary range results in an employee being paid at a rate above the
maximum established for the new class, the salary of that employee shall be
maintained at that level until such time as the employee’s salary range is
increased above the employee’s current salary.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 10.   Transition to a new salary plan.
   The following principles shall govern the transition to a new salary plan:
   (a)   No employee shall receive a salary reduction as a result of the
transition to a new salary plan.
   (b)   All employees being paid at a rate lower than the hiring rate
established for their respective classes shall have their salaries raised at
least to the new hiring rate for their classes.
   (c)   All employees being paid at a rate below the maximum rate established
for their respective classes shall be paid at a rate within the salary
schedule; all employees not at a listed rate shall have their salaries raised
to a listed rate.
   (d)   All employees being paid at a rate above the maximum rate established
for their respective classes shall be maintained at that salary level until
such time as the employees’ salary range is increased above the employee’s
current salary.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 11.   Effective date of salary changes.
   Salary changes approved after the first working day of a pay period shall
become effective at the beginning of the next pay period, or at such specific
date as may be provided by procedures approved by the Town Manager.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 12.   Overtime pay provisions.
   (a)   Employees of the town can be requested and may be required to work
overtime hours as necessitated by the needs of the town and determined by the
Department Head. All overtime hours worked must be authorized by appropriate
management or town officials. To the extent that local government jurisdictions
are so required, the town will comply with the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA).
The Human Resources Officer shall recommend which jobs are “non-exempt” and are
therefore subject to the Act in areas such as hours of work and work periods,
rates of overtime compensation, and other provisions.
   (b)   Non-exempt employees will be paid at a straight time rate for hours up
to the FLSA established limit for their position (usually forty (40) hours in a
seven (7) day period; one hundred seventy one (171) hours for police and two
hundred twelve (212) for fire personnel in a twenty-eight (28) day cycle).
Hours worked beyond the FLSA established limit will be compensated in time or
pay at the appropriate overtime rate. Generally, the town will provide
compensatory time for overtime compensation. Pay may be provided when deemed
desirable at the discretion of the Town Manager based on budgetary and other
considerations. In determining eligibility for overtime in a work period, only
hours actually worked shall be considered. In no event will vacation, sick
leave, holiday time or compensatory leave hours be counted toward the total
hours for the purpose of overtime compensation. The Town Manager will be
informed when an employee reaches a compensatory leave balance of one hundred
(100) hours or more.
   (c)   Whenever practicable, departments will schedule time off on an hour-
for-hour basis within the applicable work period (work period is seven (7) days
except for fire and law enforcement) for non-exempt employees, instead of
incurring overtime. When time off within the work period cannot be granted,
overtime worked will be compensated in accordance with the FLSA.
   (d)   In emergency situations, where employees are required to work long and
continuous hours, the Town Manager may approve compensation at time and one
half for those hours worked and/or grant time off with pay for rest and
recuperation to ensure safe working conditions. In FEMA declared emergencies,
exempt employees may be compensated for overtime up to double time if approved
by the Town Manager.
   (e)   Employees in positions determined to be “exempt” from the FLSA (as
Executive, Administrative, or Professional staff) will not receive pay for
hours worked in excess of their normal work periods. These employees may be
granted compensatory leave by their supervisor where the convenience of the
department allows and in accordance with procedures established by the Town
Manager. Such compensatory time is not guaranteed to be taken and ends without
compensation upon separation from the organization.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 13.   Call-back and stand-by pay.
   The town provides a continuous twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days
a week service to its customers. Therefore, it is necessary for certain
employees to respond to any reasonable request for duty at any hour of the day
or night. One of the conditions of employment with the town is the acceptance
of a share of the responsibility for continuous service, in accordance with the
nature of each job position. If an employee fails to respond to reasonable
calls for emergency service, either special or routine, the employee shall be
subject to disciplinary actions up to and including dismissal.
   (a)   Call-back. Non-exempt employees will be guaranteed a minimum payment
of two hours per twenty four (24) hours for being called back to work outside
of normal working hours. “Call-back” provisions do not apply to previously
scheduled overtime work (scheduled one or more days in advance). In addition,
the town may establish special call-back provisions for emergency medical staff
that differ from this policy.
   (b)   Stand-by. Non-exempt employees required to be on “stand-by” duty will
be paid for three (3) hours of work for each week (approximately one hundred
twenty eight (128) hours, excluding work time) of stand-by time they serve.
Stand-by compensation for less than one full week shall be determined by the
ratio of .0234 hours of pay per one (1) hour of stand-by time. Hours actually
worked while on stand-by are calculated beginning when the employee reports to
the work site and are added to the regular total of hours worked for the week.
Stand-by time is defined as that time when an employee must carry a pager or
other communication device and must respond immediately to calls for service.
Stand-by time is normally assigned in seven (7) day increments. Employees
designated for stand-by time must be fit for duty (not under the influence of
any alcohol or drugs and able to respond within thirty (30) minutes). Stand-by
schedule changes must be approved by the department head.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 14.   Payroll deduction.
   Deductions shall be made from each employee’s salary, as required by law.
Additional deductions may be made upon the request of the employee on
determination by the Town Manager as to capability of payroll equipment and
appropriateness of the deduction.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 15.   Hourly rate of pay.
   Employees working in a part-time or temporary capacity with the same duties
as full-time employees will work at a rate in the same salary range as the
full-time employees. The hourly rate for employees working other than forty
(40) hours per week, such as police officers working an average forty-two (42)
hours per week, will be determined by dividing the average number of hours
scheduled per year into the annual salary for the position.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 16.   Pay for interim assignment in a higher level classification.
   An employee who is formally designated for a period of at least one month to
perform the duties of a job that is assigned to a higher salary grade than that
of the employees regular classification shall receive an increase for the
duration of the acting assignment. The employee shall receive a salary
adjustment to the entry level (Hiring rate) of the job in which the employee is
acting or an increase of ten percent (10%). Criteria involved in determining
the amount of compensation shall include 1) the difference between the existing
job and that being filled on a temporary basis, and 2) the degree to which the
employee is expected to fulfill all the duties of the temporary assignment. The
salary increase shall be temporary and the employee shall go back to the salary
he or she would have had if not assigned to the acting role upon completion of
the assignment.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 17.   Longevity pay.
   The town recognizes the value of continuity of service of its employees.
Full-time employees of the town may be compensated for years of continuous
service by payment of a longevity supplement based on continuous years on the
employee’s anniversary date. Continuous service is continuous employment
including any approved leave or involuntary reduction in force.
   (a)   Longevity amounts shall be as follows for employees hired prior to
November 6, 2007 with a $1,500 maximum for any one individual:
 
Years of Service Amount
1 - 2 years   1% of annual salary or $400, whichever is greater
3 - 4 years   1.5% or $400, whichever is greater
5 - 9 years   2.0%
10 - 14 years 2.5%
15 - 19 years 3.0%
20 - 29 years 3.5%
30 plus years 4.0%
 
   (b)   Longevity amounts shall be as follows for employees hired on or after
November 6, 2007 with a $1,500 maximum for any one individual:
 
Years of Service          Amount
0 but less than 5 years   0
5 but less than 10 years  2.0%
10 but less than 15 years 2.5%
15 but less than 20 years 3.0%
20 but less than 30 years 3.5%
30 plus years             4.0%
 
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
ARTICLE IV.
RECRUITMENT AND EMPLOYMENT
Section 1.   Equal employment opportunity policy.
   It is the policy of the town to foster, maintain and promote equal
employment opportunity. The town shall select employees on the basis of the
applicant’s qualifications for the job and award them, with respect to
compensation and opportunity for training and advancement, including upgrading
and promotion, without regard to age, sex, race, color, religion, national
origin, disability, political affiliation, or marital status. Applicants with
physical disabilities shall be given equal consideration with other applicants
for positions in which their disabilities do not represent an unreasonable
barrier to satisfactory performance of required duties with or without
reasonable accommodation.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 2.   Implementation of equal employment opportunity policy.
   All personnel responsible for recruitment and employment will continue to
review regularly the implementation of this personnel policy and relevant
practices to assure that equal employment opportunity based on reasonable, job-
related requirements is being actively observed to the end that no employee or
applicant for employment shall suffer discrimination because of age, sex, race,
color, religion, disability, national origin, political affiliation, or marital
status. Notices with regard to equal employment matters shall be posted in
conspicuous places on town premises in places where notices are customarily
posted.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 3.   Recruitment, selection and appointment.
   (a)   Recruitment sources. When position vacancies occur, the Human
Resources Officer shall publicize these opportunities for employment, including
applicable salary information and employment qualifications. Information on job
openings and hiring practices will be published in local and/or other news
media as necessary to inform the community and create a quality and diverse
pool of applicants. In addition, notice of vacancies shall be posted at
designated conspicuous sites within departments. Individuals shall be recruited
from a geographic area as wide as necessary and for a period of time sufficient
to ensure that well-qualified applicants are obtained for town service. The
North Carolina Employment Security Commission shall normally be used as a
recruitment source. In rare situations because of emergency conditions, high
turnover, etc., the town may hire or promote without advertising jobs, upon
approval of the Town Manager. However, such lack of recruitment can be seen as
evidence of discrimination and will be severely limited.
   (b)   Job advertisements. Employment advertisements shall contain assurances
of equal employment opportunity and shall comply with federal and state
statutes.
   (c)   Application for employment. All persons expressing interest in
employment with the town shall be given the opportunity to file an application
but only for employment for positions which are currently being recruited.
   (d)   Application reserve file. Applications shall be kept in an inactive
reserve file for a period of two (2) years, in accordance with Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission guidelines.
   (e)   Selection. Department heads, with the assistance of the Human
Resources Officer, shall make such investigations and conduct such examinations
as necessary to assess accurately the knowledge, skills, and experience
qualifications required for the position. All selection devices administered by
the town shall be valid measures of job performance.
   (f)   Physical examination. The town, at its own expense, may require that a
selected candidate successfully complete a medical examination prior to
starting work with the town.
   (g)   Appointment. Before any commitment is made to an applicant either
internal or external, the Department Head shall make recommendations to the
Human Resources Officer including the position to be filled, the salary to be
paid, and the reasons for selecting the candidate over other candidates. The
Human Resources Officer and Department Head shall recommend approval of
appointments and the starting salary for all applicants to the Town Manager.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 4.   Probationary period.
   (a)   An employee appointed or promoted to a permanent position shall serve
a probationary period. Employees shall serve a six month probationary period,
except that part-time employees, sworn police officers, fire personnel, and
department heads shall serve a twelve month probationary period. Employees
hired as trainees shall remain on probation until the provisions of their
traineeship are satisfied. During the probationary period, the supervisor of
the employee serving in a probationary status shall closely monitor the
progress of that employee and shall frequently discuss with the employee his or
her performance. Before the end of the probationary period, the supervisor
shall conduct a performance evaluation conference with the employee and discuss
accomplishments, strengths, and needed improvements. A summary of this
discussion shall be documented in the employee’s personnel file. The supervisor
shall recommend in writing whether the probationary period should be completed,
extended, or the employee transferred, demoted, or dismissed. Probationary
periods may be extended for a maximum of six (6) additional months.
   (b)   Disciplinary action, including demotion and dismissal, may be taken at
any time during the probationary period of a new hire without following the
steps outlined in this policy for disciplinary action. A promoted employee who
does not successfully complete the probationary period may be transferred or
demoted to a position in which the employee shows promise of success. If no
such position is available, the employee shall be dismissed. Promoted employees
retain all other rights and benefits such as the right to use of the grievance
procedures and to graduated disciplinary procedures.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 5.   Promotion.
   (a)   Promotion is the movement of an employee from one position to a vacant
position in a class assigned to a higher salary range. It is the town’s policy
to create career opportunities for its employees whenever possible. Therefore,
when a current employee applying for a vacant position is best suited of all
applicants, that applicant shall be appointed to that position. The town will
balance three goals in the employment process: 1) the benefits to employees and
the organization of promotion from within; 2) providing equal employment
opportunity and a diversified workforce to the community; and 3) obtaining the
best possible employee who will provide the most productivity in that position.
Therefore, except in rare situations where previous town experience is
essential (such as promotions to Police Shift Leader), or exceptional
qualifications of an internal candidate so indicate, the town will consider
external and internal candidates rather than automatically promote from within.
Candidates for promotion shall be chosen on the basis of their qualifications
and their work records. Internal candidates shall apply for promotions using
the same application process as external candidates.
   (b)   Department heads are responsible for developing staff capacity to
provide back-up for coworkers and higher level positions; to prepare staff and
the organization for smooth transitions; and to insure capability to cover
interim absences and vacancies.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 6.   Demotion.
   (a)   Demotion is the movement of an employee from one position to a
position in a class assigned to a lower salary range. Demotion may be voluntary
or involuntary. An employee whose work or conduct in the current position is
unsatisfactory may be demoted provided that the employee shows promise of
becoming a satisfactory employee in the lower position. Such disciplinary
demotion shall follow the disciplinary procedures outlined in this chapter.
   (b)   An employee who wishes to accept a position with less complex duties
and reduced responsibilities may request a voluntary demotion. A voluntary
demotion is not a disciplinary action and is made without using the above-
referenced disciplinary procedures.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 7.   Transfer.
   Transfer is the movement of an employee from one position to a position in a
class in the same salary range. If a vacancy occurs and an employee in another
department is eligible for a transfer, the employee shall apply for the
transfer using the usual application process. The Department Head wishing to
transfer an employee to a different department or classification shall make a
recommendation to the Town Manager with the consent of the receiving department
head. Any employee transferred without requesting the action may appeal the
action in accordance with the grievance procedure outlined in this policy. An
employee who has successfully completed a probationary period may be
transferred into the same classification without serving another probationary
period.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
ARTICLE V.
CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT
Section 1.   Work Schedule.
   Department heads shall establish work schedules, with the approval of the
Town Manager, which meet the operational needs of the department in the most
cost effective manner possible.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 2.   Political activity.
   (1)   Each employee has a civic responsibility to support good government by
every available means and in every appropriate manner. Each employee may join
or affiliate with civic organizations of a partisan or political nature, may
attend political meetings, may advocate and support the principles or policies
of civic or political organizations in accordance with the Constitution and
laws of the State of North Carolina and in accordance with the Constitution and
laws of the United States. However, no employee shall:
   (a)   Engage in any political or partisan activity while on duty;
   (b)   Use official authority or influence for the purpose of interfering
with or affecting the result of a nomination or an election for office;
   (c)   Be required as a duty of employment or as condition for employment,
promotion or tenure of office to contribute funds for political or partisan
purposes;
   (d)   Coerce or compel contributions from another employee of the town for
political or partisan purposes;
   (e)   Use any supplies or equipment of the town for political or partisan
purposes; or
   (f)   Be a candidate for nomination or election to an office under the Town
Charter;
   (2)   Any violation of this section shall subject the employee to
disciplinary action including dismissal.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 3.   Outside employment.
   (1)   The work of the town shall have precedence over other occupational
interests of employees. All outside employment for salaries, wages, or
commission and all self-employment must be reported in advance to the
employee’s supervisor, who in turn will report it to the Department Head. The
Department Head will review such employment for possible conflict of interest
and decide whether to approve the work. Conflicting or unreported outside
employment are grounds for disciplinary action up to and including dismissal.
Documentation of the approval of outside employment will be placed in the
employee’s personnel file.
   (2)   Examples of conflicts of interest in outside employment include but
are not limited to:
   (a)   Employment with organizations or in capacities that are regulated by
the employee or employees department; or
   (b)   Employment with organizations or in capacities that negatively impact
the employees perceived integrity, neutrality, or reputation related to
performance of the employees town duties.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 4.   Dual Employment.
   A full or part-time non-exempt employee of the town may simultaneously hold
another position with the town if the temporary position is in a different
department and clearly different program area from that of the full or part-
time position and the employment in the temporary position is performed on an
occasional or sporadic basis. However, the work of the full or part-time
position shall take precedence over the temporary position, and such work will
not count toward the calculation of overtime for pay or time off. This policy
is intended to reflect requirements of the FLSA; otherwise, hourly rate must be
pro-rated by the two (2) different salaries and overtime compensated after
forty (40) hours per week.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 5. Employment of relatives.
   (1)   The town prohibits the hiring and employment of immediate family in
permanent positions within the same work unit. “Immediate Family” is defined in
Article VII, Section 12. The town also prohibits the employment of any person
into a permanent position who is an immediate family member of individuals
holding the following positions: Mayor, Mayor Pro Tem, Town Council Member,
Town Manager, Finance Director, Human Resources Officer, Deputy Town Clerk, or
Town Attorney. Otherwise, the town will consider employing family members or
related persons in the service of the town, provided that such employment does
not:
   (a)   Result in a relative supervising relatives;
   (b)   Result in a relative auditing the work of a relative;
   (c)   Create a conflict of interest with either relative and the town; or
   (d)   Create the potential or perception of favoritism.
   (2)   This clause shall not be retroactive concerning any relative currently
working for the town at the time of adoption.
   (3)   Should a family member (as defined in Article VII, Section 12) of a
current employee be elected to the Town Board of Council, the employee must
resign within six months of the relative taking office.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 6. Harassment.
   (a)   Harassment on the basis of race, color, religion, gender, national
origin, age or disability constitutes discrimination. The town opposes
harassment by supervisors and co-workers in any from. Harassment is verbal or
physical conduct that denigrates of shows hostility or aversion toward an
individual because of his or her race, color, religion, gender, national
origin, age, or disability, or that of his or her relatives, friends, or
associates.
   (b)   Sexual harassment is defined as unwelcome sexual advances, requests
for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature when
1) submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or
condition of an individual’s employment; 2) submission to or rejection of such
conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions
affecting such individual; or 3) such conduct has the purpose or effect of
unreasonably interfering with an individual’s work performance or creating an
intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment.
   (c)   Any employee who believes that he or she may have a complaint of
harassment may follow the grievance procedure described in this policy or may
file the complaint directly with the Town Manager, Human Resources Officer, or
any department head who will advise the Human Resources Officer of the
complaint. The Human Resources Officer will insure that an investigation is
conducted into any allegation of harassment and advise the employee and
appropriate management officials of the outcome of the investigation.
   (d)   Employees witnessing harassment shall also report such conduct to an
appropriate town official.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 7.   Acceptance of gifts and favors.
   No official or employee of the town shall accept any gift, favor, or thing
of value (more than fifty dollars ($50)) that may tend to influence such
employee in the discharge of the employee’s duties, or grant in the discharge
of duty an improper favor, service, or thing of value.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 8.   Performance evaluation.
   Supervisors and/or Department Heads shall conduct performance evaluation
conferences with each employee at least once a year to review the employee’s
accomplishments and strengths, areas for improvements goals for the next year,
and overall performance level. These performance evaluations shall be
documented in writing and placed in the employee’s personnel file. Procedures
for the performance evaluation program shall be published by the Town Manager.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 9.   Safety.
   (a)   Safety is the responsibility of both the town and employees. It is the
policy of the town to establish a safe work environment for employees. The town
shall establish a safety program including policies and procedures regarding
safety practices and precautions and training in safety methods. Department
Heads and supervisors are responsible for insuring the safe work procedures of
all employees and providing necessary safety training programs. Employees shall
follow the safety policies and procedures and attend safety training programs
as a condition of employment. Employees who violate such policies and
procedures shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including
dismissal.
   (b)   The town may award annual safety bonuses to regular full and part-time
employees who earn such awards based on safe work records and subject to the
recommendation of the Town Manager. The bonus is based on the past year’s
worker’s compensation claims.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 10.   Direct Deposit.
   Employees may be required to participate in the town’s direct deposit
program.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 11.   Use of town supplies and equipment.
   (a)   Town equipment, materials, tools and supplies shall not be available
for personal use nor be removed from town property except in conduct of
official town business.
   (b)   Town employees shall provide reasonable care for any town vehicle as a
duty and function of their job requirements and will be accountable for the
vehicle. Such vehicles are to be used exclusively for official town business,
except that by special approval by the Manager, an employee may be directed to
take the vehicle home when doing so shall serve the best interest of the town.
Use of town vehicles for commuting to and from work shall usually be limited to
an employee who is subject to emergency call-back work. IRS guidelines will
dictate any charges which shall accrue to the employee.
   (c)   No individual shall operate or ride in a town vehicle except as is
required for the conduct of official town business.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 12. Use of tobacco products regulated.
   Employees are prohibited from the use of tobacco products in any town
facility or vehicle.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
ARTICLE VI.
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
Section 1. Eligibility.
   All full-time employees (see definitions) of the town are eligible for
employee benefits as provided for in this policy. These benefits are subject to
change at the town’s discretion. Temporary employees are eligible only for
Workers’ Compensation and FICA.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 2.   Group health and hospitalization insurance.
   (a)   The town provides group health and hospitalization insurance programs
for full-time employees, subject to annual appropriation by the Town Council
and insurance policy provisions.
   (b)   Information concerning cost and benefits shall be available to all
employees from the Human Resources Department.
   (c)   Retiree insurance coverage.
   (1)   For those employees who were hired prior to July 1, 2016, the town
provides medical insurance coverage or provides a monetary amount in lieu of
insurance for the purpose of allowing the retiree to purchase insurance. The
choice of insurance or payment in lieu is made by the town. Employee
eligibility for this coverage is determined as follows:
   a.   the employee must have been hired by the town prior to July 1, 2016;
   b.   the employee must have completed at least 25 years of employment with
the town and not yet be eligible for Medicare; and
   c.   the employee must pay his/her share of the cost of such insurance
coverage as hereinafter provided, if applicable.
   (2)   The town's contribution shall be reviewed each year by the Town
Council to determine if the town's contribution is financially feasible. The
town does not provide this retiree insurance benefit to employees who were
hired on or after July 1, 2016.
(Ord. of 11/5/07; as amended by Ord. of 2/8/14)
Section 3.   Group life insurance.
   The town may elect to provide group life insurance for each employee subject
to the stipulations of the insurance contract. Employees may elect to purchase
additional coverage and/or to insure other family members at their expense
subject to the stipulations of the insurance contract.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 4.   Other optional group insurance plans and benefits.
   The town may make other group insurance plans available to employees upon
authorization of the Town Manager or Town Council.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 5.   Retirement.
   Each employee who is expected to work for the town more than one thousand
(1,000) hours annually shall join the North Carolina Local Governmental
Employees’ Retirement System immediately upon employment as a condition of
employment.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 6.   Supplemental retirement benefits.
   The town may provide supplemental retirement benefits for its full-time
employees. Each law enforcement officer shall receive 401-K benefits as
prescribed by North Carolina State Law and beginning on the first day of
employment. Each general employee shall receive supplemental benefits as
determined by the Town Council.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 7.   Social Security.
   The town, to the extent of its lawful authority and power, extends Social
Security benefits for its eligible employees and eligible groups and classes of
such employees.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 8.   Workers’ compensation.
   (a)   All employees of the town (full-time, part-time, and temporary) are
covered by the North Carolina Workers’ Compensation Act and are required to
report all injuries arising out of and in the course of employment to their
immediate supervisors at the time of the injury in order that appropriate
action may be taken at once. This provision also applies to reactions to small
pox vaccinations administered to town employees under Section 304 of the
Homeland Security Act. Such reactions shall be treated the same as any other
Workers’ Compensation claim as regards leave and salary continuation.
   (b)   Before returning to work, a statement from the attending physician
should be submitted to the Human Resources Officer giving permission for the
employee to resume regular duties.
   (c)   Upon return to work, the employee’s salary will be computed on the
basis of the last salary plus any merit increment or other salary increase to
which the employee would have been entitled during the disability covered by
Workers Compensation benefits, an employee continues to earn annual leave, sick
leave, and will retain all accumulated sick or annual leave.
   (d)   Employees may use sick leave and/or vacation both during the waiting
period before Workers’ Compensation benefits begin.
   (e)   Responsibility for claiming compensation under the Worker’s
Compensation Act is on the injured employee, and such claims should be filed
with the department head as soon as possible and within five (5) days of the
date of injury. The Human Resources Officer will assist the employee in filing
the claim when needed.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 9.   Unemployment compensation.
   In accordance with Public Law 94-566 and subsequent amendments, local
governments are covered by unemployment insurance. Town employees who are
terminated due to a reduction in force or released from town service may apply
for benefits through the local Employment Security Commission office, where a
determination of eligibility will be made.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 10.   Tuition assistance program.
   Full-time employees who have completed one (1) year of employment may apply
for tuition reimbursement for courses taken on their own time or during
educational leave which will improve their skills for their current job or
prepare them for promotional opportunities with the town. Tuition,
registration, fees, laboratory fees, and student fees are eligible expenses.
Employees may be reimbursed eligible expenses upon satisfactory completion of
the course (at least a C in graded courses). Requests for tuition assistance
shall be submitted to the Human Resources Department prior to course
registration and are subject to the review and approval of Department Head and
Town Manager, subject to availability of funds. The Human Resources Officer
shall request funding for this program as part of the budget process if not in
the departmental budgets.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 11.   Law enforcement separation allowance.
   (1)   Every sworn law enforcement officer, as defined by G.S. 128-21(11b) or
G.S. 143-166.50, shall be eligible for a separation allowance, as provided by
G.S. 143-166.42, in the amount specified in G.S. 143-166.41(a). The purpose of
this allowance is to provide additional income until the law enforcement
officer is eligible for social security benefits with the consideration that
the law enforcement officer may no longer be able to perform law enforcement
work. Given this purpose, eligibility and continuation of these benefits are
subject to the following conditions:
   (a)   The officer shall have completed thirty (30) or more years of
creditable service, or have attained fifty-five (55) years of age and completed
five (5) or more years of creditable service; and
   (b)   Not have attained sixty-two (62) years of age;
   (c)   Have completed at least five (5) years of continuous service as a law
enforcement officer immediately preceding a service retirement, as defined by
G.S. 143-166.41(a)(3) and G.S. 143-166.41(b); and
   (d)   The law enforcement officer, after separation from employment with the
town, notifies the town of any new law enforcement employment, including the
nature and extent of the employment, within five (5) days of the new
employment.
   (2)   Such allowance shall terminate at death, or on the last day of the
month in which the officer attains sixty-two (62) years of age, or upon the
first day of re-employment by any state or local law enforcement department,
agency or institution, whether in North Carolina or elsewhere.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
ARTICLE VII.
HOLIDAYS AND LEAVES OF ABSENCE
Section 1.   Policy.
   The policy of the town is to provide vacation, sick leave, and holiday leave
to all full-time employees, and to provide proportionately equivalent amounts
to employees having average work weeks of different lengths. Leave balances
should be printed on payroll checks or provided to employees with each
paycheck, including net accrued sick leave, vacation, compensatory time, etc.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 2.   Holidays.
   (a)   The town will provide the same holidays as those provided by the State
of North Carolina for its employees. The Human Resources Officer will publish
this schedule on the town’s website and in other appropriate locations at least
once a year for employee information.
   (b)   In order to receive a paid holiday, an employee must be on paid status
before and after the holiday.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 3.   Holidays: effect on other types of leave.
   Regular holidays which occur during a vacation, sick or other leave period
of any employee shall not be considered as vacation, sick, or other leave.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 4.   Holidays: compensation when work is required or regularly
scheduled off for shift personnel.
   (a)   Employees required to perform work on regularly scheduled holidays
shall be paid at the regular rate for hours actually worked and receive pay at
the regular rate for the holiday hours they did not take off. Holiday time will
be pro-rated based on the average work week according to the formula in Section
16 of this article.
   (b)   Prior to the above date, employees will receive the additional time in
additional time off.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 5.   Vacation leave.
   Vacation leave may be used for rest and relaxation, school appointments,
medical appointments, and other personal needs.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 6.   Vacation leave: use by probationary employees.
   Employees serving a probationary period following initial employment may
accumulate vacation leave but shall not be permitted to take vacation leave
during the first six (6) months of the probationary period unless part of an
agreement at employment. Employees shall be allowed to take accumulated
vacation leave after six (6) months of service.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 7.   Vacation leave: accrual rate.
   (a)   Each full -time employee of the town shall earn vacation at the
following schedule, prorated by the average number of hours scheduled in the
workweek:
 
Years of Service          Days Accrued Per Year
0 but less than 5 years   10
5 but less than 15 years  12
15 but less than 20 years 18
20 or more years          20
 
   (b)   Vacation should be accrued in each payroll period. Employees working
greater or fewer than forty (40) hours will have accrual rates prorated based
upon the formula in Article VII Section 16.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 8.   Vacation leave: maximum accumulation.
   (a)   Vacation leave may be accumulated without any applicable maximum until
December 31 of each year. However, if the employee departs from service,
payment for accumulated vacation leave shall not exceed thirty days (30) based
on the formula in Article VI, Section 16. Effective the last payroll in the
calendar year, any employee with more than this maximum amount of accumulated
leave shall have the excess accumulation removed so that only 30 days are
carried forward to January 1 of the next calendar year. Employees are not
eligible to receive pay for vacation time not taken.
   (b)   Employees may have the excess vacation leave (over the above maximum)
converted to sick leave provided that they have taken three (3) consecutive
days of vacation in the calendar year.
   (c)   Employees are cautioned not to retain excess accumulated vacation
leave until late in the year. Because of the necessity to keep all functions in
operation, large numbers of employees cannot be granted vacation leave at any
one time. If an employee has excess leave accumulation during the latter part
of the year and is unable to take such leave because of staffing demands, the
employee shall receive no special consideration either in having vacation leave
scheduled or in receiving any exception to the maximum accumulation.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 9. Vacation leave: manner of taking.
   Employees shall be granted the use of earned vacation leave at those times
designated by the department head which will least obstruct normal operations
of the town. Department heads are responsible for insuring that approved
vacation leave does not hinder the effectiveness of service delivery. Vacation
may be taken in one-quarter hour increments and should be requested in advance
according to departmental policies and procedures.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 10.   Vacation leave: payment upon separation or retirement.
   (a)   An employee who has successfully completed six months of the
probationary period will normally be paid for accumulated vacation leave upon
separation, subject to a thirty (30) day maximum based on the formula in
Section 16 of this article, provided written notice is given to the supervisor
at least two (2) weeks in advance of the effective date of resignation (minimum
of thirty (30) days notice for department heads). Any employee failing to give
the written notice required by this section shall forfeit payment for
accumulated leave. The notice requirement may be waived by the Town Manager
when deemed to be in the best interest of the town.
   (b)   An employee retiring under the provisions of the North Carolina Local
Government Retirement System may have any excess vacation (above the thirty
(30) day maximum) converted to sick leave and used for retirement service
credit.
   (c)   Employees separated involuntarily shall also receive vacation balances
paid according to these provisions.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 11.   Vacation leave: payment upon death.
   The estate of an employee who dies while employed by the town shall be
entitled to payment of all the accumulated vacation leave credited to the
employee’s account not to exceed thirty (30) days as described above.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 12.   Sick leave.
   (a)   Sick leave is a privilege granted to an employee for use consistent
with this policy and is not a right. Sick leave may be granted to an employee
absent from work for any of the following reasons: sickness, bodily injury,
temporary disabilities, required physical or dental examinations or treatment,
or exposure to a contagious disease, when continuing work might jeopardize the
health of others.
   (b)   Sick leave may be used when an employee must care for a member of his
or her immediate family who is ill or needs medical care.
   (c)   Sick leave may also be used to supplement Worker’s Compensation
Disability Leave both during the waiting period before Workers’ Compensation
benefits begin.
   (d)   Up to three (3) days of sick leave may be used for death in the
employee’s immediate family. Additional time may be requested using accrued
vacation, compensatory leave, or leave without pay.
   (e)   “Immediate family” shall be defined as spouse, child, parent, brother,
sister, grandparent, grandchild, various combinations of step, half and in-law,
and adopted relationships of the employee, or guardian.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 13.   Sick leave: accrual rate, accumulation, and manner of taking.
   (a)   Sick leave shall accrue at a rate of one (1) day per month of service
or twelve (12) days per year. Sick leave for full-time employees working other
than the basic work schedule shall be pro-rated as described in this Article.
   (b)   Notification of the desire to take sick leave shall be submitted to
the employee’s supervisor prior to the leave or not later than two (2) hours
after the beginning of a scheduled work day. An employee who works in shifts
must notify his/her supervisor of the desire to take sick leave prior to leave
or not later than two (2) hours prior to the beginning of the shift. Failure to
so notify the appropriate supervisor may result in disciplinary action.
   (c)   The minimum amount of sick leave that may be taken is one half hour
and leave must be taken in increments of one quarter hour.
   (d)   Sick leave will be cumulative for an indefinite period of time and may
be converted upon retirement for service credit consistent with the provisions
of the North Carolina Local Government Employee Retirement System.
   (e)   All sick leave accumulated by an employee shall end and terminate
without compensation when the employee resigns or is separated from the town,
except as stated for employees retiring or terminated due to reduction in
force.
   (f)   Sharing sick leave.
   (1)   With the approval of the town manager, an employee may transfer a
portion of the employee's accumulated sick leave to another town employee (the
recipient employee) who needs that sick leave because the recipient employee
has had a catastrophic injury or has a critical illness and the recipient
employee has exhausted all of his or her accumulated sick leave, vacation
leave, and compensation time.
   (2)   The donating employee may not donate more than ten percent (10%) of
the employee's accumulated sick leave and must have a remaining balance of at
least eighty (80) hours of sick leave after the donation has been made.
(Ord. of 11/5/07; Res. of 6/25/12)
Section 14.   Transfer of sick leave from previous employer.
   The town will accept the transfer of sick leave for employees from other
employers who are participants of the North Carolina Local Government or State
Employee Retirement System. The sick leave will be treated as though it were
earned with the Town of Valdese. The sick leave amount must be certified by the
previous employer. This sick leave may be taken after the employee successfully
completes the initial hire probationary period.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 15.   Sick leave: medical certification.
   (1)   The employee’s supervisor or Department Head may require a physician’s
certificate stating the nature of the employee or employee’s family member’s
illness and the employee’s capacity to resume duties, for each occasion on
which an employee uses sick leave or whenever the supervisor observes a
“pattern of absenteeism.” The employee may be required to submit to such
medical examination or inquiry as the Department Head deems desirable. The
Department Head shall be responsible for the application of this provision to
the end that:
   (a)   Employees shall not be on duty when they might endanger their health
or the health of other employees; and
   (b)   There will be no abuse of leave privileges.
   (2)   Claiming sick leave under false pretense to obtain a day off with pay
shall subject the employee to disciplinary action up to and including
dismissal.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 16.   Leave pro-rated.
   (1)   Holiday, annual, and sick leave earned by full-time employees with
fewer or more hours than the basic work week shall be determined by the
following formula:
   (a)   The number of hours worked by such employees shall be divided by the
number of hours in the basic work week (usually forty (40) hours).
   (b)   The proportion obtained in step 1 shall be multiplied by the number of
hours of leave earned annually by employees working the basic work week.
   (c)   The number of hours in step 2 divided by twelve (12) shall be the
number of hours of leave earned monthly by the employees concerned, divided by
twenty-six (26) shall be the number of hours of leave earned per bi-weekly
payroll period.
   (2)   This means, for example, that law enforcement officers scheduled for
an annual average forty-two (42) hour week earn 8.4 hours for each day of sick,
vacation, or holiday leave they earn.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 17.   Family and medical leave.
   (1)   The town will grant up to 12 weeks of family and medical leave during
any twelve (12) month period to eligible employees in accordance with the
Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA). The twelve (12) month period in
which the twelve (12) weeks of entitlement occurs shall be a “rolling” twelve
(12) month period measured backward from the date an employee uses any FMLA
leave as allowed by this policy. The leave may be paid (coordinated with the
town’s vacation and sick leave policies), unpaid, or a combination of paid and
unpaid. Earned compensatory time may also be used during FMLA leave. Unpaid
leave will be granted only when the employee has exhausted all appropriate
types of paid leave. Additional time away from the job beyond the twelve (12)
week period may be approved in accordance with the town’s leave without pay
policy.
   (2)   To qualify for FMLA coverage, the employee must have worked for the
employer twelve (12) months or fifty-two (52) weeks; these do not have to be
consecutive. However, the employee must have worked one thousand two hundred
fifty (1,250) hours during the twelve (12) month period immediately before the
date when the FMLA time begins.
   (3)   Family and medical leave can be used for the following reasons:
   (a)   The birth of a child and in order to care for that child;
   (b)   The placement of a child for adoption or foster care;
   (c)   To care for a spouse, child, or parent with a serious health
condition; or
   (d)   The serious health condition of the employee.
   (e)   Military exigency.
   (4)   An employee who takes leave under this policy will return to the same
job or a job with equivalent status, pay, benefits, and other employment terms.
The position will be the same or one that entails substantially equivalent
skill, effort, responsibility, and authority.
   (5)   A serious health condition is defined as a condition which requires
inpatient care at a hospital, hospice, or residential medical care facility, or
a condition which requires continuing care by a licensed health care provider.
This policy covers illness of a serious and long-term nature resulting in
recurring or lengthy absences. Generally, a chronic or long term health
condition which results in a period of incapacity or more than three (3) days
would be considered a serious health condition.
   (6)   If a husband and wife both work for the town and each wishes to take
leave for the birth of a child, adoption or placement of a child in foster
care, or to care for a parent (not parent in-law) with a serious health
condition, the husband and wife together may only take a total of twelve (12)
weeks leave under FMLA.
   (7)   An employee taking leave for the birth of a child may use paid sick
leave for the period of actual disability, based on medical certification. The
employee shall then use all paid vacation or leave without pay for the
remainder of the twelve (12) week period. Sick leave may not be used to care
for a healthy newborn or healthy children.
   (8)   The request for the use of leave must be made in writing by the
employee and approved by the department head or Town Manager.
   (9)   Military exigency is a qualifying exigency arising out of the fact
that the fact that the employee’s spouse, son, daughter, or parent is a
military service member (reserve or National Guard) under a call or order to
federal active duty in support of a contingency operation. Qualifying events
are:
   (a)   Deployment of service member with seven (7) or fewer days notice;
   (b)   Military ceremonies and events such as family-assistance or
informational    programs related to the family member’s active duty or call to
active duty;
   (c)   Urgent, immediate childcare or arranging for alternative childcare for
the children of service members;
   (d)   Attending school or daycare meetings relating to the child of service
member;
   (e)   Making financial or legal arrangements related to a family member’s
active duty status or call to active duty; or
   (f)   Post-deployment activities for a period of ninety (90) days after the
termination of the service member’s active duty status.
   (10)   Military caregiver leave. An eligible employee whose spouse, son,
daughter, parent or next of kin is a current service member who is undergoing
treatment, therapy, recuperation or outpatient treatment or has temporary
disability retirement for injury or illness sustained in the line of duty, is
eligible for twenty-six (26) weeks of leave in a single twelve (12) month
period. During a single twelve (12) month period, the employee is eligible for
a total of twenty six (26) weeks of all types of FMLA leave.
(Ord. of 11/5/07; Ord. of 6/29/09; Res. of 1/4/10)
Section 18.   Medical and family leave certification
   (a)   In order to qualify for leave under this law, the town requires
medical certification. This statement from the employee’s or the family
member’s physician should include the date when the condition began, its
expected duration, prognosis, and brief statement of treatment. For the
employee’s own health condition, it should state that the employee is unable to
perform the essential functions of his/her position. For a seriously ill family
member, the certification must include a statement that the patient requires
assistance and the employee’s presence would be beneficial or desirable.
   (b)   This certification should be furnished at least thirty (30) days prior
to the needed leave unless the employee’s or family member’s condition is a
sudden one. The certification should be furnished as soon as possible (no
longer than fifteen (15) days from the date of the employee’s request). The
certification and request must be made to the department head and filed with
the Human Resources Officer.
   (c)   The employee is expected to return to work at the end of the time
frame stated in the medical certification, unless he/she has requested
additional time in writing under the town’s leave without pay policy.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 19.   Leave without pay.
   (a)   A full or part-time employee may be granted a leave of absence without
pay for a period of up to twelve (12) months by the Town Council. The leave
shall be used for reasons of personal disability after both sick leave and
vacation have been exhausted, sickness or disability of immediate family
members, continuation of education, special work that will permit the town to
benefit by the experience gained or the work performed, or for other reasons
deemed justified by the Town Manager.
   (b)   The employee shall apply in writing to the supervisor for leave. The
employee is obligated to return to duty within or at the end of the time
determined appropriate by the Town Manager. Upon returning to duty after being
on leave without pay, the employee shall be entitled to return to the same
position held at the time leave was granted or to one of like classification,
seniority, and pay. If the employee decides not to return to work, the
supervisor shall be notified immediately. Failure to report at the expiration
of a leave of absence, unless an extension has been requested, shall be
considered a resignation.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 20.   Family medical leave and leave without pay: retention and
continuation of benefits.
   (a)   When an employee is on leave under FMLA (maximum of twelve (12) weeks
in a year), the town will continue the employee’s health benefits during the
leave period at the same level and under the same conditions as if the employee
had continued to work. If an employee chooses not to return to work for reasons
other than a continued serious health condition, the town will require the
reimbursement of the amount paid for the employee’s health insurance premium
during the FMLA leave period.
   (b)   Other insurance and payroll deductions are the responsibility of the
employee and the employee must make those payments for continued coverage of
that benefit.
   (c)   An employee shall retain all unused vacation and sick leave while on
leave without pay. An employee ceases to earn leave credits on the date leave
without pay begins. The employee may continue to be eligible for benefits under
the town’s group insurance plans at his or her own expense, subject to any
regulation adopted by the Town Council and the regulations of the insurance
carrier.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 21.   Workers’ compensation leave.
   (1)   An employee absent from duty because of sickness or disability covered
by the North Carolina Workers’ Compensation Act may elect to use accrued sick
leave, vacation, or compensatory time during the first waiting period. The
employee may also elect to supplement workers’ compensation payments after they
begin with sick leave, vacation, or compensatory time, provided that the
combination of leave supplement and workers’ compensation payments does not
exceed normal compensation. An employee on workers’ compensation leave may be
permitted to continue to be eligible for benefits under the town’s group
insurance plans. When workers’ compensation leave extends long enough for the
waiting period to be reimbursed, the employee shall return the reimbursement
check to the town and have leave hours re-instated for all time covered by paid
leave. In such cases, the town will pay the employee for any unpaid time that
is owed the employee.
   (a)   All injuries arising out of, and during, the course of employment
should be reported by the injured employee to the immediate supervisor as soon
as possible. The supervisor or department head shall file an injury report
immediately. The employee must use sick leave or annual leave for the first
seven (7) days of disability. These days will be reimbursed only if the
disability continued for more than twenty-one (21) days.
   (b)   Before returning to work, a statement from the attending physician
should be submitted to the Human Resources Officer giving permission for the
employee to resume regular duties.
   (c)   Upon return to work, the employee’s salary will be computed on the
basis of the last salary plus any merit increment or other salary increase to
which the employee would have been entitled during the disability covered by
Workers’ Compensation. While receiving workers’ compensation benefits, an
employee continues to earn annual leave, sick leave, and will retain all
accumulated sick or annual leave.
   (2)   This provision also applies to reactions to small pox vaccinations
administered to town employees under Section 304 of the Homeland Security Act.
Such reactions shall be treated the same as any other workers’ compensation
claim as regards leave and salary continuation.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 22.   Military leave.
   The town will follow the requirements of USSERA (Uniformed Services
Employment and Re-employment Act) and any other applicable regulations. Regular
employees who are members of an Armed Forces Reserve organization or National
Guard shall be granted two (2) calendar weeks per year for military leave
without pay. Employees may use vacation or accrued compensatory leave time
during military leave. On rare occasions due to annual training being scheduled
on a federal fiscal year basis, an employee may be required to attend two (2)
periods of training in one (1) calendar year. For this purpose only, an
employee shall be granted an additional ten (10) days of military leave during
the same calendar year. If such duty is required beyond this ten (10) workdays,
the employee shall be eligible to take accumulated vacation leave or be placed
in a leave without pay status. While taking military leave, the employee’s
leave credits and other benefits shall continue to accrue as if the employee
physically remained with the town during this period. Employees who are
eligible for military leave have all job rights specified by the Vietnam
Veterans Readjustment Act.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 23.   Reinstatement following military service.
   The town will follow the requirements of USSERA and any other applicable
regulations. An employee called to extended active duty with the United States
military forces, who does not volunteer for service beyond the period for which
called, shall be reinstated with full benefits provided the employee:
   (a)   Applies for reinstatement within ninety (90) days after the release
from military service; and
   (b)   Is able to perform the duties of the former position or similar
position; or
   (c)   Is unable to perform the duties of the former position or a similar
position due to disability sustained as a result of the military service, but
is able to perform the duties of another position in the service of the town.
In this case the employee shall be employed in such other position as will
provide the nearest approximation of the seniority, status, and pay which the
employee otherwise would have been provided, if available.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 24.   Civil leave.
   A town employee called for jury duty or as a court witness for the federal
or state governments, or a subdivision thereof, shall receive leave with pay
for such duty during the required absence without charge to accumulated leave.
The employee may keep fees and travel allowances received for jury or witness
duty in addition to regular compensation; except, that employees must turn over
to the town any witness fees or travel allowance awarded by that court for
court appearances in connection with official duties. While on civil leave,
benefits and leave shall accrue as though on regular duty.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 25.   Parental school leave.
   A town employee who is a parent, guardian, or person standing in loco
parentis (in place of the parent) may take up to four (4) hours of paid leave
(vacation or accrued compensatory leave) annually to involve him or herself in
school activities of his or her child(ren). This leave is subject to the three
following conditions:
   (a)   The leave must be taken at a time mutually agreed upon by the employee
and the town;
   (b)   The town may require the employee to request the leave in writing at
least 48 hours prior to the time of the desired leave; and
   (c)   The town may require written verification from the child’s school that
the employee was involved at the school during the leave time.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 26.   Adverse weather and emergency conditions policy.
   (1)   The town has responsibility for providing emergency services. Adequate
staff is required to operate these critical services seven (7) days per week
and twenty-four (24) hours per day in all weather. Department Heads should
designate which staff is in critical positions required to report to work
regardless of weather or other hazardous conditions.
   (2)   The adverse weather/hazardous conditions policy is established to be
as fair as possible to all employees applying the following principles:
   (a)   Maintain adequate staffing at all times of emergency services;
   (b)   Provide for as much safety as possible for all employees in traveling
to and from work in hazardous conditions; and
   (c)   Not pay regular salaries to some employees for not working when others
are required to be at work.
   (3)   Town offices and departments shall remain open for the full scheduled
working day unless authorization for closing or other deviation is received
from the Town Manager’s office. The Manager will consider the hazard of driving
conditions and other relevant factors in determining whether to close town
offices. All departments and offices will be given sufficient advance notice of
any authorized closing of non-critical town functions. Upon authorizing a
closing, non-critical staff who does not work does not get paid but may use
vacation, earned compensatory time, or time without pay for the unworked hours.
Employees who leave work before an official early closing time, as well as
employees who report for work late or do not report for work because of
hazardous conditions may also use earned vacation or compensatory leave for
days or hours not worked.
   (4)   Critical staff is required to report in emergency situations and
should make preparations for care of family and personal needs to allow them to
report for duty when required. Any employee in a position designated as
critical who does not report to work as directed by the Town Manager shall be
subject to disciplinary action.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
ARTICLE VIII.
SEPARATION AND REINSTATEMENT
Section 1.   Types of separations.
   All separations of employees from positions in the service of the town shall
be designated as one of the following types and shall be accomplished in the
manner indicated. Resignation, reduction in force, disability, voluntary
retirement, dismissal, or death.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 2.   Resignation.
   (a)   An employee may resign by submitting the reasons for resignation and
the effective date in writing to the immediate supervisor as far in advance as
possible. In all instances, the minimum notice requirement is two (2) weeks;
thirty (30) days notice is required for department heads. Failure to provide
minimum notice shall result in forfeit of payment for accumulated vacation
unless the notice is waived upon recommendation of the Department Head and
approval by the Town Manager. Vacation Leave may not be taken in the final two
(2) weeks when an employee is working his or her resignation notice. Sick leave
will only be approved during the final two (2) weeks of a notice with a
physician’s certification or comparable documentation.
   (b)   Three (3) consecutive days of absence without contacting the immediate
supervisor or Department Head may be considered to be a voluntary resignation.
   (c)   Employees must return any town property including uniforms and
equipment upon resignation.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 3.   Reduction in force.
   In the event that a reduction in force becomes necessary, consideration
shall be given to the quality of each employee’s performance, organizational
needs, and seniority in determining those employees to be retained. Employees
who are separated because of a reduction in force shall be given at least two
(2) weeks notice of the anticipated action. No regular employee shall be
separated because of a reduction in force while there are temporary or
probationary employees serving in the same class in the department, unless the
regular employee is not willing to transfer to the position held by the
temporary or probationary employee.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 4.   Disability.
   An employee who cannot perform the essential job functions of the assigned
job because of a physical or mental impairment may be separated. Action may be
initiated by the employee or the town. In cases initiated by the employee, such
action must be accompanied by medical evidence acceptable to the Town Manager.
The town may require an examination, at the town’s expense, performed by a
physician of the town’s choice. The town will make reasonable accommodation
whenever possible for employees with disabilities in compliance with the
Americans with Disability Act.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 5.   Voluntary retirement.
   An employee who meets the conditions set forth under the provision of the
North Carolina Local Government Employee’s Retirement System may elect to
retire and receive all benefits earned under the retirement plan.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 6.   Death.
   Separation shall be effective as of the date of death. All compensation due
shall be paid to the estate of the employee.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 7.   Dismissal.
   An employee may be dismissed in accordance with the provisions and
procedures of Article IX.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 8.   Reinstatement.
   An employee who resigns while in good standing or who is separated because
of reduction in force may be reinstated within one (1) year of the date of
separation, upon recommendation of the department head, and upon approval of
the Town Manager. An employee who is reinstated in this manner shall be re-
credited with his or her previously accrued sick leave and previous service.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 9.   Rehiring.
   An employee who resigns while in good standing may be rehired with the
approval of the Town Manager, and may be regarded as a new employee, subject to
all of the provisions of rules and regulations of this policy. An employee in
good standing who is separated due to a reduction in force shall be given the
first opportunity to be rehired in the same or a similar position.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
ARTICLE IX.
UNSATISFACTORY JOB PERFORMANCE AND DETRIMENTAL PERSONAL CONDUCT
Section 1.   Disciplinary action for unsatisfactory job performance.
   A regular employee may be placed on disciplinary suspension, demoted, or
dismissed for unsatisfactory job performance, if after following the procedure
outlined below, the employee’s job performance is still deemed to be
unsatisfactory. All cases of disciplinary suspension, demotion, or dismissal
must be approved by the Town Manager prior to giving final notice to the
employee.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 2.   Unsatisfactory job performance defined.
   Unsatisfactory job performance includes any aspects of the employee’s job
which are not performed as required to meet the standards set by the department
head (including written performance standards, verbal performance coaching, and
performance review discussions. Examples of unsatisfactory job performance
include, but are not limited to, the following:
   (a)   Demonstrated inefficiency, negligence, or incompetence in the
performance of duties;
   (b)   Careless, negligent or improper use of town property or equipment;
   (c)   Physical or mental incapacity to perform duties after reasonable
accommodation;
   (d)   Discourteous treatment of the public or other employees;
   (e)   Absence without approved leave;
   (f)   Repeated improper use of leave privileges;
   (g)   Habitual pattern of failure to report for duty at the assigned time
and place;
   (h)   Failure to complete work within time frames established in work plan
or work standards; or
   (i)   Failure to meet work standards over a period of time.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 3.   Communication and warning procedures preceding disciplinary action
for unsatisfactory job performance.
   (1)   When an employee’s job performance is unsatisfactory, or when
incidents or inappropriate actions warrant, the supervisor should meet with the
employee as soon as possible in one (1) or more counseling sessions to discuss
specific performance problems. A brief summary of these counseling sessions
should be noted in the employee’s file by the supervisor. An employee whose job
performance is unsatisfactory over a period of time should normally receive at
least two (2) counseling sessions followed with written warnings from the
supervisor before disciplinary action is taken. In each case, the supervisor
should record the dates of discussions with the employee, the performance
deficiencies discussed, the corrective actions recommended, and the time limits
set. If the employee’s performance continues to be unsatisfactory, then the
supervisor should use the following steps:
   (a)   A final counseling session followed by a written warning from the
supervisor serving notice upon the employee that corrected performance must
take place immediately in order to avoid suspension, demotion, or dismissal.
   (b)   If performance does not improve, a written recommendation should be
sent to the department head or Town Manager for disciplinary action such as
suspension, demotion, or dismissal.
   (2)   Disciplinary suspensions for nonexempt employees should not generally
exceed three (3) days (twenty-four (24) hours). Disciplinary suspensions for
exempt employees should be for one (1) week in order to retain the exempt
status under FLSA. Copies of all disciplinary actions should be sent through
the Human Resource Officer to the personnel file.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 4.   Disciplinary action for detrimental personal conduct.
   With the approval of the Town Manager, an employee may be placed on
disciplinary suspension, demoted, or dismissed without prior warning for causes
relating to personal conduct detrimental to town service in order to:
   (1)   Avoid undue disruption of work;
   (2)   Protect the safety of persons or property; or
   (3)   For other serious reasons.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 5.   Detrimental personal conduct defined.
   Detrimental personal conduct includes behavior of such a serious detrimental
nature that the functioning of the town may be or has been impaired; the safety
of persons or property may be or have been threatened; or the laws of any
government may be or have been violated. Examples of detrimental personal
conduct include, but are not limited to, the following:
   (a)   Fraud or theft;
   (b)   Conviction of a felony or the entry of a plea of nolo contendere
thereto;
   (c)   Falsification of records for personal profit, to grant special
privileges, or to obtain employment;
   (d)   Willful misuse or gross negligence in the handling of town funds;
   (e)   Willful or wanton damage or destruction to property;
   (f)   Willful or wanton acts that endanger the lives and property of others;
   (g)   Possession of unauthorized firearms or other lethal weapons on the
job;
   (h)   Brutality in the performance of duties;
   (i)   Reporting to work under the influence of alcohol or drugs or partaking
of such while on duty. Prescribed medication may be taken within the limits set
by a physician as long as medically necessary;
   (j)   Engaging in incompatible employment or serving a conflicting interest;
   (k)   Request or acceptance of gifts in exchange for favors or influence;
   (l)   Engaging in political activity prohibited by this policy;
   (m)   Harassment of an employee or the public with threatening or obscene
language and/or gestures;
   (n)   Harassment of an employee(s) and/or the public on the basis of sex or
any other protected class status;
   (o)   Stated refusal to perform assigned duties or flagrant violation of
work rules and regulations; or
   (p)   Disclosure of confidential information.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 6.   Pre-dismissal conference.
   Before dismissal action is taken, whether for failure in personal conduct or
failure in performance of duties, the Town Manager or a department head will
conduct a pre-dismissal conference. At this conference, the employee may
present any response to the proposed dismissal to the Town Manager or
department head. The Town Manager or department head will consider the
employee’s response, if any, to the proposed dismissal, and will, within three
(3) working days following the pre-dismissal conference, notify the employee in
writing of the final decision. If the employee is dismissed, the notice shall
contain a statement of the reasons for the action and the employee’s appeal
rights under the town’s grievance procedure.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 7.   Non-disciplinary suspension.
   (1)   During the investigation, hearing, or trial of an employee on any
criminal charge, or during an investigation related to alleged detrimental
personal conduct, or during the course of any civil action involving an
employee, when suspension would, in the opinion of the department head, be in
the best interest of the town, the department head may suspend the employee for
part or all of the proceedings as a non-disciplinary action. In such cases, the
department head may:
   (a)   Temporarily relieve the employee of all duties and responsibilities
and place the employee on paid or unpaid leave for the duration of the
suspension, or
   (b)   Assign the employee new duties and responsibilities and allow the
employee to receive such compensation as is in keeping with the new duties and
responsibilities.
   (2)   If the employee is reinstated following the suspension such employee
shall not lose any compensation or benefits to which otherwise the employee
would have been entitled had the suspension not occurred. If the employee is
terminated following suspension, the employee shall not be eligible for any pay
from the date of suspension; provided, however, all other benefits with the
exception of accrued vacation and sick leave shall be maintained during the
period of suspension. (Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 8.   Substance abuse policy.
   The town has established policies and procedures related to employee
substance abuse in order to insure the safety and well-being of citizens and
employees, and to comply with any state, federal, or other laws and
regulations.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
ARTICLE X.
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE AND ADVERSE ACTION APPEAL
Section 1.   Policy.
   (a)   It is the policy of the town to provide a just procedure for the
presentation, consideration, and disposition of employee grievances. The
purpose of this article is to outline the procedure and to assure all employees
that a response to their complaints and grievances will be prompt and fair.
   (b)   Employees utilizing the grievance procedures shall not be subjected to
retaliation or any from of harassment from supervisors or employees for
exercising their rights under this policy. Supervisors or other employees who
violate this policy shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including
dismissal from town service.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 2.   Grievance defined.
   A grievance is a claim or complaint by an employee based upon an event or
condition which affects the circumstances under which an employee works and is
allegedly caused by misinterpretation, unfair application, or lack of
established policy pertaining to employment conditions.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 3.   Purposes of the grievance procedure.
   The purposes of the grievance procedure include, but are not limited to:
   (a)   Providing employees with a procedure by which their complaints can be
considered promptly, fairly, and without reprisal;
   (b)   Encouraging employees to express themselves about the conditions of
work which affect them as employees;
   (c)   Promoting better understanding of policies, practices, and procedures
which affect employees;
   (d)   Increasing employees’ confidence that personnel actions taken are in
accordance with established, fair, and uniform policies and procedures;
   (e)   Increasing the sense of responsibility exercised by supervisors in
dealing with their employees.
   (f)   Encouraging conflicts to be resolved between employees and supervisors
who must maintain an effective future working relationship, and therefore,
encouraging conflicts to be resolved at the lowest level possible of the chain
of command through collaboration and/or mediation; and
   (g)   Creating a work environment free of continuing conflicts,
disagreements, and negative feelings about the town or its leaders, thus
freeing up employee motivation, productivity, and creativity.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 4.   Procedure.
   (a)   When an employee has a grievance, the following successive steps are
to be taken. The number of calendar days indicated for each step should be
considered the maximum unless otherwise provided, and every effort should be
made to expedite the process. However, the time limits set forth may be
extended by mutual consent. The last step initiated by an employee shall be
considered to be the step at which the grievance is resolved. A decision to
rescind a disciplinary suspension, demotion or dismissal must be approved by
the Town Manager before the decision becomes effective.
   (b)   Informal resolution. Prior to the submission of a formal grievance,
the employee and supervisor should meet to discuss the problem and seek to
resolve it informally. Either the employee or the supervisor may involve the
Human Resources Department as a resource to help resolve the grievance.
Mediation may be used at any step in the process and is encouraged. Mediation
is the neutral facilitation of the conflict between or among parties where the
facilitator helps the parties find a mutually agreeable outcome. The mediator
should be a party agreed upon by all parties to the grievance.
   (1)   Step 1. If no resolution to the grievance is reached informally, the
employee who wishes to pursue a grievance shall present the grievance to the
appropriate supervisor (the person who took the action which created the
grievance issue, could be immediate supervisor, division head, department head,
etc.) in writing. The grievance must be presented within seven (7) calendar
days of the event or within seven (7) calendar days of learning of the event or
condition. The written grievance should identify the action that is deemed
unfair and the reason the grieving employee believes it to be unfair. The
supervisor shall respond to the grievance within seven (7) calendar days after
receipt of the grievance. The supervisor should, and is encouraged to, consult
with any employee of the town in order to reach a correct, impartial, fair and
equitable determination or decision concerning the grievance. Any employee
consulted by the supervisor is required to cooperate to the fullest extent
possible. The response from the supervisor for each step in the formal
grievance process shall be in writing and signed by the supervisor. In
addition, the employee shall sign a copy to acknowledge receipt thereof. The
responder at each step shall send copies of the grievance and response to the
Human Resources Officer.
   (2)   Step 2. If the grievance is not resolved by the first level supervisor
to the satisfaction of the employee by the supervisor, the employee may appeal
in writing to the next level supervisor (Division Head, Department Head, Town
Manager, etc.) within seven (7) calendar days after receipt of the response
from Step 1. The next level supervisor shall respond to the appeal stating the
determination of decision within seven (7) calendar days after receipt of the
appeal.
   (3)   Step 3. If the grievance is not resolved to the satisfaction of the
employee at the end of Step 2, the employee may appeal, in writing, to the Town
Manager within seven (7) calendar days after receipt of the response from Step
2. The Town Manager shall respond to the appeal, stating the determination of
decision within ten (10) calendar days after receipt of the appeal. The Town
Manager’s decision shall be the final decision. The Town Manager would notify
the Town Council of any impending legal action.
   (c)   Department heads.
   (1)   In the case of department heads or other employees where the Town
Manager has been significantly involved in determining disciplinary action,
including dismissal, the Town Manager may wish to obtain a neutral outside
party to either:
   a.   Provide mediation between the grieving department head and the Town
Manager (see definition of mediation in informal resolution above); or
   b.   Consider the appeal and make recommendations back to the Town Manager
concerning the appeal. Such parties might consist of human resource
professionals, attorneys, mediators, or other parties appropriate to the
situation.
   (2)   Department heads may also request the application of these special
provisions.
   (d)   The Town Manager’s decision regarding the disposition of the grievance
shall be the final decision. The Town Manager would notify the Town Council of
any impending legal action.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 5.   Role of the Human Resources Officer.
   (1)   Throughout the grievance procedure, the Human Resources Officer shall:
   (a)   Advise parties (including employee, supervisors, and Town Manager) of
their rights and responsibilities under this policy, including interpreting the
grievance and other policies for consistency of application;
   (b)   Be a clearinghouse for information and decisions in the matter
including maintaining files of all grievance documents.
   (c)   Give notices to parties concerning timetables of the process, etc.;
   (d)   Assist employees and supervisors in drafting statements;
   (e)   Facilitate the resolution of conflicts in the procedures or of the
grievance at any step in the process; and
   (f)   Help locate mediation or other resources as needed.
   (2)   The Human Resources Officer shall also determine whether or not
additional time shall be allowed to either side in unusual circumstances if the
parties cannot agree upon extensions when needed or indicated.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 6.   Grievance and adverse action appeal procedure for discrimination.
   When an employee, former employee, or applicant, believes that any
employment action discriminates illegally (i.e. is based on age, sex, race,
color, national origin, religion, creed, political affiliation, or non-job
related handicap), he or she has the right to appeal such action using the
grievance procedure outlined in this Article (Section 4 above). While such
persons are encouraged to use the grievance procedure, they shall also have the
right to appeal directly to the Human Resources Officer or Town Manager.
Employment actions subject to appeal because of discrimination include
promotion, training, classification, pay, disciplinary action, transfer,
layoff, failure to hire, or termination of employment. An employee or applicant
should appeal an alleged act of discrimination within thirty (30) calendar days
of the alleged discriminatory action, but may appeal for up to six (6) months
following the action.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
ARTICLE XI.
RECORDS AND REPORTS
Section 1.   Public information.
   In compliance with G.S. 160A-168, the following information with respect to
each town employee is a matter of public record: name; age; date of original
employment or appointment to the service; current position title; current
salary; date and amount of the most recent increase or decrease in salary; date
of the most recent promotion, demotion, transfer, suspension, separation, or
other change in position classification; and the office to which the employee
is currently assigned. Any person may have access to this information for the
purpose of inspection, examination, and copying, during regular business hours,
subject only to such rules and regulations for the safekeeping of public
records as the town may adopt. For the purposes of this section, the term
“salary” includes pay, benefits, incentives, bonuses and deferred and all other
forms of compensation paid by the town.
(Ord. of 11/5/07; Ord. of 6/29/09)
Section 2.   Access to confidential records.
   All information contained in a town employee’s personnel file, other than
the information mentioned above is confidential and shall be open to inspection
only in the following instances:
   (a)   The employee or his or her duly authorized agent may examine all
portions of his or her personnel file except letters of reference solicited
prior to employment, and information concerning a medical disability, mental or
physical, that a prudent physician would not divulge to the patient.
   (b)   A licensed physician designated in writing by the employee may examine
the employee’s medical record.
   (c)   A town employee having supervisory authority over the employee may
examine all material in the employee’s personnel file.
   (d)   By order of a court of competent jurisdiction, any person may examine
all material in the employee’s personnel file.
   (e)   An official of an agency of the state or federal government, or any
political subdivision of the state, may inspect any portion of a personnel file
when such inspection is deemed by the Town Manager to be necessary and
essential to the pursuit of a proper function of the inspecting agency, but no
information shall be divulged for the purpose of assisting in a criminal
prosecution of the employee, or for the purpose of assisting in an
investigation of the employee’s tax liability. However, the official having
custody of the personnel records may release the name, address, and telephone
number from a personnel file for the purpose of assisting in a criminal
investigation.
   (f)   An employee may sign a written release to be placed in his or her
personnel file that permits the record custodian to provide, either in person,
by telephone, or by mail, information specified in the release to prospective
employers, educational institutions, or other persons specified in the release.
   (g)   The Town Manager, with the concurrence of the Town Council, may inform
any person of the employment, non-employment, promotion, demotion, suspension
or other disciplinary action, reinstatement, transfer, or termination of a town
employee, and the reasons for that action. Before releasing that information,
the Town Manager shall determine in writing that the release in essential to
maintaining the level and quality of town services. The written determination
shall be retained in the Town Manager’s office, is a record for public
inspection, and shall become a part of the employee’s personnel file.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 3.   Personnel actions.
   The Human Resources Officer, with the approval of the Town Manager, will
prescribe necessary forms and reports for all personnel actions and will retain
records necessary for the proper administration of the personnel system. The
official personnel files are those which are maintained by the Human Resources
Department. These files shall contain documents such as employment applications
and related materials, records of personnel actions, documentation of employee
warnings, disciplinary actions, performance evaluations, retirement and
insurance records, letters of recommendation, and other personnel-related
documents. Any documents not contained in these files or maintained as
designated by the Human Resources Officer is not an official part of the
personnel file.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 4.   Records of former employees.
   The provisions for access to records apply to former employees as they apply
to present employees.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 5.   Remedies of employees objecting to material in file.
   An employee who objects to material in his or her file may place a statement
in the file relating to the material considered to be inaccurate or misleading.
The employee may seek removal of such material in accordance with established
grievance procedures.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 6.   Examining and/or copying confidential material without
authorization.
   Section 160A-168 of the General Statutes of North Carolina provides that any
person, not specifically authorized to have access to a personnel file
designated as confidential, who shall knowingly and willfully examine in its
official filing place, remove or copy any portion of a confidential personnel
file shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined
consistent with the General Statutes.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 7.   Destruction of records regulated.
   No public official may destroy, sell, loan, or otherwise dispose of any
public record, except in accordance with G.S. 121.5, without the consent of the
State Department of Cultural Resources. Whoever unlawfully removes a public
record from the office where it is usually kept, or whoever alters, defaces,
mutilates or destroys it will be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
will be fined in an amount provided in G.S. Chapter 132.3.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
ARTICLE XII.
IMPLEMENTATION OF POLICIES
Section 1.   Conflicting policies repealed.
   All policies, ordinances, or resolutions that conflict with the provisions
of these policies are hereby repealed.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 2.   Separability.
   If any provision of these policies or any rule, regulation, or order
thereunder of the application of such provision to any person or circumstances
is held invalid, the remainder of these policies and the application of such
remaining provisions of these policies of such rules, regulations, or orders to
persons or circumstances other than those held invalid will not be affected
thereby.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 3.   Effective date.
   These policies shall become effective on a date approved by the Town
Council.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
Section 4.   Amendments.
   This policy may be amended by action of the Town Council and by resolution
appropriately approved. Notice of any suggested amendment to the policy or any
portion thereof, shall be provided to employees and opportunities for employee
comment and reaction shall be made available prior to the amendments going to
the Town Council for action. Proposed amendments should be posted on bulletin
boards in all employee work locations and/or in employee newsletters. Any
revisions or amendments adopted in conformance with this procedure shall become
effective as of the date of such adoption.
(Ord. of 11/5/07)
CHAPTER 3
Departmental Operating Organization
(Reserved)
Cross Reference: Police and fire department provisions are found in Part 3,
Public Safety.
CHAPTER 4
Financial Administration
ARTICLE A
Purchasing
Section
2-4001   Purchasing.
Section
2-4002 through Section 2-4010 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Section
2-4011   Fiscal year.
Section
2-4012   Date of assessment.
Section
2-4013   Partial payment of taxes.
Section
2-4014   Apportionment and release of lien.
Section
2-4015   Applicability of Sections 2-4013 and 2-4014.
Section
2-4016   Franchises now in effect.
Section
2-4017 through Section 2-4050 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Fiscal Procedures (Reserved)
ARTICLE D
Gross Receipts Tax on Retail Short-Term Lease or Rental of Vehicles.
Section
2-4051   Definitions.
Section
2-4052   Levy of tax.
Section
2-4053   Collection of the tax.
Section
2-4054   Report and payment of tax.
Section
2-4055   Taxpayer to keep records.
Section
2-4056   Tax collector to provide forms.
Section
2-4057   Situs.
Section
2-4058   Penalties and remedies.
Section
2-4059   Administration.
Section
2-4060 through Section 2-4080 reserved.
ARTICLE E
Section
2-4081   Citation.
Section
2-4082   Definitions.
Section
2-4083   Ratification of existing permits.
Section
2-4084   Levy of tax.
Section
2-4085   Period for which tax due.
Section
2-4086   Report and payment of tax.
Section
2-4087   Refunds.
Section
2-4088   Penalties and remedies.
Section
2-4089   Administration.
Section
2-4090   Confidentiality of records.
Section
2-4091   Article cumulative.
ARTICLE A
Purchasing
Section 2-4001   Purchasing.
   (a)   In accordance with the Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act,
no bill or claim against the town may be paid unless it has been approved by
the officer or employee responsible for the function or agency to which the
expense is charged. No check or draft of the town shall be valid unless it
bears on its face the certificate of the purchasing agent as follows:
   “This disbursement has been approved as require by the Local Government
Budget and Fiscal Control Act.”
   (b)   No contract, agreement, or purchase order shall be valid unless it
bears the purchasing agent’s certificate as follows:
   “This instrument has been preaudited in the manner required by the Local
Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act.”
State Law Reference: G.S. 159-28, as amended.
Cross Reference: Town manager to serve as purchasing agent, Section
2-2009(1).
Editorial Note: The town has a joint purchasing agreement for office and street
supplies with the City of Morganton and the Town of Drexel (Resolution passed
on March 3, 1975).
Section 2-4002 through section 2-4010 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Finance and Taxation Generally
State Law Reference: Taxation authority generally, G.S. §160a-206 et seq.
Cross Reference: Duty of manager as to finance. Section
2-2009(1),
2-2009(6),
2-2009(7). Town Treasurer. Section
2-2012 and
2-2013. Tax collector. Section 2-016 and
2-2017.
Section 2-4011   Fiscal year.
   The fiscal year for the town shall commence on July 1 of each year and end
on June 30 of the following year. (Code 1970, Sec. 2-55)
Section 2-4012   Date of assessment.
   All property, real and personal shall be listed and assessed, as the case
may be, in accordance with ownership and value as of January 1 of each year.
(Code 1970, Sec. 2-56)
Section 2-4013   Partial payment of taxes.
   Unless otherwise directed by the governing body, the tax collector shall, at
any time, accept partial payments on taxes and issue a partial payment receipt
therefor. In crediting the payment on the tax for any year or on any
installment, the payment shall first be applied to accrued penalties, interest,
and costs and then to the principal amount of such tax or installment. (Code
1970, Sec. 2-57)
Section 2-4014   Apportionment and release of lien.
   In order to avoid undue hardship, the tax collector may release a particular
tract or parcel of real estate from the tax lien of the town when a change in
the ownership of such property has occurred since the listing date for the year
proposed to be paid, upon payment by the owner of such property of the tax
against the same and upon the payment of all unpaid personal property tax with
interest and penalties thereon, and all costs allowed by law, against the party
in whose name such property was listed. The party paying the personal property
tax of another shall be subrogated to the rights of the town with respect to
such tax, and the tax collector shall assign to such party all rights of the
town with respect to such item of personal property tax. (Code 1970, Sec. 2-58)
Section 2-4015   Applicability of Sections 2-4013 and 2-4014.
   The rules stated in the two (2) preceding sections shall apply in cases
where property has been sold for taxes and the town is the holder of the
certificate of sale; provided, that no suit has been instituted to foreclose
such certificate; provided, further, that the first applicant for a release in
accordance with the provisions of section
2-4014 shall pay the cost of advertising, selling, and issuing of certificate
of sale. (Code 1970, Sec. 2-59)
Section 2-4016   Franchises now in effect.
   Copies of all franchises and agreements now in effect shall be found on file
in the town clerk’s office. (Code 1970, Sec. 2-61)
Section 2-4017 through Section 2-4050 reserved.
Editorial Note: The town repealed its privilege license taxation ordinances
effective June 30, 1969.
ARTICLE C
Fiscal Procedures
(Reserved)
ARTICLE D
Gross Receipts Tax on Retail Short-Term Lease or Rental of Vehicles.
Section 2-4051   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Customer. Any person that leases or rents a vehicle on a short-term lease or
rental basis.
   General Statutes. The North Carolina General Statutes; any reference to a
particular section thereof shall include the same as may be from time to time
amended, modified, supplemented, revised, or superseded.
   Gross receipts. The amount that is or would be reported as gross receipts on
a business’s state income tax return, or on the federal income tax return filed
with the state income tax return if the state return does not separately state
gross receipts for the most recently completed tax year. Taxes collected
hereunder are not subject to the tax herein imposed and are not included in
gross receipts.
   Lease or rental. A transfer of possession or control of tangible personal
property for a fixed or indeterminate term for consideration. The term does not
include any of the following:
   (1)   A transfer of possession or control of property under a security
agreement or deferred payment plan that requires the transfer of title upon
completion of the required payments.
   (2)   A transfer of possession or control of property under an agreement
that requires the transfer of title upon completion of required payments and
payment of an option price that does not exceed the greater of $100 or 1% of
the total required payments.
   (3)   The providing of tangible personal property along with an operator for
a fixed or indeterminate period of time, if the operator is necessary for the
equipment to perform as designed. For the purpose of this definition, an
operator must do more than maintain, inspect, or set up the tangible personal
property. (G.S. 105-164.3(7A))
   Long-term lease or rental. A lease or rental made under a written agreement
to lease or rent property to the same person for a period of at least 365
continuous days. (G.S. 105-187.1(3))
   Person. Any individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary, corporation,
unincorporated association, partnership, sole proprietorship, company, firm, or
other legal entity.
   Short-term lease or rental. Any lease or rental of a vehicle that is not a
long-term lease or rental. (G.S. 160A-215.1(e)(1) and G.S. 105-187.1(7))
   Tax Collector. That individual appointed by the governing body pursuant to
G.S. 105-349 to collect taxes
on behalf of the town, any other person authorized to carry out the duties and
functions of such individual.
   Taxpayer. Any person liable for the taxes imposed by this article.
   Vehicle. Any of the following:
   (1)   A private vehicle of the private passenger type, including a passenger
van, minivan, or sport utility vehicle.
   (2)   A motor vehicle of the cargo type, including a cargo van, pickup
truck, or truck with a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,000 pounds or less
that is used predominantly in the transportation of property for other than
commercial freight and that does not require the operator to possess a
commercial drivers license.
   (3)   A trailer or semitrailer with a gross vehicle weight of 6,000 pounds
or less. (G.S. 160A-215.1(e)(1)) (Ord. of 6/12/00)
Section 2-4052   Levy of Tax.
   A tax is hereby imposed and levied in an amount equal to 1.5% of the gross
receipts derived from the short-term lease or rental of vehicles at retail to
the general public. This tax on gross receipts is in addition to the privilege
taxes authorized by G.S. 160A-211. (Ord. of 6/12/00)
Section 2-4053   Collection of the Tax.
   Every person engaged in the business of the short- term lease or rental of
vehicles at retail to the general public shall collect at the time of the lease
or rental the tax herein levied, place the tax so collected in a segregated
account, and thereafter remit such tax to the Tax Collector in accordance with
the provisions of this article. The taxpayer shall include a provision in each
retail short- term lease or rental agreement stating that the percentage amount
enacted by this article of the total lease or rental price, excluding sales
tax, is being charged as a tax on gross receipts. The amount of the tax shall
be stated separately from the lease or rental and shown separately on the
taxpayer’s records. The tax shall be paid by the customer to the taxpayer as
trustee for and on account of the town. The taxpayer shall be liable for the
collection thereof and for its payment to the Tax Collector, and the taxpayer’s
failure to charge or to collect the tax from the customer shall not affect such
liability. (Ord. of 6/12/00)
Section 2-4054   Report and Payment of Tax.
   Taxes levied under this article are due and payable when a return is
required to be filed. Every taxpayer shall, within the time specified, submit a
return to the Tax Collector on the form prescribed by the Tax Collector. A
return must be signed by the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s agent. Returns of
taxpayers are due to the Tax Collector each month on or before the 15th day of
the month following the month in which the tax accrues. As provided in G.S.
160A-208.1, a return shall not be considered a public record, and information
contained in a return may be disclosed only in accordance therewith. (Ord. of
6/12/00)
Section 2-4055   Taxpayer to Keep Records.
   The taxpayer shall keep and preserve suitable records of the gross receipts
received by such taxpayer in the conduct of business and such other books or
accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of the tax for which such
taxpayer is liable under the provisions of this article. It shall be the duty
of the taxpayer to keep and preserve for a period of three (3) years all such
records of gross receipts and other books and accounts described. All records,
books, and accounts herein described shall be open for examination at all
reasonable hours during the day by the Tax Collector or his or her duly
authorized agent. (Ord. of 6/12/00)
Section 2-4056   Tax Collector to Provide Forms.
   The Tax Collector shall design, prepare, print, and make available to all
taxpayers operating within the municipal boundaries of the town forms and
instructions for filing returns to insure a full collection of and an
accounting for taxes due. The failure of any taxpayer to obtain or receive
forms shall not relieve such taxpayer from the payment of the tax at the time
and in the manner provided. (Ord. of 6/12/00)
Section 2-4057   Situs.
   The transaction giving rise to the tax herein levied shall be deemed to have
occurred at the location of the entity from which the customer takes delivery
of the vehicle. (G.S. 160A-215.1(b)) (Ord. of 6/12/00)
Section 2-4058   Penalties and Remedies.
   The provisions with respect to remedies and penalties applicable to
Subchapter VIII (Local Government Sales and Use Tax) of Chapter 105 of the
General Statutes, as contained in Article 5 and Article 9, Subchapter 1,
Chapter 105 thereof, shall be applicable in like manner to the tax authorized
to be levied and collected under this article, to th extent that the same are
not inconsistent with the provisions hereof. The governing body of the town may
exercise any power the Secretary of Revenue may exercise in collecting sales
and use taxes. (G.S. 160A-215.1(f)) (Ord. of 6/12/00)
Section 2-4059   Administration.
   In addition to the provisions herein, the levy and collection of the taxes
herein imposed shall be otherwise administered in the same manner as the Sales
and Use Tax as provided in Article 5, Subchapter 1, Chapter 105 of the General
Statutes. (G.S. 160A-215.1(d)) (Ord. of 6/12/00)
Section 2-4060 through 2-4080 reserved.
ARTICLE E
Franchise Tax on Electric Power
Section 2-4081   Citation.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as the town Franchise Tax on
Electric Power Ordinance. (Ord. of 6/3/02)
Section 2-4082   Definitions.
   Except as otherwise provided in this article, the definitions of words,
terms, and phrases as set forth and/or applied in G.S. Chapter 105, Article 3,
are hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof. Reference to any
provision or provisions in the General Statutes shall include the same as may
be from time to time amended, modified, supplemented, revised, or superceded.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Secretary of Revenue. The Secretary of Revenue of the state.
   State Franchise Tax Act. G.S. Chapter 105, Article 3.
   Tax Collector. The department of the town government or the official agency
of the state designated by law and authorized by law to administer the
collection of the tax herein levied.
   Taxpayer(s). Any electric power company liable for the taxes imposed by this
article.
   Town. The town of Valdese.
   Town franchise tax. The franchise or privilege tax imposed on an electric
power company engaged in the business of furnishing electricity, electric
lights, current, or power as provided in G.S. Chapter 105, Article 3, entitled
“Franchise Tax.” (Ord. of 6/3/02)
Section 2-4083   Ratification of Existing Permits.
   All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Secretary of
Revenue pursuant to the Revenue Act are, for the purposes of this article,
hereby ratified, confirmed, and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an
additional town permit for the same purpose. (Ord. of 6/3/02)
Section 2-4084   Levy of Tax.
   A franchise tax is hereby levied and imposed for the period(s) designated in
Section 2-2085 of this article upon the electric power companies engaged in the
business of furnishing electricity, electric lights, current, or power within
the corporate limits of the town. The tax shall by 3.09% of the companies’
taxable gross receipts from the business of furnishing electricity, electric
lights, current, or power within the corporate limits of the town. It
isintended that taxable gross receipts hereunder shall be the same as those
taxable under the State Franchise Tax Act. (Ord. of 6/3/02)
Section 2-4085   Period for which Tax Due.
   When a distribution to the town as required under the State Franchise Tax
Act shall not be made, the town franchise tax shall be levied for the periods
herein described. A period for which the tax shall be due shall begin on the
first day of the first calendar month following the month during which a
distribution under the State Franchise Tax Act was due, but not made, to the
town, and shall continue from month to month until such time as a distribution
as required under the State Franchise Tax Act shall be made. The town shall
notify taxpayers within a reasonable time after a required distribution is or
is not made by the Secretary of Revenue. (Ord. of 6/3/02)
Section 2-4086   Report and Payment of Tax.
   The tax shall be paid to the Tax Collector at the time and in the form and
manner provided for the payment of sales and use taxes pursuant to and in
accordance with G.S. 105-164.16 as the same applies to a taxpayer who is
consistently liable for more than $100 but less than $10,000 a month. As
applicable to sales and use taxes, such a taxpayer must file a return and pay
the taxes due on a monthly basis. The tax shall be due and payable when a
return is required to be filed. (Ord. of 6/3/02)
Section 2-4087   Refunds.
   Upon the resumption of distributions by the Secretary of Revenue as required
under the State Franchise Tax Act, a refund may be due to a taxpayer as
specified in this section. A refund in the amount indicated herein below shall
be due to a taxpayer within thirty (30) days after presentation to the town by
the taxpayer of a written certification made by the Secretary of Revenue
stating that portion of the town’s percentage distribution amount of the state
franchise tax that was paid by the taxpayer and allocable to the calendar
quarter for which the most recent distribution was made. The amount of a refund
shall equal the portion of the percentage distribution amount designated by the
Secretary of Revenue. (Ord. of 6/3/02)
Section 2-4088   Penalties and Remedies.
   The provisions with respect to remedies and penalties applicable to the
State Franchise Tax Act, as contained in G.S. Chapter 105, Subchapter I,
Article 9, shall be applicable in like manner to the tax authorized to be
levied and collected under this article, to the extent that the same are not
inconsistent with the provisions hereof. The governing body of the town may
exercise any power the Secretary of Revenue may exercise in collecting the
state franchise tax. (Ord. of 6/3/02)
Section 2-4089   Administration.
   In addition to the provisions herein and to the extent that the same are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this article, the levy and collection of
taxes herein imposed shall be otherwise administered in the same manner as the
State Franchise Tax Act, as contained in G.S. Chapter 105, Subchapter I,
Article 9. (Ord. of 6/3/02)
Section 2-4090   Confidentiality of Records.
   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning
the administration of the town franchise tax is legislatively recognized and
declared, and to protect the same the provisions of G.S. Chapter 105 are
adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration
of the tax levied herein as if set forth in full. (Ord. of 6/3/02)
Section 2-4091   Article Cumulative.
   The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all
other taxing provisions of town ordinances. (Ord. of 6/3/02)
CHAPTER 5
Social Security and Retirement
ARTICLE A
Social Security
Section
2-5001   Social Security agreement entered into.
Section
2-5002   Coverage; exclusion.
Section
2-5003 through section 2-5010 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Retirement
Section
2-5011   Town secures benefits of North Carolina Retirement System.
Section
2-5012   Agreement with the North Carolina Local Governmental Employees'
Retirement System.
ARTICLE A
Social Security
Section 2-5001   Social Security agreement entered into.
   It is agreed that the *state agency is hereby authorized to include,
effective, April 1, 1956, individuals as employees in temporary part-time,
temporary and part-time regular positions under provisions of the agreement
which was made and entered into on February 6, 1956, by and between this town
and the Secretary of the Board of Trustees of the Teachers' and State
Employees' Retirement System. (Ord. of 2/6/56, Sec. 1)
*Editorial Note: The "state agency " is the Board of Trustees of the Teachers'
and State Employees' Retirement System.
Section 2-5002   Coverage; exclusion.
   It is agreed between the town and the state agency that the services of
members of all gov­ erning boards will be covered under Social Se­ curity by
this agreement, provided the follow­ ing optional exclusion is ruled out and
initialed by the mayor, chairman, or other office em­ powered to execute this
agreement:
   Services of elective officials comprising the governing board and members of
all other boards, comm1ss1ons, councils, committees where such positions are
filled by the General Assembly, a board or committee or by the qualified
electorate of the particular jurisdiction involved and the members of any and
all other said boards whose duties require not more than 1,000 hours of service
per year. (Ord. of 2/6/56, Sec. 1)
Section 2-5003 through section 2-5010 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Retirement
Section 2-5011   Town secures benefits of North Carolina Retirement System.
   The Town of Valdese hereby elects to secure said benefits for its employees
in the North Carolina Local Governmental Employees’ Retirement System. (Res. of
7/8/74, Sec. 1)
Section 2-5012   Agreement with the North Carolina Local Governmental
Employees’ Retirement System.
   The town hereby agrees to comply with all provisions of the North Carolina
Local Governmental Employees’ Retirement System as defined in Article 3,
Chapter 128 of the General Statutes of North Carolina, as amended, and to make
such increased employer’s contributions as the Local Governmental Employees’
Retirement System may determine to be necessary in order to provide said
benefits. (Res. of 7/8/74, Sec. 2)
   The town is hereby ordered and directed to execute an agreement with the
Director of the North Carolina Local Governmental Employees’ Retirement System
to implement the benefits of Chapter 1310 of the Session Laws of 1973 (2nd
Session, 1974). (Res. of 7/8/74, Sec. 3)
CHAPTER 6
(Reserved)
CHAPTER 7
Boards and Commissions
ARTICLE A
Planning and Zoning Board
Section
2-7001   Board created.
Section
2-7002   Composition.
Section
2-7003   Appointment of members.
Section
2-7004   Terms of members; filling vacancies.
Section
2-7005   Qualifications and compensation of members.
Section
2-7006   Removal of members.
Section
2-7007   Organization.
Section
2-7008   Rules; records; meetings; quorum.
Section
2-7009   Powers and duties generally.
Section
2-7010   Basic studies; cooperation of town officials; right of entry, etc.
Section
2-7011   Comprehensive plan; generally.
Section
2-7012   Same; public hearings thereon.
Section
2-7013   Zoning ordinance.
Section
2-7014   Subdivision regulations.
Section
2-7015   Publicity and education.
Section
2-7016   Committees, employees and expenditures generally.
Section
2-7017   Authority as to contributions.
Section
2-7018   Annual report, analysis of expenditures and budget request.
Section
2-7019 through section 2-7020 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Parks and Recreation Commission
Section
2-7021   Town to assume responsibilities.
Section
2-7022   through section 2-7030 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Housing Authority
Section
2-7031   Authority created.
Section
2-7032   Members, number, initial appointments.
Section
2-7033   through section 2-7039 reserved.
ARTICLE D
Town Arbor - Beautification Committee
Section
2-7040   Committee created.
Section
2-7041   Members, number, initial appointments.
Section
2-7042   Qualifications and compensation of members.
Section
2-7043   Removal of members.
Section
2-7044   Organization.
Section
2-7045   Rules; records; meetings; quorum.
Section
2-7046   Powers and duties generally.
Section
2-7047   Appropriation, budgeting of funds.
ARTICLE A
Planning and Zoning Board
Section 2-7001   Board created.
   The planning and zoning board is hereby created. (Code 1970, Sec. 2-62)
Section 2-7002   Composition.
   The planning board shall consist of five (5) members. (Code 1970, Sec. 2-63;
as amended 11/3/80)
Section 2-7003   Appointment of members.
   The five (5) members of the planning board for that area within the town
shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the town council. (As amended
11/3/80)
Section 2-7004   Terms of members; filling vacancies.
   Each member of the planning board shall be appointed for a term of four (4)
years, and the original appointments shall be made in the following manner: One
(1) member for a term of two (2) years; two (2) members for a term of three (3)
years; and two (2) members for a term of four (4) years. At the expiration of
the terms of all members first appointed, all new or reappointed members shall
be for a full term of four (4) years. Vacancies occurring otherwise shall be
for the unexpired term and shall be made by the mayor with the approval of the
town council. (Code 1970, Sec. 2-65; as amended 11/3/80)
Section 2-7005   Qualifications and compensation of members.
   (a)   The members of the planning and zoning board shall be persons of
recognized experience and qualifications and shall hold no other official
position.
   (b)   All members of the planning and zoning board shall serve as such
without compensation. (Code 1970, Sec. 2-66)
Section 2-7006   Removal of members.
   (a)   Members may, after public hearing, be removed from the planning and
zoning board by the mayor for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in
office.
   (b)   The membership of any member who is absent from four (4) consecutive
meetings, or whose percentage of attendance over any period of 12 consecutive
months is less than 60 percent, shall automatically be terminated, unless such
absence is excused by the full planning and zoning board for good and
sufficient cause. (Code 1970, Sec. 2-67)
Section 2-7007   Organization.
   (a)   The planning and zoning board shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman,
secretary and such other officials as may be necessary, from among its members,
to serve for a period of one year, with eligibility for reelection.
   (b)   The planning and zoning board shall hold a meeting for the election of
officers at the first meeting in Febmary of each year. (Code 1970, Sec. 2-68)
Section 2-7008   Rules; records; meetings; quorum.
   The planning and zoning board shall adopt rules for transaction of its
business and shall keep a record of its members' attendance and of its
resolutions, discussions, findings and recommendations, which record shall be a
public record. The board shall hold at least one meeting quarterly, and all of
its meetings shall be open to the public. There shall be a quomm of five (5)
members for the purpose of taking any official action required by this article.
(Code 1970, Sec. 2-69)
Section 2-7009   Powers and duties generally.
   (a)   It shall be the function and duty of the planning and zoning board to
make comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable
future developments and prepare such plans for physical, social and economic
growth as will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience of
the general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the development of the
town.
   (b)   In general, the planning and zoning board shall have the power and
duty to:
   (1)   Acquire and maintain in current form such basic information and
materials as are necessary to an understanding of past trends, present
conditions and forces at work to cause changes in these conditions;
   (2)   Prepare and from time to time amend and revise a comprehensive and
coordinated plan for the physical development of the area;
   (3)   Establish principles and policies for guiding action in the
development of the area;
   (4)   Prepare and recommend to the town council ordinances promoting orderly
development in accordance with the comprehensive plan;
   (5)   Determine whether specific proposed de­ velopments conform to the
principles and re­ quirements of the comprehensive plan for the growth and
improvement of the area;
   (6)   Keep the council and the general public informed and advised as to
these matters;
   (7)   Prepare and n commend for adoption a zoning ordinance and map;
   (8)   Prepare and recommend for adoption subdivision regulations and to
administer such regulations.
Cross Reference: Subdivision regulations are codified as section
9-3001 et seq. Zoning ordinance is codified as section 9-4001 et seq.
State Law Reference: Zoning and subdivision regulations are covered in G.S.
160A-J60 et seq.
Section 2-7010   Basic studies; cooperation of town officials; right of entry,
etc.
   (a)   The planning and zoning board may collect maps and aerial photographs
of manmade and natural physical features of the area, statistics on past trends
and present conditions with respect to population, property values, the
economic base of the area, land use and such other information as is important
or likely to be important in the preparation of a comprehensive plan of
development for the planning area and its various parts.
   (b)   In addition, the planning and zoning board may make special studies on
the location, condition and adequacy of specific facilities. which may include
but are not limited to studi s of housing, commercial and industrial
facilities, parks, playgrounds and recreational facilities, public and private
utilities and traffic, transportation and parking facilities.
   (c)   All town officials shall, upon request, furnish to the planning and
zoning board such available records or information as it may require in its
work. The board or its agents may, in the performance of its official duties,
enter upon lands and make examinations or surveys and maintain necessary
monuments thereon. (Code 1970, Sec. 2-71)
Section 2-7011   Comprehensive plan; generally.
   (a)   The comprehensive plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and
descriptive mat­ ter, shall be and show the planning and zoning board's
receommendations to the town council the development of the planning area,
including, among other things, the general location, charac­ ter and extent of
streets, bridges, boulevards, parkways, playgrounds, squares, parks, aviation
fields and other public ways, grounds and open spaces; the general location and
extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned
or operated, for water, lights, sanitation, transportation, communication,
power and other purposes, the removal, relocation, widening, narrowing,
vacating, abandonment, change of use or extension of any of the foregoing ways,
buildings, grounds, open spaces, property, utilities or terminals, the most
desirable pattern of land use within the area, in­ cluding areas for
residential uses, for farming and forestry, for manufacturing and industrial
uses, for commercial uses, for recreational uses, for open spaces, for mixed
uses and for other features.
   (b)   The plan and any ordinance or other measures to effectuate it shall be
made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious development of the town and its environs which will, in
accordance with present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals
and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of
development; including, among other things, adequate provision for traffic, the
promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provision for light
and air, the promotion of the healthful and convenient distribution of
population, the promotion of good civic design and arrangements, wise and
efficient expenditure of public funds, and the adequate provision of public
utilities, services and other public requirements.
Section 2-7012   Same; public hearings thereton.
The planning and zoning board may conduct such public hearings as may be
required to gather information necessary for the drafting, establishment and
maintenance of the compre­ hensive plan. Before adopting any such plan it shall
hold at least one public hearing thereon. (Code 1970, Sec. 2-73)
Section 2-7013   Zoning ordinance.
   (a)   The planning and zoning board shall prepare and submit a zoning
ordinance to the town council for its consideration and possible adoption in
accordance with the provisions of article 19 of chapter 160A of the General
Statutes of North Carolina, as amended.
   (b)   The planning and zoning board may initiate, from time to time,
proposals for amendment of the zoning ordinance, based upon its studies and the
comprehensive plan. In addition, it shall review and make recommendations to
the town council concerning all proposed amendments to the zoning ordinance.
Section 2-7014   Subdivision regulations.
   The planning and zoning board shall prepare and submit subdivision
regulations to the town council for its consideration and adoption.
Section 2-7015   Publicity and education.
   The planning and zoning board shall have power to promote public interest in
and an understanding of its recommendations, and to that end it may publish and
distribute copies of its recommendations and may employ other means of
publicity and education as it may determine. (Code 1970, Sec. 2-76)
Section 2-7016   Committees, employees and expenditures generally.
The planning and zoning board is authorized to appoint such committ es and
employees, and to authorize such expenditur s, as it may see fit, subject to
limitations of funds provided for the planning and zoning board by the town
council.
Section 2-7017   Authority as to contributions.
   The planning and zoning board is authorized to receive contributions from
private agencies and organizations or from individuals, in addition to any sums
which may be appropriated for its use by the town council. It may accept and
disburse such contributions for special purposes or projects, subject to any
specific conditions which it deems acceptable, whether or not such projects are
included in the approved budget.
Section 2-7018   Annual report, analysis of expenditures and budget request.
   The planning and zoning board shall, annually, submit to the town council a
written report of its activities, an analysis of the expenditures to date for
the current fiscal year and its requested budget of funds needed for operation
during the ensuing fiscal year.
State Law Reference: Article 19 of the General Statutes is the state provision
on planning and regulation of development.
Cross Reference: Subdivision regulations are codified as section
9-3001 et seq. Zoning is section 9-4001 et seq.
Section 2-7019 through 2-7020 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Parks and Recreation Commission
Section 2-7021   Town to assume responsibilities.
   (A)   The Town of Valdese hereby assumes the duties and obligations of the
Valdese Parks and Recreation Commission in order to provide appropriate
recreational programs and facilities for the citizens of the Town of Valdese.
   (B)   Persons presently employed by the Valdese Parks and Recreation
Commission shall hereby become employees of the Town of Valdese. (Ord. of 8/3/
87)
Section 2-7022 through section 2-7030 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Housing Authority
Section 2-7031   Authority created.
   The Valdese Housing Authority, created on October 4, 1965, is recognized as
the public body organized for the purpose of providing safe and sanitary
dwelling accommodations for the low-income person in the town.
State Law Reference:  State Housing Authorities Law, G.S. 157- 1, et seq.
Minimum housing standards, G.S. 160A-441 to 160A- 450.
Cross Reference: Minimum housing standards, Section
9-1021 to
9-1041.
Section 2-7032   Members, number, initial appointments.
   The housing authority shall be composed of five (5) members who are
residents of the town who shall serve terms of office of five (5) years each
with the first members appointed to serve terms of one, two (2), three (3),
four (4) and five (5) years and thereafter each member to serve terms of five
(5) years and thereby create staggered terms and require the reappointment of
one member to the authority each year.
ARTICLE D
Town Arbor-Beautification Committee
Section 2-7040   Committee created.
    There is hereby created a committee to be known as the Town Arbor-
Beautification Committee (hereafter referred to as the “committee”). (Ord. of
12/8/86)
Section 2-7041   Members, number, initial appointments.
The committee shall be composed of nine members who are residents of the town
who shall serve terms of office of three (3) years with original appointments
made in the following manner: Three (3) members for a term of one year; three
(3) members for a term of two (2) years; and three (3) members for a term of
three years. At the expiration of the terms of all members first appointed, all
new or reappointed members shall be for a full term of three (3) years.
Vacancies occurring otherwise shall be for the unexpired term and shall be made
by the mayor with the approval of the town council. (Ord. of 12/8/86)
Section 2-7042   Qualifications and compensation of members.
    (a)   The members of the committee shall be persons of recognized
experience and qualifications and shall hold no other official position.
    (b)   All members of the committee shall serve at such without
compensation. (Ord. of 12/8/86)
Section 2-7043   Removal of members.
Members may, after public hearing, be removed from the committee by the mayor
for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. (Ord. of 12/8/86)
Section 2-7044   Organization.
   (a)   The committee shall elect a chairperson, vice-chairperson, secretary,
and such other officials as may be necessary, from among its members, to serve
for a period of one year, with eligibility for reelection.
   (b)   The committee shall hold a meeting for the election of officers at the
first meeting held each year. (Ord. of 12/8/86)
Section 2-7045   Rules; records; meetings; quorum.
   The committee shall adopt rules for transaction of its business. It shall
keep a record of its members attendance and of its resolutions, discussions,
findings and recommendations, which records shall be of public record. The
board shall hold meetings at least quarterly, and all of its meetings shall be
open to the public. A majority of the committee’s members shall be a quorum for
the purpose of taking any official action. (Ord. of 12/8/86)
Section 2-7046   Powers and duties generally.
   (a)   It shall be the function and duty of the committee to make surveys and
studies of the landscaping, vegetation, and trees located within the town’s
parks, streets, sidewalks, and rights-of-way and to perform those other duties
and responsibilities set out in the town’s tree ordinance.
   (b)   In general, the committee shall have the power and duty to:
   (1)   Prepare and, from time to time, amend and revise a comprehensive and
coordinated plan for the landscaping, and vegetation located in the town’s
parks, streets, sidewalks, and rights-of-way.
   (2)   Prepare and recommend to the town council action promoting the town’s
beautification and, in particular, the construction, planting, maintenance, or
removal of landscaping and vegetation in the town’s parks, streets, sidewalks,
and rights-of-way.
   (3)   Prepare and recommend to the town council ordinances promoting the
beautification of the town.
   (4)   Exercise those duties, responsibilities, and powers set out in the
tree ordinance.
   (5)   To keep the council and the general public informed and advised as to
these matters. (Ord. of 12/8/86)
Cross Reference: Tree regulations, see section
8-8001 through section
8-8019.
Section 2-7047   Appropriation, budgeting of funds.
Funds appropriated by the council and budgeted to the committee shall be
disbursed by the fiscal disbursing officer of the council upon vouchers issued
by the committee and within the budget appropriations made. Funds received by
the committee from sources other than the budget appropriations shall be
deposited by the council to the credit and for the use of the committee and
disbursed as budget funds are disbursed, except that funds received by gift,
bequest, or otherwise shall be disbursed in accordance with the terms of such
gift or bequest. (Ord. of 12/8/86)
CHAPTER 8
Elections
Section
2-8001   Burke County Board of Elections to conduct town elections.
Section
2-8002   Existing election procedures to be continued.
Section
2-8003   Same; procedures re-adopted
Section
2-8004   Absentee ballots authorized.
Section
2-8005   Filing fees.
Section 2-8001   Burke County Board of Elections to conduct town elections.
   The Town of Valdese shall have the Burke County Board of Elections conduct
all of its elections in accordance with Article 23, Chapter 163 of the North
Carolina General Statutes. (Res. of 1/3/72, Sec. 1)
Section 2-8002   Existing election procedures to be continued.
   The election procedure heretofore existing for the town, including the
elections on a non-partisan basis where those receiving a plurality of the
votes are elected without a run-off are to be continued.
Section 2-8003   Same; procedures re-adopted.
   The election procedures followed by the town as of 1/3/72 are re-adopted and
confirmed as the election procedures for the town except any changes required
therein by the General Statutes of the state wherein the town has no discretion
or choice. (Res. of 1/3/72, Sec. 3)
Charter Reference: Method of election, Charter, Sec. 3.1.
State Law Reference: Municipal election procedure is governed by Article 23,
Chapter 163 of the General Statutes. G.S. 163-285 is the provision on optional
administration of municipal elections by county board of elections.
Section 2-8004   Absentee ballots authorized.
   Absentee ballots shall be allowed in the regular town elections, in
accordance with the provisions of Article 20 and 21 of Chapter 163 of the
General Statutes, and as authorized by Chapters 370 and 836 of the Session Laws
of 1975. (Res. of 8/4/75, Sec. 1)
State Law Reference: Absentee ballots. G.S. 163-226 et seq. Military absentee
registration. G.S. 163-245 et seq.
Section 2-8005   Filing fees.
   The filing fee for elections for the office of mayor shall be $12.00. The
filing fee for elections to the office of commissioner shall be $10.00. (Ord.
of 9/1/75, Sec. 1)
PART 3
Public Safety
Chapter 1.    Law Enforcement
Chapter 2.    Fire Prevention and Protection
Chapter 3.    Emergency and Rescue
CHAPTER 1
Law Enforcement
ARTICLE A
Police Department
Section
3-1001   Organization; composition;. executive head.
Section
3-1002    Same; general supervision; suspension of members.
Section
3-1003   Same; chief to assign duties, etc.
Section
3-1004   Chief of police, appointment.
Section
3-1005   Duties of chief of police.
Section
3-1006   May summon aid.
Section
3-1007   Interfering with, etc., police officer.
Section
3-1008   Uniforms, etc.; generally.
Section
3-1009   Same; return upon leaving department.
Section
3-1010    Duties of police officers generally.
Section
3-1011   Special policemen.
Section
3-1012   Resisting police prohibited.
Section
3-1013 through section 3-1020 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Auxiliary Police
Section
3-1021   Auxiliary police division established.
Section
3-1022   Chief of police to control; appointments and removals.
Section
3-1023   Duties.
Section
3-1024   Identification.
Section
3-1025   Carrying and custody of firearms.
Section
3-1026   Law enforcement powers.
Section
3-1027   Power of arrest.
ARTICLE A
Police Department
Section 3-1001   Organization; composition; executive head.
   The manager shall be the executive head of the police department and,
together with the chief of police and such other employees as the council may
deem necessary, shall constitute the police department of the town.
Section 3-1002   Same; general supervision; suspension of members.
   The manager shall have general control of the police department and may at
any time for cause suspend from duty any member of the police force. (Code
1970, Sec. 15-2)
Section 3-1003    Same; chief to assign duties, etc.
   The chief of police, subject to the manager, shall have charge of the police
force and as such shall assign such duties to the policemen as he thinks best
for the good order of the town and shall be responsible to the manager in
seeing that the policemen faithfully perform their duties. (Code 1970, Sec. 15-
3)
Section 3-1004    Chief of police, appointment.
   The city manager shall appoint a chief of police.
Section 3-1005    Duties of chief of police.
   (a)   The chief shall have control over the police department under the
supervision and direction of the manager. The chief shall keep the manager
informed of the department's ac­ tivities and make such reports that the board
or the manager may from time to time require, and he shall perform such other
duties as may be required of him by the manager.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the chief of police to:
   (1)   Preserve the peace by suppression of all disturbances and apprehension
of all offenders.
   (2)   Assign such duties as he deems best to the police officers of the
town. (Code 1970, Sec. 2-46)
Section 3-1006   May summon aid.
   The chief of police or any policeman of the town shall have authority, if
resisted in the execution of their lawful duties, to summon a suffi­ cient
number of men to aid them in enforcing the law; and it shall be unlawful for
any person so summoned to refuse to assist the chief of police or other
officer. (Code 1970, Sec. 15-4)
Section 3-1007    Interfering with, etc., police officer.
   It shall be unlawful to interfere with, hamper, molest, resist or hinder a
police officer in the lawful discharge of his duty. (Code 1970, Sec. 15-5)
Section 3-1008   Uniforms, etc.; generally.
   The chief of police and other police officers shall, when on duty wear such
uniforms as shall be prescribed by the board, and shall keep the same in a neat
condition, and it shall be the duty of the chief of police to see that the
force presents a neat and respectable appearance; provided, that any member of
the police force designated or employed for emergency, limited or special duty,
or anyone working generally as detective or doing detective work, need not be
clad in a uniform unless specially directed by the chief of police to wear a
uniform. (Code 1970, Sec. 15-8)
Section 3-1009    Same; return upon leaving department.
   If and when any member of the police department of the town, for any reason,
is leaving the police department, he shall return to the town such uniforms,
badges, blackjacks, handcuffs and all other equipment that has been furnished
to him by the town. (Code 1970, Sec. 15-7)
Section 3-1010   Duties of police officers generally.
   It shall be the duty of the police officers of the town to:
   (1)   Especially preserve public peace, prevent crimes, detect and arrest
offenders, suppress riots and unlawful gatherings which obstruct the free
passage of public streets, sidewalks, parks and public places.
   (2)   Protect the rights of persons and property.
   (3)   Guard the public health.
   (4)   Preserve order at elections and all public meetings and assemblages.
   (5)   Regulate the movements of vehicles and teams in the streets, bridges,
parks, public squares and highways.
   (6)   Arrest all street mendicants and beggars.
   (7)   Provide proper police attendance at fires.
   (8)   Carefully observe and inspect all places of public amusement; all
places of business having license to carry on such business and to suppress and
restrain all unlawful and disorderly conduct or practices therein.
   (9)   Enforce penalties for the violation of state and federal laws, the
provisions of this Code and other ordinances in the town.
   (10)   Arrest all persons guilty of violating any law or any provision of
this Code or other ordinance.
   (11)   Prevent as far as possible any injury to property and buildings,
streets and sidewalks.
   (12)   Report to the chief of police any repairs needed to any public
property.
   (13)   Serve all processes issued to them.
   (14)   Summon as many persons as may be necessary to assist them in the
duties herein outlined.
   (15)   Perform any other duties that may be assigned to them either by the
mayor. the council. the manager or the chief of police.
State Law Reference:For general state law provision on appointment and duties
of policemen, see G. S. 160A-281 and 160A-285.
Section 3-1011    Special policemen.
   The town manager shall have the power, when he deems it necessary in the
case of an emergency, to employ as many special policemen as are necessary to
preserve the peace. (As amended 11I 3I 80)
Section 3-1012    Resisting police prohibited.
   No person shall resist the police while in the discharge of their duty, by
force, words or threats, or any attempt to excite others to resistance, or in
any other manner obstruct them in the performance of their duty.
Section 3-1013 through section 3-1020 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Auxiliary Police
Section 3-1021   Auxiliary police division established.
   There is hereby established within the town police department, as a division
thereof, an auxiliary police division. The auxiliary pohce division shall be a
volunteer organization, composed of as many members as may from time to time be
determined by the town council.
Section 3-1022   Chief of police to control; appointments and removals.
   The auxiliary police division shall be under the direct control of the chief
of police, acting under the general supervision of the town manager. All
appointments and removals of members of the auxiliary police division shall be
made in the same manner and under the same policies and procedures as may from
time to time be established for appointment and removal of regular police
officers. The auxiliary police division shall have no commanding officer, nor
any officers, and all members shall bear the rank of patrolman. Each member of
the auxiliary police division shall take the oath of office of a regular
policeman. The chief of police shall provide for adequate training of members
of the auxiliary police division, and of candidates for membership.
Section 3-1023    Duties.
   The duties of the auxiliary police division, subject at all times to the
direction, supervision and control of the chief of police, shall be to assist
the regular members of the police department in the enforcement of law and the
maintenance of peace and order when called to active duty by the chief of
police. The chief shall by order establish rules and regulations to govern the
auxiliary police division, to fix the specific duties of its members, and to
provide for the maintenance of discipline. Members of the auxiliary police
division shall obey the instructions of regular police officers in carrying out
their duties. The chief may prescribe other duties than those mentioned herein
to be performed by the auxiliary police division, with approval of the town
manager.
Section 3-1024    Identification.
   An identification card and such other insignia or evidence of identity as
the chief may prescribe shall be issued to each member of the auxiliary police
division who must carry the card and other identification at all times while on
duty, and who must surrender them upon the termination of his membership.
Section 3-1025   Carrying and custody of firearms.
   No member of the auxiliary police division shall, while on duty, carry or
use any firearm except upon the express order of the chief of police, and all
official firearms shall be kept in custody of the police department except when
issued to a member of the auxiliary division for use on active duty while
accompanied by and under the supervision of one or more regular olice officers.
Section 3-1026   Law enforcement powers.
   No member or members of the auxiliary police division shall enforce, nor
attempt to enforce, any law except when called to active duty, and except when
immediately accompanied by one or more regular police officers.
Section 3-1027   Power of arrest.
   Members of the auxiliary police division shall, while undergoing official
training and while performing duties on behalf of the town, pursuant to orders
or instructions of the chief of police, be entitled to all powers of rrest,
privileges and immunities afforded by law to regularly employed policemen.
CHAPTER 2
Fire Prevention and Protection
ARTICLE A
Fire Department
Section
3-2001   Organization.
Section
3-2002   Chief of fire department; appointment.
Section
3-2003   Duties of chief.
Section
3-2004   Same; duties as fire inspector.
Section
3-2005   General authority at fires; persons and vehicles regulated.
Section
3-2006   Interfering with firemen or fire apparatus.
Section
3-2007   Only firemen may ride on trucks without permission.
Section
3-2008   Interfering with fire alarm apparatus.
Section
3-2009   Right of way of fire apparatus and firemen responding to fire alarm.
Section
3-2010   Duty of drivers of vehicles upon approach of fire apparatus.
Section
3-2011   Driving on streets where fire department is fighting fires.
Section
3-2012   Following or passing fire apparatus; parking near fire.
Section
3-2013   Driving over fire hose.
Section
3-2014   False alarms.
Section
3-2015   Fire protection for areas outside of town limits.
Section
3-2016 through section 3-2020 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Fire Prevention and Hazards
Section
3-2021   Fire prevention and protection.
Section
3-2022   Blasting.
Section
3-2023   Pyrotechnics.
Section
3-2024 through section 3-2030 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Fire District
Section
3-2031   Description.
Section
3-2032 through section 3-2040 reserved.
ARTICLE D
Police and Fire Alarm Systems
Section
3-2041   Definitions.
Section
3-2042   Alarm system owner - permits required; application.
Section
3-2043   Alarm system owner - response to police alarms.
Section
3-2044   Alarm system owner - response to fire alarms.
Section
3-2045   False alarms.
Section
3-2046   Assessment of civil penalty.
Section
3-2047   Appeal.
Section
3-2048   Notice and hearing.
ARTICLE A
Fire Department
Section 3-2001   Organization.
   The fire department shall consist of the chief of the fire department and a
sufficient number of firemen (voluntary, part or full-time) to maintain and
operate the department. The department may from time to time adopt its own
rules and regulations governing the department subject to the approval of the
manager. However, any such rules and regulations shall include provisions for
at least one (1) training period each month and that any member who is absent
from two (2) consecutive meetings without a bona fide reason be dropped from
the department.
Section 3-2002   Chief of fire department; appointment.
   The town manager shall appoint a chief of the fire department.
Section 3-2003   Duties of chief.
   It shall be the duty of the chief to:
   (a)   Supervise and direct the extinguishing of fires.
   (b)   Preserve and safe keep all equipment of the fire department.
   (c)   Compel when necessary all officers of the town or other persons to aid
in the extinguishing of fires.
   (d)   Enforce all provisions of this Code and other rules and ordinances
relative to fire prevention.
   (e)   Perform the duties assigned to the fire inspector.
   (f)   Inspect all equipment of the fire department and report all needed
repairs to the manager.
   (g)   Report all violations of any of the provisions of chapter 8 or any
other fire prevention ordinances.
   (h)   Annually report to the town manager the names, residences and
occupations of all firemen, the number and locality of fires which have
occurred during the year, the causes thereof if they can be ascertained, name
of the owner and value of the property destroyed, insurance coverage, and such
other matters pertaining to the fire department, its organization and operation
as he deems best.
   (i)   Do such other and further things necessary for the proper and
efficient operation of his department and for the prevention of fire.
State Law Reference: Duties of fire chief enumerated, G.S. 160A-292.
Section 3-2004   Same; duties as fire inspector.
   (a)   The chief is to assume the functions of fire inspector. As such, he
(or his designated agent) shall have authority to enter any and all premises,
at a reasonable time, for purposes of inspection.
   (b)   Routine inspections. He shall make annual inspections of all
structures located within the fire district.
   (c)   Inspections upon complaint. He shall, upon receipt of a complaint
forthwith investigate.
   (d)   He shall investigate the causes of fires and shall keep records of his
findings as to origin, location, owner, extent of damage and injury, and amount
of insurance carried. The findings must be reported to the North Carolina
Insurance Commissioner at regular intervals.
   (e)   He shall cause the removal of fire hazards by serving proper orders to
the owner or agent of premises in question, such orders to state a reasonable
time limit. Failure to comply with such order shall be considered a
misdemeanor. (Code 1970, Sec. 8-5)
Section 3-2005   General authority at fires; persons and vehicles regulated.
   (a)   The chief or his designated agent shall be the officer in command at
the scene of fire and his commands shall be promptly obeyed.
   (b)   The officer in command shall have authority to summon aid and no
citizen so summoned may refuse to help in extinguishing the fire or in
protecting exposed property.
   (c)   During the continuance of a fire, the manager, the fire chief, his
assistant or the mayor shall have authority to call upon any citizen to render
assistance in pulling down or demolishing any building or in removing goods or
furniture from a building on fire or in danger of fire, but not without the
consent of the officer of the fire department or the police department who may
be in charge.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful to congregate on the streets or alleys near a
fire in a manner which would interfere with the activities of the fire
department.
   (e)   In the event of an alarm of fire the apparatus of the fire department
responding to it shall have the right-of-way in and upon all streets, lanes,
alleys and other public ways.
   (f)   The drivers of vehicles, upon the approach of fire apparatus shall
immediately bring their vehicle to a stop on the right hand side of the street
in the direction in which they are facing and shall not move their vehicle
until such apparatus has passed. (Code 1970, Sec. 8-6, 8-7)
Section 3-2006   Interfering with firemen or fire apparatus.
   No person shall interfere with a fireman in the discharge of his duty, or
hinder him in the performance of that duty; nor shall any person other than
members of the fire department loiter about any fire station, or change,
handle, or meddle in any manner with any fire engine or any other fire
apparatus.
Section 3-2007   Only firemen may ride on trucks without permission.
   No person other than a bona fide member of the fire department shall mount
any fire engine or apparatus before it leaves the station or while on its way
to or from a fire, or at any other time, unless by permission of the driver or
officer in command of the equipment.
Section 3-2008   Interfering with fire alarm apparatus.
   No person shall interfere carelessly or willfully with the fire alarm system
or injure the poles, wires, boxes, or other apparatus connected therewith.
Section 3-2009   Right of way of fire apparatus and firemen responding to fire
alarm.
   In the event of an alarm of fire the apparatus of the fire department
responding to it, and firemen driving own cars responding to it, shall have the
right of way in and upon all streets, lanes, alleys, squares and railroad
crossings. (Code
1970, Sec. 8-9)
Section 3-2010   Duty of drivers of vehicles upon approach of fire apparatus.
   The drivers of vehicles, upon the approach of fire apparatus, shall
immediately bring their vehicles to a stop on the right hand side of the street
in the direction in which they are facing and shall not move their vehicle
until such apparatus has passed. (Code 1970, Sec. 8-10)
Section 3-2011   Driving on streets where fire department is fighting fires.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, after being forbidden by an officer of
the city, to ride or to drive a vehicle through any street, alley or square on
which the fire department is assembled for active service during the progress
of a fire. (Code 1970, Sec. 8-11)
Section 3-2012   Following or passing fire apparatus; parking near fire.
   It shall be unlawful to follow any fire apparatus which is responding to a
call, by automobile or any other vehicle, unless such is used for transporting
firemen to the scene of fire, at a distance closer than one city block, or to
pass such apparatus or to park within the same block in which the fire is in
progress. (Code 1970, Sec. 8-12)
Section 3-2013   Driving over fire hose.
   No vehicle shall be driven over any hose of the fire department when laid
down on any street or driveway to be used at any fire, without the consent of
the fire department officer in command. (Code 1970, Sec. 8-13)
Section 3-2014   False alarms.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to give or cause to be given any false
alarm of fire. (Code 1970, Sec. 8-14)
Section 3-2015   Fire protection for areas outside of town limits.
   The town will provide to areas desiring fire protection outside of the town
limits such protection on the following basis:
   (1)   All fire contracts are to be issued on an annual basis.
   (2)   All businesses or industries must qualify or be approved for the fire
protection by the State Rating Bureau.
   (3)   Each business served will pay a flat rate for each year served, and a
fee for each call made to that business, both fees as established by the
council and kept on file in the office of the clerk. (Ord. of 4/1/68, Sec. 1)
State Law Reference: Fire protection outside town limits; maintenance of
equipment; jurisdiction. G. S. 160A-293.
Section 3-2016 through section 3-2020 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Fire Prevention and Hazards
Section 3-2021   Fire prevention and protection.
   (a)   This section shall be known as the Fire Prevention and Protection Code
of Valdese, North Carolina, and may be cited as such and referred to herein as
the “Code.”
   (1)   It is the intent of the Code to prescribe regulations consistent with
internationally recognized standards and good practices for the safeguarding of
life and property within the jurisdiction of the town from the hazards of fire
and explosion arising from the storage, handling, and use of hazardous
substances, materials, and devices and arising from hazardous conditions in the
use of occupancy of buildings or premises. (Ord. of  / /  )
   (2)   The Code shall not be construed to hold the town responsible for any
damage to person(s) or property by reason of the inspection or the reinspection
authorized herein, or the failure to inspect or reinspect, or the permits
issued or denied as herein provided, or by reason of the approval or
disapproval of any equipment authorized herein.
   (b)   Fire chief to enforce code. The Code shall be enforced by the town
fire chief or his designated representatives or as otherwise provided herein.
   (c)   Adoption of technical codes and standards by reference; copies on
file.
   (1)   The code known as the North Carolina International Building Code and
all subsequent volumes, amendments, appendices, and revisions, is hereby
adopted by reference and is set forth herein as the Fire Prevention and
Protection Ordinance for the Town. Any amendments to the Fire Prevention Code
which are adopted and published by the North Carolina Building Code Council,
shall be effective in the jurisdiction of the Town at the time such amendments
are declared in effect by the North Carolina Building Code Council.
   (2)   A copy of the Fire Prevention and Protection Ordinance and all
Technical codes and standards adopted by reference shall be available for
public inspection at the Office of the Fire Marshal and the Office of the Fire
Chief of the Valdese Fire Department. (Ord. of 6/3/96; Ord. of  / /  ;
Amendment of 11/7/11)
   (d)   Inspection of buildings and premises. Subject tothe limitations and
conditions stated in the North Carolina Building Code, it shall be the duty of
the fire chief or his designated representative to inspect or causeto be
inspected as often as he deems necessary orappropriate, all buildings,
structures, and premises within his jurisdiction for the purposes of
ascertaining and causing to be corrected any condition which may cause a fire
or explosion and for the purpose of identifying violations of the provisions of
the Code or any other ordinances pertaining to fire or explosion hazards. (Ord.
of //)
   (e)   Permits.
   (1)   This Code shall require permits from the fire chief or his designated
representative as set forth in Chapter 1, “Administration,” the North Carolina
Fire Prevention Code.
   (2)   It shall be the duty of the fire chief or his designated
representative to evaluate applications and issue permits, if the application
is approved, for conditions as prescribed in Chapter 1, “Administration,” of
the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code.
   (3)   No person shall maintain, store, or handle materials or conduct
processes which produce conditions hazardous to life or property, or install
equipment used in connection with such activities without a permit as required
by the fire chief or his designated representative, and prescribed in Chapter 1
of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code and this Code. Before such a permit
may be issued, the fire chief or his designated representative shall inspect
receptacles, vehicles, buildings, structures, storage areas, devices,
processes, and all other conditions as related to the permit, to assure
compliance with the Code. (Ord. of  / /  )
   (f)   Service of orders or notices.
   (1)   The service of orders or notices for the correction of violations of
the Code shall be made upon the owner, occupant, or other person responsible
for the conditions, either by personally delivering a copy of same to such
person, or by delivering same to and leaving it with any person in charge of
the premises, or by sending a copy of the order or notice by certified or
registered mail to the owner’s last known address.
   (2)   When buildings or other premises are occupied by one other than the
owner under a lease or other agreement, the orders or notices issued to correct
the violations of the Code shall apply to the occupant thereof; provided that
where the orders or notices require the making of additions to, or changes in
the premises themselves which may become a part of the real property of the
owner, then in such cases, the orders or notices shall also be issued to the
owner of the premises or real property. Failure to deliver an order or notice
to the owner, if other than the occupant, shall not invalidate such order or
notice.
   (g)   Fee schedule.
   (1)   Fees for inspections required by the Code shall be determined by
resolution of the town council. An inspection fee schedule shall be filed with
the clerk and in the office of the fire chief for public inspection. (See
division (m) of this section.)
   (2)   Inspection fees shall be paid within three (3) days as specified in
the billing or notice of the amount of the fee due.
   (h)   Violations and penalties.
   (1)   Any person(s) who shall violate any of the provisions of the Code
hereby adopted, or who shall fail to comply with any judicial warrant, lawful
order, or regulation made thereunder, or who builds in violation of any
specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any permit issued
thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. In the name of the town, the
fire chief, through the town attorney, may file suit to enjoin the construction
or maintenance of any facility, building, or structure which does not conform
to the provisions of the Code.
   (2)   This Code may be enforced by any of the remedies set forth in G.S.
160A-175, in addition to others specifically set out herein or in the town code
of ordinances.
   (3)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Code shall be
subject to a civil penalty for each violation in the amount shown in the
schedule set forth in division (l) of this section. The civil penalty shall be
on file with the clerk and in the office of the fire chief for public
inspection. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.
   (4)   Civil penalties must be paid within seventy-two (72) hours after a
citation has been issued by the fire chief or his designated representative for
a violation. The fire chief or his designated representative is authorized to
issue written citations in the name of the town for all violations of the Code.
   (5)   Civil penalties for a second or subsequent violation shall be double
the amounts specified in division (l). (Ord. of  / /  )
   (i)   Removal of obstructions; prohibited parking. Any vehicle found to be
obstructing any fire hydrant, fire protection equipment, designated and marked
fire lane, or fire station may be removed or towed away by or under the
direction of the fire chief to a storage area or garage. The owner of such
vehicle shall be deemed to have appointed the fire chief as his agent for the
purpose of arranging for the transportation and safe storage of the vehicle.
The owner of such vehicle, before obtaining possession thereof, shall pay all
reasonable costs incidental to the removal and storage of the vehicle due for
the violation of prohibited parking.
   (j)   Emergency entry. The town fire chief or his designated representative
shall have the right to enter any building or premises without permission or
warrant in the event of any emergency situation constituting a threat to human
life, property, or the public safety for the purpose of eliminating,
controlling, or abating the dangerous condition or situation.
   (k)   Inspection schedule. In order to preserve and to protect public health
and safety, and to satisfy the requirements of G.S. 160A-411, the town adopts
the following inspection schedule:
 
                        Hazardous, institutional, high rise, assembly except
Annually:               those noted below, and residential except one- and two-
                        family dwellings and only interior common areas of
                        dwelling units of multi-family occupancies.
Once every twoyears:    Industrial and educational (except public schools).
                        Assembly occupancies with an occupant load less than
Once every three years: 100, business, mercantile, storage, churches,
                        synagogues and miscellaneous group U occupancies.
 
Nothing in this section is intended to prevent the jurisdiction from conducting
more frequent inspections than the schedule listed above or the schedule filed
with the Engineering Division of the North Carolina Department of Insurance.
(Ord. of  / /  ; Ord. of 11/7/11)
   (l)   The following civil penalties are hereby approved, adopted, and
imposed by the town council for each violation of the referenced chapters of
the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code:
 
Chapter Number Title Fee Amount
1. Administration                                         50.00
2  Definitions                                            0.00
3  General precautions against fire                       50.00
4  Emergency planning and preparedness                    50.00
5  Fire service features                                  50.00
6  Building services and systems                          50.00
7  Fire resistance-rated construction                     50.00
8  Interior finish, decorative materials, and furnishings 50.00
9  Fire protection systems                                150.00
10 Means of egress                                        150.00
11 Aviation facilities                                    50.00
12 Dry cleaning                                           50.00
13 Combustible dust producing operations                  50.00
14 Fire safety during construction and demolition         50.00
15 Flammable finishes                                     50.00
16 Fruit and crop ripening                                50.00
17 Fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging            50.00
18 Semiconductor fabrication facilities                   50.00
19 Lumber yards and woodworking facilities                50.00
20 Manufacture of organic coatings                        50.00
21 Industrial ovens                                       50.00
22 Service stations and repair garages                    50.00
23 High piled combustible storage                         50.00
24 Tents and other membrane structures                    50.00
25 Tire rebuilding and tire storage                       50.00
26 Welding and other hot work                             50.00
27 Hazardous materials —general provisions              50.00
28 Aerosols                                               50.00
29 Combustible fibers                                     50.00
30 Compressed gases                                       50.00
31 Corrosive materials                                    50.00
32 Cryogenic fluids                                       50.00
33 Explosives and fireworks                               50.00
34 Flammable and combustible liquids                      50.00
35 Flammable gases                                        50.00
36 Flammable solids                                       50.00
37 Highly toxic and toxic materials                       50.00
38 Liquefied petroleum gases                              50.00
39 Organic peroxides                                      50.00
40 Oxidizers                                              50.00
41 Pyrophoric materials                                   50.00
42 Pyroxylin (cellulose nitrate) plastics                 50.00
43 Unstable (reactive) materials                          50.00
44 Water-reactive solids and liquids                      50.00
45 Referenced standards                                   0.00
 
(Ord. of / / ; Ord. of 6/3/96; Ord. of //; Ord. of 11/7/11)
   (m)   The following fees are approved and adopted for inspection under this
section:
 
Inspection Type                                                          Scheduled
                                                                         Fee
Periodic fire inspection:                                                None
   Fire inspection pursuant to permit application:                    None
   First reinspection for noncompliance, if code requirements are met:None
   First reinspection for noncompliance, if code requirements are not $50.00
met:
   Second and subsequent reinspections for noncompliance:             $100.00
 
(Res. of 9/8/92; Ord. of //; Ord. of 11/7/11)
Section 3-2022   Blasting.
   No blasting of any kind shall be allowed without a permit from the manager
or the governing body. (Code 1970, Sec. 3-15)
Section 3-2023   Pyrotechnics.
   No pyrotechnical display of any kind shall be allowed except upon the
specific approval of the fire chief. In granting approval to conduct fireworks
displays, the fire chief shall take under consideration the following:
   (1)   Degree of hazard posed to persons and property.
   (2)   Protective measures to be taken, including emergency alternatives.
   (3)   Environmental factors, including weather, wind, etc.
   (4)   Degree of anticipated disturbance through noise and light to nearby
properties.
Section 3-2024 through section 3-2030 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Fire District
Section 3-2031   Description.
   The primary fire district for the town shall be from the corner of Eldred
Street and Main Street to the corner of Morganton Street and Main Street to
extend 300 feet north and 200 feet south of Main Street east and west, with the
exception of the western half of the block located south of Main Street, east
of Colombo Street Southwest, west of Waldo Street and north of St. Germain
Avenue Northwest, and with the exception of that parcel described in that deed
recorded in Book 665, page 342, Burke County Registry, said parcel having been
assigned Tax Parcel I.D. No. 74-56-3-2 by the Burke County Tax Office, and with
the exception of that parcel described in that deed recorded in Book 640, page
833, Burke County Registry, said parcel having been assigned Tax Parcel I.D.
No. 74-40-6-1, by the Burke County Tax Office, and with the exception of that
parcel described in that deed recorded in Book 1610, page 69, Burke County
Registry, said parcel having been assigned Tax Parcel I.D. No. 74-36-3-1, by
the Burke County Tax Office. (Ord. of 1/10/94; Ord. of 2/5/96; Ord. of 12/8/03;
Ord. of 11/5/07)
State Law Reference: Fire Limits, G.S. 160A-435.
Section 3-2032 through section 3-2040 reserved.
ARTICLE D
Police and Fire Alarm Systems
Section 3-2041   Definitions.
   The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth herein
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
   (1)   Alarm system. Any electronic or mechanical device which transmits an
electronic alarm signal or recorded message to the town’s communications center
or other receiving station indicating an actual or attempted unauthorized entry
into a building or indicating the commission or attempted commission of a crime
in or about a building, or indicating a fire or other incendiary occurrence.
For purposes of this definition, “other receiving station” means any person or
business that receives an electronic alarm signal or recorded message and
transmits information regarding such signal or message to the town’s
communications center. This definition shall include any local audible alarm
system and any automatic telephone dialing type of alarm.
   (2)   Alarm system business. Any business whose primary daily operation is
to sell or lease alarm systems to a person, corporation, partnership,
governmental or educational entity.
   (3)   Alarm system owner. Any person, corporation, partnership, governmental
or educational entity owning or leasing an alarm system.
   (4)   False alarm. Activation of an alarm system that elicits a response by
the police or firefighters when no situation requiring such a response does, in
fact, exist. This includes accidental, avoidable, and unnecessary alarm
activation due to user error, equipment malfunction, improper or unsuited
equipment, but does not include alarm activation caused by violent conditions
of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to
control by the alarm user of alarm system business.
   (5)   Fire alarm. Activation of an alarm system that is intended to elicit a
response by firefighters.
   (6)   Fire chief. The fire chief of the town or any designee acting on
behalf of the fire chief.
   (7)   Local audible alarm system. Any alarm owned by an alarm system owner
that, by sound of a whistle, bell, buzzer, siren or other noise generator,
alerts those outside the home or building, but in the near vicinity, of a
break-in, robbery, or fire, but does not transmit a signal by telephone or
other communications device.
   (8)   Police alarm. Activation of an alarm system that is intended to elicit
a response by police.
   (9)   Police chief. The police chief of the town or any designee acting on
behalf of the police chief.
   (10)   Town’s communications center. The town’s communications center which
receives telephone requests or signal requests for police, fire, ambulance,
rescue, or other emergency service within the town. (Ord. of 10/7/91)
Section 3-2042   Alarm system owner - permits required; application.
   (a)   In general.
   (1)   Every alarm system owner shall obtain a permit from the fire
department for each alarm system that such owner operates within the town. An
alarm system business must obtain a permit under this section only if an alarm
system is used to protect the premises in which the business is housed. Any
owner of a local audible alarm system shall also obtain a permit as required
under this section. Every alarm system owner shall pay a fee of ten dollars
($10.00) per year per alarm system for a permit from the town, except those in
(a)(2) below, who shall pay the fee prescribed in (a)(2).
   (2)   Any owner of an alarm system that has a direct connection with the
town’s communications center shall pay to the town a fee of twenty dollars
($20.00) per year per alarm system. No alarm system owner may directly connect
the alarm with the town’s communications center unless such alarm system owner
complies with all regulations applicable to the direct connection of an alarm
system to the town’s communications center. In the event the town contracts
with a company for installation of a fire/burglar alarm receiving system, the
alarm system owner shall also be required to pay to the company such fees and
provide it with such information as the company requires.
   (b)   Alarm system owner - permit application.
   (1)   The alarm system owner applying for the permit required herein shall
state on the permit application form: the name, address and telephone number of
each person in control of the property; the street address of the property on
which the alarm system has been or will be installed; the type of alarm system;
and the name, address, and telephone number of at least two other persons (in
the case of a corporate applicant, at least three persons) who can be reached
at any time, day or night, and who are authorized by the alarm system owner to
respond to and open the premises in which the alarm system is installed. The
form of the alarm system owner permit application shall be prescribed by the
town manager. Any alarm system owner may obtain a permit application from the
fire department.
   (2)   At such time that any information required as provided in (b)(1) of
this section is in any way changed, the alarm system owner shall complete
another alarm system owner permit application. There shall be no fee for
completing another permit application where the purpose is to correct or change
information that was previously provided.
   (c)   An alarm system owner permit application shall be submitted to the
fire chief who shall approve such application if it is determined that the
application provides all of the information required in (b)(1) above and, in
the case of direct connections to the town’s communications center, the owner
has complied with all regulations applicable to direct connection of alarm
systems.
   (1)   The fire chief shall not approve an alarm system owner permit
application where the alarm system owner’s previous permit was revoked pursuant
to section
3-2045 and the alarm system owner has not had the alarm system inspected and
repaired by a company licensed by the State of North Carolina to install and
inspect alarm systems.
   (2)   The fire chief may revoke a permit where it is found that the alarm
system owner provided false information on the alarm system owner permit
application form.
   (3)   Upon approval of the application by the fire chief, and upon receipt
of a permit fee, as set forth in (a)(1) and (2) above, a permit shall be
issued.
   (4)   Any person whose application for a permit is denied by the fire chief
may appeal from such decision to the town manager pursuant to section
3-2048.
   (d)   Each permit for a business shall be prominently displayed on the
premises wherein the alarm system is installed and shall be available for
inspection by the fire chief during normal business hours. Every business alarm
system owner shall display an emergency call-back sticker on the door or window
designated in the permit of the building wherein the alarm system is installed.
   (e)   Any alarm system owner who operates an alarm system without a permit
as required by this article shall be assessed a civil penalty of:
   (1)   Fifty dollars ($50.00) for failure to secure said permit.
   (2)   Thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for each false alarm answered by the
police department.
   (3)   One hundred dollars ($100.00) for each false alarm answered by the
fire department. (Ord. of 10/7/91)
Section 3-2043   Alarm system owner - response to police alarms.
   The alarm system owner or a representative thereof shall be available at all
times for the purpose of responding to police alarms by personally appearing at
the home or building designated in the permit following an alarm of any kind.
If, following a police alarm, the alarm system owner or a representative
thereof fails to appear at the home or building designated in the permit within
thirty (30) minutes after being notified by the town’s communications center,
the alarm system owner shall be assessed a civil penalty of ten dollars
($10.00) for every such event. (Ord. of 10/7/91)
Section 3-2044   Alarm system owner - response to fire alarms.
   The alarm system owner or a representative thereof shall be available at all
times for the purpose of responding to fire alarms by personally appearing at
the home or building designated in the permit following an alarm of any kind.
If, following a fire alarm, the alarm system owner or a representative thereof
fails to appear at the home or building designated in the permit within thirty
(30) minutes after being notified by the town’s communications center, the
alarm system owner shall be assessed a civil penalty of ten dollars ($10.00)
for every such event. (Ord. of 10/7/91)
Section 3-2045   False alarms.
   (a)   Police false alarms.
   (1)   If the town’s communications center receives more than one (1) false
police alarm in any thirty (30) day period from any single alarm system, the
alarm system owner owning or leasing the alarm system shall be assessed a civil
penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the second and each subsequent
false alarm received within a thirty (30) day period.
   (2)   If the town’s communications center receives in excess of four (4)
false police alarms in any thirty (30) day period from any single alarm system,
the fire chief shall disconnect any such alarm system and/or may revoke the
permit; provided, however, when the fire chief has reason to believe that such
false alarms are the result of a defective alarm system, in lieu of such
disconnection or permit revocation, the fire chief may require the alarm system
owner to cause the alarm system to be inspected by an individual or company
licensed by the State of North Carolina to install and inspect alarm systems.
The alarm system owner shall select an individual or company to perform the
inspection. If the alarm system owner fails to have such an inspection
performed, or if the alarm system is not repaired, altered, replaced, or other
corrective action taken, the fire chief shall cause the alarm system to be
disconnected and/or may revoke the permit, as the case may be. Further, if the
alarm system transmits an electronic alarm signal or recorded message to a
receiving station other than the town’s communications center, or is a local
audible alarm, the police department, upon notice in writing to the alarm
system owner, may cease responding to said alarms until the alarm system is
repaired and inspected under the guidelines stated in this paragraph.
   (3)   Signals or messages transmitted by the alarm system during alarm
system testing procedures shall not be considered false alarms if the alarm
system owner first notifies and receives permission from the town’s
communications center before testing the alarm system.
   (b)   Fire false alarms.
   (1)   If the town’s communications center receives in excess of one (1)
false fire alarm in any thirty (30) day period from any single alarm system,
the alarm system owner owning or leasing the alarm system shall be assessed a
civil penalty of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each said false alarm.
Failure to pay this penalty within thirty (30) days from the date the notice of
the violation is issued may result in the revocation of the permit.
   (2)   If the town’s communications center receives in excess of four (4)
false fire alarms in any thirty (30) day period, the fire chief shall have the
authority to disconnect any such alarm system and/or may revoke the permit;
provided, however, when the fire chief has reason to believe that such false
alarms are the result of a defective alarm system, in lieu of such
disconnection or permit revocation, the fire chief may require the alarm system
owner to cause the alarm system to be inspected by an individual or company
licensed by the State of North Carolina to install and inspect alarm systems.
The alarm system owner shall select an individual or company to perform the
inspection. If the alarm system owner fails to have such an inspection
performed, or if the alarm system is not repaired, altered, replaced, or other
corrective action taken, the fire chief shall cause the alarm system to be
disconnected and/or may revoke the permit, as the case may be.
   (3)   Signals or messages transmitted by the alarm system during alarm
system testing procedures shall not be considered false alarms if the alarm
system owner first notifies and receives permission from the town’s
communications center before testing the alarm system. (Ord. of 10/7/91)
Section 3-2046   Assessment of civil penalty.
   The fire chief shall assess civil penalties under the provisions of this
article. An assessment notice shall be mailed to the alarm system owner at the
address stated on the permit application. (Ord. of 10/7/91)
Section 3-2047   Appeal.
   (a)   Any alarm system owner who has been assessed a civil penalty under
this article may request, orally or in writing, an informal hearing with the
fire chief. The decision of the fire chief may be appealed to the town manager.
In such a case, the notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed in the town
manager’s office within ten (10) days of the issuance of a final decision by
the fire chief. The town manager shall schedule a hearing on the matter within
thirty (30) days from the date the notice of appeal is filed.
   (b)   Failure to perfect an appeal within the time and in the manner
provided for in this section shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal.
(Ord. of 10/7/91)
Section 3-2048   Notice and hearing.
   Before the fire chief revokes a permit pursuant to this article, or if an
appeal is taken pursuant to section
3-2042(c)(4) from a decision of the fire chief denying an application for a
permit, the fire chief shall cause a written notice to be sent by certified
mail to the permittee or applicant affected, at the address stated on the
permit or application. This notice shall advise the affected party of a right
to appear before the town manager, with or without legal counsel, at a stated
time and place, for the purpose of presenting any evidence relevant to such
revocation or denial, and for the purpose of hearing all evidence submitted and
examining or cross-examining any person providing such evidence. Any permittee
or applicant under this article may appeal to the town council from any final
decision of the town manager. (Ord. of 10/7/91)
CHAPTER 3
Emergency and Rescue
ARTICLE A
Emergencies
Section
3-3001   State of emergency.
Section
3-3002   Proclamation of state of emergency.
Section
3-3003   Application of restrictions.
Section
3-3004   Termination of restrictions and state of emergency.
Section
3-3005   Unlawful activities during state of emergency.
Section
3-3006   Proclamation may be extended, repealed.
Section
3-3007   Violations.
Section
3-3008 through section 3-3010 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Civil Defense Agency
Section
3-3011   Agency established.
Section
3-3012   Organization, duties.
Section
3-3013 through section 3-3020 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Emergency Medical Service (Reserved)
ARTICLE A
Emergencies
Section 3-3001   State of emergency.
   A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times of
great public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe or similar public
emergency, for any reason, municipal public safety authorities are unable to
maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives or property.
(Code 1970, Sec. 12-28(a))
Section 3-3002   Proclamation of state of emergency.
   In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency endangering the
lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within the town, or threatening
damage to or destruction of property, the mayor is hereby authorized and
empowered to issue a public proclamation de­ claring to all persons the
existence of such a state of emergency, and, in order to more effectively
protect the lives and property of people within the town, to place in effect
any or all of the restrictions hereinafter authorized. (Code 1970, Sec. 12-28
(b))
Section 3-3003 Application of restrictions.
The mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit by the proclamation the
applica­ tion of all or any part of such restrictions to any area specifically
designated or described within the corporate limits of the town and to specific
hours of the day or night; and to exempt from all or any part of such
restrictions law enforcement officers, firemen and other public employ­ ees,
doctors, nurses, employees of hospitals and other medical facilities, on-duty
military personnel whether state or federal; on-duty employees of public
utilities, public transportation companies, and newspaper, magazine, radio
broadcasting and television broadcasting corporations operated for profit; and
such other classes of persons as may be essential to the preservation of public
order and immediately necessary to serve the safety, health and welfare needs
of the people within the town. (Code 1970, Sec. 12-28(c))
Section 3-3004   Termination of restrictions and state of emergency.
   The mayor shall proclaim the end of such state of emergency or all or any
part of the restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances warrant or when
directed to do so by the gov­ erning body. (Code 1970, Sec. 12-28(d))
Section 3-3005   Unlawful activities during state of emergency.
   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, the mayor may
impose by proclamation any or all of the following restrictions:
   (1)   Prohibit or regulate the possession off one's own premises of
explosives, firearms, ammunition or dangerous weapons of any kind, and prohibit
the purchase, sale, transfer or other disposition thereof;
   (2)   Prohibit or regulate the buying or selling of beer, wine or
intoxicating beverages of any kind, and their possession or consumption off
one's own premises;
   (3)   Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade, march, vigil or
participation therein from taking place on any of the public ways or upon any
public property;
   (4)   Prohibit or regulate the sale of gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, or any
other explosive or inflammable fluids or substances;
   (5)   Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street, alley, or roadway
or upon any other public property, except by those in search of medical
assistance, food, or other commodity or service necessary to sustain the well-
being of themselves or their families or some member thereof;
   (6)   Prohibit or regulate the participation in or carrying on of any
business activity, and prohibit or regulate the keeping open of places of
business, places of entertainment, and any other places of public assembly.
Section 3-3006   Proclamation may be extended, repealed.
   Any proclamation may be extended, altered, or repealed in any particular
during the continued or threatened existence of a state of emergency by the
issuance of a subsequent proclamation. (Code 1970, Sec. 12-28(f))
Section 3-3007   Violations.
   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, it shall be
unlawful for any person to violate any provision of any restriction imposed by
any proclamation authorized by this article. (Code 197, Sec. 12-28(g))
Section 3-3008 through section 3-3010 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Civil Defense Agency
Section 3-3011   Agency established.
   In accordance with G.S. Chapter 166A, as amended, the Valdese Civil Defense
Agency is established. (Res. of 12/7/64, Sec. 1)
Section 3-3012   Organization, duties.
   The agency shall be organized in accordance with state law and orders,
resolutions, and ordinances of the board as passed consistent with state law.
The agency shall report to the manager and shall perform such duties as
directed by the manager.
State Law Reference: Local organization for civil defense is authorized by G.S.
166A-8.
Section 3-3013 through section 3-3020 reserved.
PART 4
Public Works
Chapter 1.   Streets and Sidewalks
Chapter 2.   Solid Waste
Chapter 3.   Municipally Owned Cemeteries
CHAPTER 1
Streets and Sidewalks
ARTICLE A
Acceptance and Improvement of Public Streets
Section
4-1001   Policy established.
Section
4-1002   Requirements for the acceptance of new streets.
Section
4-1003   Petition for street improvements.
Section
4-1004   Street improvements defined.
Section
4-1005   Street improvement project procedure.
Section
4-1006   Installation of utilities.
Section
4-1007   Utility services, or public utilities, defined.
Section
4-1008   Utilities to be placed underground; exceptions.
Section
4-1009   Same; penalty for violation section 4-1008.
Section
4-1010   Responsibility of property owner.
Section
4-1011   Construction according to specifications.
Section
4-1012   Opening and improving streets without petition.
Section
4-1013   Resurfacing improvements.
Section
4-1014   Property owner's cost.
Section
4-1015   Assessments under petitions.
Section
4-1016   New subdivisions.
Section
4-1017   Developer's cost.
Section
4-1018   Street lights.
Section
4-1019 through section 4-1020 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Excavation and Repair
Section
4-1021   Permit to dig in streets.
Section
4-1022   Application for permit; fees.
Section
4-1023   Municipal liability.
Section
4-1024   Supervision and control.
Section
4-1025   Disposition of fees.
Section
4-1026   Street repair.
Section
4-1027   Excavations; leaving unprotected.
Section
4-1028   Streets not to be damaged.
Section
4-1029   Violation; penalty.
Section
4-1030   Sidewalk construction.
Section
4-1031   House moving.
Section
4-1032   Damage to municipal property.
Section
4-1033   Permit to mix building materials.
Section
4-1034   Driveways; permit required.
Section
4-1035   Same; application.
Section
4-1036   Same; standards.
Section
4-1037   Same; construction.
Section
4-1038   through section 4-1040 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Assignment and Display of Street Address Numbers
Section
4-1041   Assignment of street address numbers.
Section
4-1042   Display of street address numerals.
Section
4-1043   Enforcement.
ARTICLE D
Street Naming
Section
4-1044 through section 4-1050 reserved.
ARTICLE E
Sidewalk Cafés
Section
4-1051   Purpose.
Section
4-1052   Area of applicability.
Section
4-1053   Definitions.
Section
4-1054   Permit procedures.
Section
4-1055   Sketch plan.
Section
4-1056   Standards.
Section
4-1057   Operating restrictions.
Section
4-1058   Violations and penalty.
ARTICLE A
Acceptance and Improvement of Public Streets
Section 4-1001   Policy established.
   It shall be the policy of the board to regulate the acceptance and
improvement of public streets by exercising the powers and duties conferred by
G.S. 160A-296 in the best interests of the citizens of the town.
Section 4-1002   Requirements for the acceptance of new streets.
   Private streets offered for dedication to the town will not be accepted by
the town council as public, municipal streets unless:
   (1)   approved by the planning board;
   (2)   consistent with all standards and specifications for town streets;
   (3)   found to be in the best interests of the town; and
   (4)   formally accepted by resolution of the council.
Section 4-1003   Petition for street improvements.
   (a)   Execution by owners. All petitions for street improvements must be
signed in ink by the owners of the property signed for, or by their duly
authorized agents.
   (b)   Execution when town owns property. Whenever the abutting landowners on
any street petition to have the same improved and the town owns property along
the street whereon such improvement is desired, the mayor is hereby authorized
and empowered to sign the petition in the name of the town for the full
frontage of the property owned by the town along such street.
   (c)   Right to withdraw signature. Any person shall have the right to
withdraw his signature from a petition for the pavement or repavement of a
street, but any such withdrawal must be in the handwriting of the withdrawing
petitioner and shall state that it is his own act, uninfluenced by persuasion
from any person manufacturing competing products.
   (d)   Effect of withdrawal of signature. Any person who has signed a
petition for the pavement or repavement of a street or portion of a street and
withdraws his signature therefrom thereafter will not be considered on any
petition for pavement or repavement; that is, such withdrawing person can sign
any other paving petition, but the town will not pass such other petition
unless the required number of fee is signed in addition to that of the party
who has withdrawn his signature.
   (e)   Misrepresentation to induce withdrawal of signers. No person shall
appeal personally to signers of such petitions to withdraw their names and in
making such appeals misrepresent the facts, either as to the cost of the
respective pavements or any other fact connected therewith.
Section 4-1004   Street improvements defined.
   For the purposes of this article, the term "street improvem nts" shall
include the grading, regrading, paving, repaving, macadamizing and
remacadimizing of streets, alleys, sidewalks, or other public places or ways,
and the construction, reconstruction and altering of curbing, guttering, storm
sewers, turnouts, watermains, and water, gas, or sewer connections therein.
Section 4-1005   Street improvement project procedure.
   The procedure for street improvement projects shall be as specified in G.S.
160A-216 et seq.
Section 4-1006 Installation of utilities.
   At least 30 days before a contractor is notified that a street is ready for
him to proceed with his work, the superintendent of public works shall notify
all public utilities that the street is being turned over to the contractor for
the execution of his contract. If those so notified are not ready or cannot get
ready within the 30 days, the superintendent of public works shall be so
notified in writing, whereupon he may, at his discretion and upon the approval
of the council, delay the sending of the notice to the contractor.
Section 4-1007   Utility services, or public utilities, defined.
   For the purpose of this article, the term utility services or public
utilities, shall include electricity, telephone, telegraph, community antennae,
watr and gas transmission and distribution systems. (Code 1970, Sec. 17-15)
Section 4-1008   Utilities to be placed underground; exceptions.
   (a)   The extension of existing utility services into new areas shall be
placed underground.
   (b)   Utilities services in all public and private housing developments
shall henceforth be installed underground. Housing developments shall be
defined as any land development whereby a land subdivision map is placed on
public record or land is subdivided into four (4) or more lots.
   (c)   Utilities services in urban renewal areas shall be placed underground.
   (d)   In support of projects of civic improvement including, but not
restricted to, street widening, street paving, street realignment, provisions
for open space, etc., utility services shall be relocated underground.
   (e)   In situations where the movement of utility services underground is
demonstratively impracticable, variances from the provisions of this section
shall be granted by the council.
   (f)   When uility services are placed underground, they shall be of
sufficient depth to eliminate exposure and to adequately protect the same from
shallow excavations. (Code 1970, Sec. 17-16)
Section 4-1009   Same; penalty for violation section 4-1008.
   Any violation of section
4-1008 shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of $50
or 30 days imprisonment or both, in the discretion of the court. The imposition
of one penalty for any violation of the section shall not excuse the violation
or permit it to continue. Each day that a violation of the section continues
after notice from the manager, or a duly authorized agent of the town, shall
constitute a separate offense. (Code 1970, Sec. 17-17)
Cross Reference: Street and sidewalk use and regulation generally. Section
6-2001 through
6-2019. Poles and wires. Section
6-2013 through
6-2017.
Section 4-1010   Responsibility of property owners.
   All abutting property owners shall receive the same notice as is provided to
public utilities under section
4-1006(a) hereof and shall be required to make all necessary preparations for
street improvements. Property owners may request a delay in the sending of
notice to the contractor as provided in such subsection.
Section 4-1011   Construction according to specifications.
   All street improvements shall be constructed in accordance with
specifications furnished by the superintendent of public works, and all such
work shall be done under his supervision.
Section 4-1012   Opening and improving streets without petition.
   It shall be wholly discretionary with the council whether any street
improvement work is necessary or desirable and shall be done or not. Except for
the levy of assessments, street im­ provements made without a petition therefor
shall follow the same procedure as street im­ provements made pursuant to
petition.
Section 4-1013   Resurfacing improvements.
   (a)   In all cases where a street is being repaved, the superintendent of
public works shall be authorized to close such street or part of such street
from the time the work is started until such time as in his judgment the street
is suitable for ordinary traffic thereon. If there is any dispute as to the
time when such pavement is sufficiently set or hardened or otherwise has become
fit for travel, the decisioin of the superintendent shall be final. It shall be
the special duty of the superintendent to see that the provisions of this
section are enforced, both as to the erection of barriers or enclosures and as
to travel on any such street by vehicles, during the time prohibited. It shall
also be the duty of the superintendent to serve such notice as may be necessary
to protect any person having a permanent line thereon, such as bus lines,
taxicab lines and the like.
   (b)   No person shall interfere with such closing or undertaking by
operating a car or otherwise traveling thereon before the enclosures have been
removed therefrom and such street opened for travel.
Section 4-1014   Property owner's cost.
   The cost for street improvements charged against each abutting property
owner shall be determined by the board under the provisions of G.S. 160A-218.
Section 4-1015   Assessments under petitions.
   Assessments shall be due within 30 days from presentation and notification
of the assessment; but the property owners shall have the privilege, of giving
written notice of such intention, to pay one-fourth (1/4) thereof in cash and
to give notes for the balance for payment of such assessments in installments.
Such notes shall provide that if all installments are paid before maturity only
interest accruing to date of payment shall be collected.
Section 4-1016   New subdivisions.
   Street improvements in new subdivisions shall be made as provided by the
superintendent of public works.
Section 4-1017   Developer's cost.
   Developers shall be assessed as abutting property owners for the cost of
street improvements done by the town.
Section 4-1018   Street lights.
   Street lights shall be installed and maintained by the town in other than
business sections only at street intersections or terminations. (As amended 11/
3/80)
Section 4-1019 through section 4-1020 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Excavation and Repair
Section 4-1021   Permit to dig in streets.
   No person shall make any excavation or opening or dig any ditch, trench,
tunnel or hole in, along, across or under any street, sidewalk or other public
place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires or poles or
for any other purposes unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the
manager or some other officer of the town vested with such authority: Provided,
that a permit shall not be required where such work is performed under a
contract with the town but in the event such work requires a sidewalk or street
to be wholly or partially obstructed, the person shall notify the clerk, the
public works department and the police department at least two (2) hours before
obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless prevented by sudden emergency.
Section 4-1022   Application for permit; fees.
   All persons desiring a permit to make an opening in any street or sidewalk,
as set forth in section
4-1021, shall make written application therefor, which application shall show
the location of the proposed opening, the purpose therefor and the approximate
number of square yards of surface to be cut. Such application shall be
accompanied by a fee which shall be established by the council.
Section 4-1023   Municipal liability.
   Any person obtaining a permit as provided for in sections
4-1021 and
4-1022 herein agrees as a condition of the issuance of said permit, to
indemnify and hold harmless the town against any claims or expenses, including
attorney's fees for bodily injury or property damage for accidents or
occurrences arising out of the person's operations, excluding only the
liability of the town for its sole negligence except in connection with general
supervision of work performed by said person.
Section 4-1024   Supervision and control.
   All excavations and work in streets, sidewalks, alleys or public places in
the town shall be under the supervision and control of the superintendent of
public works, whose duty it shall be to inspect the same from to time during
the progress thereof. Upon the completion thereof, he shall make a final
inspection and see that the street, sidewalk or public place is restored to a
condition as good in all respects as before the excavation or work was made or
done, and that all debris, materials, tools and equipment are removed
therefrom. Any person refusing or failing to comply with any provision of this
section shall be guilty of a violation thereof, and where such failure or
refusal is continued after notice from the superintendent, every day's
continuance shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
Section 4-1025   Disposition of fees.
   All fees collected under the provisions of this article shall be paid into
the general fund.
Section 4-1026   Street repair.
   When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of the
town shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person making such excavation
or opening shall have the duty of refilling such excavation or opening, and
such refilling shall be done in accordance with the standards and
specifications issued by the superintendent of public works or his duly
authorized representative. Any person, firm or corporation neglecting,
refusing, or failing to comply with any provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a violation thereof; and where such neglect, refusal or failure is
continued, after notice from the superintendent or his authorized representa­
tive, every day's continuance thereafter shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
Section 4-1027   Excavations; leaving unprotected.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who obtains a
permit under the sections of this article to do any excavation of any kind
which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley,
sidewalk or public place of the town without placing and maintaining proper
guard rails three (3) feet from the ground and signal lights or other warnings
at, in or around the same, sufficient to warn the public of such excavation or
work, and to protect all persons using reasonable care from mJunes on account
of same. It shall be unlawful to cut drains or ditches across the sidewalks or
streets unless boxing be used and the same covered on a level with the
sidewalk.
Section 4-1028   Streets not to be damaged.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to drag, or run or
cause to be dragged or run any harrow or other implement, engine, machine or
tool upon any asphalt, bithulitic, warrenite, or other type of permanently
paved street of the town which shall be liable, in any way to injure or cut the
surface thereof. It shall also be unlawful to injure any dirt street in the
same manner.
Section 4-1029   Violation; penalty.
   All persons found guilty of violation of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $50 or imprisoned for not more
than 30 days.
Section 4-1030   Sidewalk construction.
   No sidewalk of any description shall be built by any individual, firm or
corporation of any brick, wood, or other material without a written permit from
the town.
Section 4-1031   House moving.
   No person shall move any house or building upon or across the public streets
or sidewalks without the written consent of the council and the deposit of a
good and sufficient bond in the sum of $500 to cover damage done to such street
or sidewalk or to any property of any person.
Section 4-1032   Damage to municipal property.
   No person shall injure, tamper with, remove, paint upon or deface any
bridge, culvert, ditch and drain, sign, sign post, street light, traffic sig­
nal, bulletin board or other municipal property upon the streets and sidewalks
or elsewhere except employees of the town in the performance of their duties.
Section 4-1033   Permit to mix building materials.
   No person shall mix any building materials on any street, sidewalk or other
public place, unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the clerk or
some other officer of the town vested with such authority. All persons desiring
a permit to mix building materials shall make written application therefor,
which application shall show the location of the proposed mixing and the kind
and approximate amounts of materials to be mixed. The application shall be
accompanied by a fee which shall be established by the council.
Section 4-1034   Driveways; permit required.
   No person shall begin to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter, or grade any
driveway on the public streets, unless a written permit therefor has been
issued by the manager or some other officer of the town vested with such au­
thority.
Section 4-1035   Same; application.
   (a)   All persons desiring a driveway permit shall make application
therefor, which application shall show:
   (1)   The name and address of the owner or agent in charge of the property
abutting and proposed work area;
   (2)   The name and address of the party doing the work;
   (3)   The location of the work area;
   (4)   Attached plans showing details of the proposed alteration;
   (5)   The estimated cost of the alteration; and
   (6)   Such other information as the issuing officer shall find reasonably
necessary to the determination of whether a permit should issue hereunder.
   (b)   The application shall be accompanied by a fee which shall be
established by the council.
Section 4-1036   Same; standards.
   The officer shall issue a permit hereunder when he finds:
   (1)   That the plans for the proposed operation have been approved by the
superintendent of public works, to whom they shall be forwarded by the officer
within a reasonable time after receipt thereof;
   (2)   That the work shall be done according to the standard specifications
of the town for public work of like character;
   (3)   That the operation will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, the demand and necessity for parking spaces, and the means
of egress to and from the property affected and adjacent properties; and
   (4)   That the health, welfare and safety of the public will not be
unreasonably impaired.
Section 4-1037   Same; construction.
   Driveways shall be constructed of portland cement concrete in one course.
Section 4-1038 through section 4-1040 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Assignment and Display of Street Address Numbers
Section 4-1041   Assignment of street address numbers.
   The town shall be responsible for assigning street address numbers for all
residential, institutional, industrial and commercial buildings located within
the corporate limits of the town. If a building contains apartments or more
than one business, each apartment and each business shall be assigned a
separate street address number or letter or combination of numbers and letters
to enable each such apartment or business to be separately identified. Property
owners shall be responsible for applying by mail or in person at the town hall
for assignment of a street address number (or, if applicable, numbers) for each
such building. (Ord. of 9/3/91)
Section 4-1042   Display of street address numerals.
   The owner of each residential, institutional, industrial or commercial
building located within the corporate limits of the town shall display numerals
representing the numbers assigned by the town on the building in such a manner
that the numerals are plainly visible and legible from the street. The numerals
shall be at least three (3) inches high. If a building is located so far from
the street or is situated in such a manner that the numerals cannot reasonably
be displayed on the building so as to be plainly visible and legible from the
street, the owner shall display the numerals on the property close enough to
the street and in such manner that the numerals representing the street numbers
for the building shall be plainly visible and legible from the street. (Ord. of
9/3/91)
Section 4-1043   Enforcement.
   Violators of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty of $50;
provided, however, a civil penalty shall not be assessed unless an owner or
occupant of the property was first notified in writing that the property was
not in compliance with this article and the owner failed to comply with this
article within thirty (30) days from the date the written notice was given.
Violators shall be issued a written citation which must be paid within 72
hours. Each day's continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct
offense. (Ord. of 9/3/91)
ARTICLE D
Street Naming
Section 4-1044 through section 4-1050 reserved.
ARTICLE E
Sidewalk Cafés
Section 4-1051   Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to allow sidewalk cafés on public sidewalks
in locations where they are determined to be an appropriate amenity and to
promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare. These goals
include, among others, the following specific purposes:
   (1)   To provide adequate space for pedestrian use adjacent to sidewalk
cafés and to insure access to adjacent commercial and retail uses;
   (2)   To promote sidewalk cafés as useful and properly planned visual
amenities that better relate to the streetscape;
   (3)   To promote the most desirable use of land and buildings and thereby
protect the town's tax revenues;
   (4)   To promote the historic character and ambiance of the downtown area of
the Town.
(Amendment of 2/11/13)
Section 4-1052   Area of Applicability.
   The sidewalk café provisions of this article shall apply to the public
sidewalk located along Main Street.
(Amendment of 2/11/13)
Section 4-1053   Definitions.
   (a)   Public sidewalk means sidewalk located in the public right-of-way that
is public through dedication, easement or use.
   (b)   Sidewalk café means an outdoor dining area located on a public
sidewalk that contains readily removable tables, chairs, railings and may
contain planters. It is otherwise open to the air, and not enclosed by fixed
walls, except that it may have an awning, canopy or umbrellas, or other non-
permanent covers.
   (c)   Sidewalk café permit means the permit issued by the Planning
Department which conforms to the procedures and regulations of this article.
(Amendment of 2/11/13)
Section 4-1054   Permit procedures.
   (a)   The Planning Director is authorized to issue to the owner or lessee of
property abutting a public sidewalk a revocable sidewalk café permit
authorizing the permitee to operate a sidewalk café on public sidewalk provided
that the standards set forth in this article are complied with by the
applicant. The sidewalk café permit shall be revocable, and the Town shall be
allowed in its discretion to require the Applicant at any time to vacate all or
part of the public sidewalk space the Applicant has been given permission to
use. Upon request, the Applicant shall promptly vacate all or such portion of
the public sidewalk space as the Town directs the Applicant to vacate, remove
any personal property within such sidewalk space, and return such sidewalk
space to the condition it was in immediately prior to its use as a sidewalk
café.
   (b)   The permit shall be an annual permit and it shall allow the operation
of a sidewalk café from February 1 or thereafter until January 31 of the
following year.
   (c)   An applicant for a sidewalk café permit shall obtain and provide
evidence of general liability insurance in the amount of at least one million
dollars ($1,000,000) naming the Town of Valdese as an additional insured.
   (d)   An applicant shall submit with the application a sketch plan in
compliance with Section
4-1055.
   (e)   The permit application shall be submitted on a form available from the
Planning Department and shall include the following:
   (1)   Name of the applicant;
   (2)   Applicant's address;
   (3)   Address of restaurant for which the sidewalk café requested;
   (4)   Name and address of property owner, if other than the applicant;
   (5)   Dates of proposed occupancy of the sidewalk café;
   (6)   Hours of proposed occupancy of the sidewalk café;
   (7)   Area of occupancy (square feet) and dimensions for sidewalk café;
   (8)   Proposed outdoor lighting and proposed use of musical instruments,
sound reproduction systems or other entertainment, if any;
   (9)   Whether alcoholic beverages will be served at the outdoor café and, if
so, provide proof of required license for such sales;
   (10)   Whether the application is a new application or a renewal of
previously approved permit;
   (11)   Written authorization from the owner of the property to submit the
application shall be required where the applicant is not the owner of the
affected property;
   (12)   If the public sidewalk in front of an adjacent property is to be
used, written authorization from said adjacent owner;
   (13)   Applicant shall execute a hold harmless agreement and an agreement to
vacate the space upon request by the Town.
(Amendment of 2/11/13)
Section 4-1055   Sketch plan.
   (a)   No sidewalk café shall be operated except in conformance with a sketch
plan approved by the Planning Director.
   (b)   The sketch plan shall show the following:
   (1)   The proposed location of the sidewalk café in relation to the existing
building/property. Indicate adjacent buildings, streets and other permanent
structures within twenty-five (25) feet of the proposed location of the
sidewalk café. Dimensions shall be included on the sketch so that the proposed
layout can be adequately reviewed. Three (3) copies of the sketch plan shall be
submitted on no smaller than an 11-inch by 17-inch sheet.
   (2)   The plan must show the design, relevant details and location of all
temporary structures such as awnings, planters, landscaping, railings, tables,
chairs and other equipment, as well as lighting and electrical outlet
locations.
   (3)   All exterior lighting, if any, shall be shown on the sketch plan and
shall be of such type and location and shall have such shading as will prevent
the source of light from intruding on any adjacent property or causing
potential safety concerns for pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the adjacent
roadways.
   (c)   The Planning Director shall distribute copies of the application and
sketch plan to the Police Chief, Town Manager and Director of Public Works for
review and comments as to compliance with this and other Town ordinances.
   (d)   Based upon the review and comments, the Planning Director may approve,
approve with conditions, refer the application back to the applicant for
modification, or deny the application. If approved, the Planning Director shall
authorize the issuance of a sidewalk café permit.
(Amendment of 2/11/13)
Section 4-1056   Standards.
   (a)   There shall be a minimum of five (5) feet, exclusive of the area
occupied by the sidewalk café, designed to allow safe, efficient and adequate
pedestrian movement adjacent to the sidewalk café and street. Sidewalk cafés
shall only be permitted where it is determined that the use will not create a
hazard, a sight distance obstruction for motor vehicle operators, nor unduly
impede pedestrian traffic. The sidewalk café area shall be separated from
pedestrian traffic and vehicular traffic by an approved barrier. Temporary
bollards, stanchions, planters or posts with railings, chain, rope, etc. may
serve as an acceptable barrier. The actual materials used must meet with Town
approval.
   (b)   Generally, sidewalk cafés may only be located adjacent to the
establishment with which they are associated. This requirement may be waived,
however, to extend the sidewalk café to an adjacent property if deemed
appropriate and agreeable to the adjacent property owner.
   (c)   Sidewalk cafés shall be kept free of litter and food scraps at all
times. The permit holder shall provide adequate refuse containers and shall not
deposit refuse from its operations in town sidewalk refuse containers.
   (d)   Employees of the establishment shall continuously supervise sidewalk
cafés at which alcoholic beverages are served.
   (e)   Furnishings of sidewalk cafés shall consist solely of readily
removable awnings, covers, railings, tables, chairs, planters containing plants
and accessories. When the associated establishment and sidewalk café are not
open for daily use, all furniture and fixtures shall be removed or otherwise
secured on the public property in a manner that does not create a public
hazard. Furnishings shall be designed for outdoor use.
   (f)   A sidewalk café shall not interfere with any public service facility,
such as, but limited to a public telephone, mailbox or bench located on a
sidewalk.
   (g)   Operation of a sidewalk café shall not adversely affect adjacent or
nearby properties and shall be operated in conformance with all applicable
codes and ordinances.
   (h)   Tables, chairs, umbrellas and any other objects provided with the
sidewalk café shall be of quality design, materials and workmanship both to
insure the public safety and convenience of users and to enhance the visual and
aesthetic quality of the urban environment. While temporary, all such items
must be adequately secured so as to prevent them from being blown off the
property in inclement weather.
(Amendment of 2/11/13)
Section 4-1057   Operating restrictions.
   (a)   Hours of operation shall not be greater than those of the indoor
restaurant from which the sidewalk café operates.
   (b)   All alcoholic beverages to be served at sidewalk cafés shall be
prepared within the existing establishment and alcoholic beverages shall only
be served to patrons seated at tables. The drinking of alcoholic beverages by a
member of the public while a patron at a sidewalk cafê within the confines of
the sidewalk café area shall not be construed as a violation of any ordinance
controlling open containers in a public area. If the operation intends to serve
alcoholic beverages in the sidewalk café area, the operator of the sidewalk
café shall comply with all laws and regulations concerning the serving of
alcoholic beverages in the State of North Carolina.
   (c)   The establishment shall not serve food or beverage to a patron at the
sidewalk café area unless that patron is seated at a table.
   (d)   Sidewalk cafés and the public property on which they are located shall
be kept neat and clean at all times and free from any substance that may cause
damage to the sidewalk or cause pedestrian injury.
   (e)   The Town shall have the right to prohibit or restrict the operation of
a sidewalk café because of anticipated or actual problems or conflicts.
Examples of such problems or conflicts are festivals and similar events,
parades, and repairs to the street, sidewalk or utilities within the public
right-of-way. To the maximum extent possible, the café owner will be given
prior written notice of any time period during which the operation of the
sidewalk café may be affected.
(Amendment of 2/11/13)
Section 4-1058   Violations and penalty.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sidewalk café without a
permit or to violate any of the provisions of this article, and such a
violation shall be punishable as follows:
   (1)   The violation shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as
provided in G.S. 14-4.
   (2)   In addition to and separated from other remedies provided in this
article or otherwise provided by law, a violation shall subject the offender to
a civil penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for each day
the violation continues, to be recovered by the Town in a civil action in the
nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within ten (10) days
after he or she has been cited for the violations.
(Amendment of 2/11/13)
CHAPTER 2
Solid Waste Ordinance
ARTICLE A
Definitions
Section
4-2001   Definitions.
Section
4-2002 through section 4-2009 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Control of Solid Wastes, Scrap Materials, Noxious Growth
Section
4-2010   Accumulation of solid wastes.
Section
4-2011   Dumping or littering on public or private property.
Section
4-2012   Transportation of solid waste within town.
Section
4-2013   Burning or burying solid wastes.
Section
4-2014   Scrap materials; declaration of policy.
Section
4-2015   Accumulation of scrap materials.
Section
4-2016   Noxious growth.
Section
4-2017 through section 4-2019 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Storage and Collection of Solid Wastes
Section
4-2020   Responsibility for providing adequate solid waste receptacles.
Section
4-2021   Size, number, and type of solid waste receptacles required.
Section
4-2022   Storage and collection practices; premises served by dumpsters.
Section
4-2023   Storage and collection practices; premises not served by dumpsters.
Section
4-2024   Special collection.
Section
4-2025   Town assistance in providing mobile containers.
Section
4-2026   Appeals of discretionary determinations.
Section
4-2027   Miscellaneous.
Section
4-2028   Recycling.
Section
4-2029 reserved.
ARTICLE D
Enforcement
Section
4-2030   Penalties and remedies.
Section
4-2031   Violations resulting from continuing conditions.
Section
4-2032   Summary abatement of condition dangerous or prejudicial to the public
health.
Section
4-2033   Notice required.
Section
4-2034   Hearing procedures.
Section
4-2035   Order.
ARTICLE A
Definitions
Section 4-2001   Definitions.
   Unless otherwise specifically provided, or unless otherwise clearly required
by the context, the words and phrases defined in this section shall have the
meaning indicated when used in this chapter.
   Construction Debris: Rubbish from construction, remodeling and repair
operation on houses, commercial buildings, and other structures, including but
not limited to excavated earth, stones, brick, plaster, lumber, concrete,
singles, and other roofing items, and waste parts occasioned by installation
and replacement.
   Garbage: All solid wastes capable of being rapidly decomposed by micro-
organisms, including but not limited to animal and vegetable wastes resulting
from handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, as well as animal
offal and carcasses, but excluding sewage and human wastes.
   Hazardous waste: Potentially dangerous byproducts of our highly
industrialized society which cannot be handled, treated or disposed of without
special precautions. It includes ignitable, corrosive, reactive and toxic waste
such as acetone, gasoline and industrial alcohol, alkaline cleaners, acids,
cyanide and chlorine, arsenic, pesticide wastes, pain, caustics, infected
material, offal, fecal matter (human and animal), and explosive.
   Public Works Director: The Public Works Director or any other person
designated by the manager to perform the functions and exercise the
responsibilities assigned by this chapter to the Public Works Director.
   Scrap Materials: Scrap materials are:
   (a)   Pieces or fragments of metal, wood, glass, masonry, plastic, textiles,
rope leather, rubber, paper, or any substance, that formerly were part of the
construction of some useful object or thing or that consist of the excess
resulting from the creation of some useful object or thing; or
   (b)   Objects or things, including but not limited to machines, tools,
equipment, hardware, furniture, appliances, etc., or parts of the same that are
no longer in serviceable condition or are valuable only as raw material for
reprocessing; or
   (c)   Motor vehicles, motor vehicle parts or remnants thereof that (i) do
not display current license plates, and (ii) cannot without substantial repairs
be made to operate in the manner originally intended, and (iv) are valuable
only as raw materials for reprocessing but that do not constitute solid wastes
as herein defined because they are or may be useful to or wanted by or have not
been discarded by the person in control of the premises where they have been
located.
   Solid Wastes: Wastes that are nongaseous and nonliquid (except that liquid
wastes resulting from the processing of food are deemed solid wastes for the
purposes of this chapter).
   Wastes: All useless, unwanted, or discarded materials resulting from
domestic, industrial, commercial or community activities.
   Yard Waste: Organic materials such as leaves, pine straw, wheat straw,
grass, weeds or hedge clippings that commonly result from yard and landscape
maintenance. (Ord. of 12/6/04)
ARTICLE B
Control of Solid Wastes, Scrap Materials, Noxious Growth
Section 4-2010   Accumulation of solid wastes.
   (a)   Subject to the qualifications contained in subsection (b), no person
may cause, suffer, or permit solid wastes to accumulate or remain on premises
under his control except in accordance with the provisions of Article C of this
chapter (Storage and Collection of Solid Wastes).
   (b)   Yard waste may be allowed to accumulate or remain on premises under a
person's control unless those materials become or threaten to become a fire
hazard or a harboring place for rats, mice, snakes or other vermin or otherwise
pose a danger to the public health or safety. (Ord. of 12/6/04)
Section 4-2011   Dumping or littering on public or private property.
   No person may place, discard, throw, drop, or deposit, or cause to be
placed, discarded, thrown, dropped or deposited any solid wastes on:
   (1)   Any public street or sidewalk within the town or on any property owned
or operated by the town or any other public property, except in properly
designated receptacles; or
   (2)   Any property not owned by him without the consent of the owner,
occupant, or lessee thereof. (Ord. of 12/6/04)
State Law Reference: G.S. 14-399 makes the acts prohibited in this section a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00. Therefore, this
section may be enforced by the town only through civil penalties or injunctive
relief.
Section 4-2012   Transportation of solid waste within town.
   No person may transport or cause to be transported any solid wastes on the
public streets of the town unless the solid wastes are so secured that no solid
wastes escape from the transporting vehicle. In addition, any garbage so
transported shall be carried in closed containers that prevent the escape of
noxious odors or liquids. (Ord. of 12/6/04)
Section 4-2013   Burning or burying solid wastes.
   (a)   No person may burn or cause to be burned any solid waste without first
having obtained permission from the town fire department.
   (b)   No person may bury or cause to be buried any solid waste for purposes
of disposal. (Ord. of 12/6/04)
Section 4-2014   Scrap materials; declaration of policy.
   The Town Council hereby declares that the uncontrolled accumulation of scrap
materials on any premises constitutes a danger to the health, safety, and
welfare of the citizens of the town in that such accumulations can furnish
shelter and breeding places for vermin, present physical dangers to the safety
and well-being of children and other citizens, pose a danger of fire, and
depreciate property values or cause a loss of business by detracting from the
appearance and character of residential and commercial neighborhoods. (Ord. of
12/6/04)
Section 4-2015   Accumulation of scrap materials.
   No person may cause, suffer or permit scrap materials to accumulate or
remain on premises under his control unless the scrap materials are:
   (1)   Surrounded by a fence of sufficient height, strength, and construction
to deny persons, especially small children, access to them and to shield
neighboring properties from the view of them; or
   (2)   Are so stored within a structure or within a container outside of a
structure as to minimize substantially the dangers set forth in Section
4-2015. (Ord. of 12/6/04)
Section 4-2016   Noxious growth.
   No persons may cause, suffer, or permit on premises under his control any
growth of weeds, grasses, or other plants or bushes that becomes or threatens
to become a fire hazard or a harboring place for rats, mice, snakes, or other
vermin or otherwise poses a danger to the public health or safety. (Ord. of 12/
6/04)
ARTICLE C
Storage and Collection of Solid Wastes
Section 4-2020   Responsibility for providing adequate solid waste receptacles.
   (a)   The owner of every premises shall bear the ultimate responsibility for
providing adequate solid waste receptacles to store the solid wastes that are
typically generated by activities taking place on those premises pending
removal (by town crews or otherwise).
   (b)   Every premises shall be served either by one or more mobile containers
as provided by the town or by one or more dumpsters. The town shall assist
qualifying owners of premises in fulfilling the obligation set forth in
subsection (a) by making up to two containers available. The town will not pick
up or otherwise be responsible for collection of solid wastes stored in mobile
containers that are not compatible with town collection equipment. (Ord. of 12/
6/04)
Section 4-2021   Size, number, and type of solid waste receptacles required.
   (a)   Subject to the provisions of this section, and whenever possible after
consultation with the owner of the premises concerned, the Public Works
Director shall determine the number and type of solid waste receptacles (mobile
containers or dumpsters) that must be provided for all premises in accordance
with Section
4-2020. In making this determination, the Public Works Director shall consider
the type of activities on each premises and the amount of solid wastes likely
to be generated by those activities, as well as the welfare of the occupants
and neighbors of those premises and the town's need to facilitate collection
and minimize the cost of this service.
   (b)   Unless otherwise determined by the Public Works Director for good
cause shown, when five or more dwelling units are located on a single lot, the
owner of the premises shall at the owner’s cost contract with a commercial
garbage service for one or more dumpsters so that the following criteria
relating to capacity are satisfied:
   (1)   Two cubic yards of storage capacity are provided for every eight (8)
dwelling units or fraction thereof.
   (2)   If more than one dumpster is required, the owner shall provide the
smallest number of dumpsters capable of satisfying the requirements stated in
subdivision one of this subsection.
   (c)   Unless otherwise determined by the Public Works Director for good
cause shown, whenever any nonresidential premises requires more than two of the
mobile containers as provided by the town to satisfy the requirement stated in
subsection
4-2020(a) or whenever any residential premises requires more than five such
containers to satisfy this requirement, one or more dumpsters of an appropriate
size will be required.
   (d)   Mobile containers shall be used to store and dispose of solid waste
materials in accordance with the provisions of this article.
   (e)   It shall be the responsibility of each customer to safeguard and
protect mobile containers from theft, loss or damage, and to report any damage
to or loss of the container to the town Public Works Department upon discovery
of theft, loss or damage. Customers shall be responsible for theft, loss or
damage to the container, reasonable wear and tear excepted.
   (f)   It shall be unlawful to willfully break or damage any town owned
mobile container. Any person or entity violating this section shall be required
to purchase a replacement container from the town and may also be subject to
the civil penalties as outlined in this article.
   (g)   Mobile containers shall remain at the assigned locations after the
owner or occupant of the property at which the container is located vacates the
property. (Ord. of 12/6/04)
Section 4-2022   Storage and collection practices; premises served by
dumpsters.
   With respect to premises served by dumpsters:
   (1)   The owner of the premises shall be responsible for contracting with a
private contractor for waste disposal services.
   (2)   The location of dumpsters shall be determined by the Public Works
Director and, whenever possible, this determination shall be made after
consultation with the owner of the premises concerned. In making this
determination, the Public Works Director shall consider the welfare of the
occupants of the premises, neighbors and passersby, and the town's need to
facilitate collection and minimize the cost of service.
   (3)   Solid wastes shall be collected from the dumpsters by the owner’s
contractor at least weekly.
   (4)   The Public Works Director may require that screening be provided
around the dumpsters if he determines that such screening is necessary to
prevent solid wastes from being scattered about the site or transported onto
neighboring properties or if the location of the dumpsters is such that, in the
absence of screening, the dumpsters would present an offensive appearance or
cause offensive odors to be transmitted to occupants of the site, neighboring
properties or passersby.
   (5)   All solid wastes shall be stored in dumpsters pending collection.
   (6)   All dumpsters shall be cleaned periodically to minimize offensive
odors.
   (7)   No person may place within any dumpster any solid waste without the
permission of the owner or occupant of the premises on which the dumpster is
located.
   (8)   No person may place within any dumpster any solid waste that may not
be placed for collection within mobile containers, as specified in Section
4-2023.
   (9)   Garbage shall not be allowed to be placed or accumulated beside or
around the dumpster or otherwise on the premises on which the dumpster is
located.
   (10)   Covers shall not be required unless otherwise required by law in
which event they shall also be required by this article.
   (11)   The dumpster shall not be filled with solid waste above the height of
the dumpster.
   (12)   If the dumpster deteriorates to such an extent that, in the judgment
of the Public Works Director, it no longer adequately serves its intended
function or if the dumpster presents an offensive appearance or causes
offensive odors to be transmitted to occupants of the site or neighboring
property or passersby, the Public Works Director shall so inform the owner of
the premises involved and the owner shall either have the dumpster repaired to
the reasonable satisfaction of the Public Works Director or replaced at the
expense of the owner. (Ord. of 12/6/04)
Section 4-2023   Storage and collection practices; premises not served by
dumpsters.
   (a)   The provisions of this section shall apply to premises not served by
dumpsters.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, all solid wastes may be
stored, pending collection by the town, only in the mobile containers provided
by the town, and the top of such containers shall at all times be kept securely
fastened. Such mobile containers shall be kept between scheduled pick ups
either within a completely enclosed substantial structure such as a house,
garage, or shed, or:
   (1)   If a lot has frontage on only one street, then such mobile containers
shall be located behind the building line of the side of the principal building
on that lot that faces the street;
   (2)   If a lot is a corner lot, then such mobile containers shall be located
behind the building line of the side of the principal building on that lot that
faces the street;
   (3)   If a lot has frontage on two streets that are more or less parallel,
then such mobile containers shall be located behind the building line of the
front of the principal building on that lot but (if possible) not closer than
forty-five feet to the center line of the street that runs along the rear of
such lot. If mobile containers stored behind the front building line must be
located within forty-five feet of the centerline of the street that runs along
the rear of such lot, then such mobile containers shall be located along the
side of the principal building.
   (c)   Mobile containers shall be placed adjacent to the street (on the
street side of any drainage ditch or swell) for collection on the scheduled
collection day or after dark on the preceding day. After collection, all mobile
containers and all uncollected solid wastes shall beremoved to a storage
location that complies with subsection (b) of this section by 6:00 a.m. on the
day following the collection day.
   (d)   If the Public Works Director determines that, because of the physical
infirmity of the occupant of any premises or the physical characteristics of
the premises, the occupant cannot without severe hardship transport the solid
wastes from the storage location required by subsection (b) of this section to
the collection point required by subsection (c) of this section, he may do one
of the following:
   (1)   Provide assistance in transporting the mobile container to and from
the collection point;
   (2)   Provide pick up service of solid wastes stored in bags in such manner
and kept in such place as the Public Works Director may determine
   (e)   Containers other than those mobile containers provided by the town may
be treated as solid wastes and collected by the town or its contractor, or the
owner’s contractor. The town or its contractor reserves the right to refuse to
collect solid wastes not placed in the approved containers as provided by the
town.
   (f)   No person may cause, suffer, or permit any garbage can or solid waste
receptacles other than mobile containers provided by the town to be stored in
any location that does not comply with the provision of subsection (b) of this
section dealing with the storage location of mobile containers.
   (g)   Yard wastes may not be placed in the mobile containers for collection
by the town.
   (h)   Clean cardboard that is broken down and stacked beside a mobile
container will be collected by the town at the time it collects the waste in
the mobile containers. With the exception of such cardboard, the town will not
collect solid waste not located inside the mobile containers.
   (i)   The following items may not be placed within mobile containers:
   (1)   Building materials, including but not limited to such items as lumber,
shingles, bricks, sheet rock, insulation, etc.
   (2)   Paint, gasoline, antifreeze, flammable liquids, solvents, or other
liquids containing hazardous chemicals.
   (3)   Motor oil.
   (4)   Wet cell batteries.
   (5)   Tires.
   (6)   Ashes or hot coals.
   (7)   Any liquid waste not enclosed in a tight container.
   (8)   Hazardous waste. (Ord. of 12/6/04)
Section 4-2024   Special collection.
   (a)   Brush, yard waste, and leaves: The town will collect brush, yard waste
and leaves subject to the following conditions and requirements:
   (1)   The town will not collect stumps.
   (2)   Brush piles which include brush resulting from the clearing of
property or brush from property other
than the property at which the brush pile is located will not be collected.
   (3)   Brush must not be located under a power line or at a location that may
jeopardize the safety of the town employees collecting the brush.
   (4)   Brush must be cut so as to enable town employees to pickup the brush
using the town’s brush collection equipment. Brush, yard waste and/or leaves
must be neatly piled at the curbside.
   (5)   Upon request of the property owner, town employees may go onto the
property to collect brush if:
   (i)   In the judgment of the Public Works Director, going onto the private
property to collect the brush would be safe, cost effective and at least as
convenient to the town employees as would be picking up the brush at curbside;
and
   (ii)   The property owner has signed a release and authorization form as
approved by the Town Manager authorizing town employees to go onto the property
to pick up the brush and releasing the town from any liability for damage to
the property resulting from the collection of brush on the property of the
owner.
   (6)   Brush, yard waste, and leaves will be collected at such times and
subject to such additional requirements as established by the Public Works
Director from time to time.
   (b)   Construction debris:
   (1)   The town will not collect construction debris resulting from work
performed by a contractor. The contractor and the property owner shall be
responsible for promptly disposing of all such construction debris.
   (2)   Construction debris resulting from work performed by the property
owner, individually, (not through a contractor) will be collected by the town
provided that the property owner pays the town in advance a fee as determined
by the Public Works Director to cover the cost of the collection and disposal
of the construction debris.
   (3)   Roofing shingles and hazardous waste or materials, including paints
and lacquers, will not be collected by the town.
   (c)   Furniture and white goods: The town will collect only furniture and
white goods (appliances) that result from the residential use of the property
at which they are to be collected. Such furniture and white goods will be
collected at curbside at such times and subject to such other requirements as
established by the Public Works Director.
   (d)   Tires: The town will collect only those tires that result from the
residential use of the property at which the tires are to be collected;
provided, however, (i) that the property owner must pay in advance a fee as
determined by the Public Works Director to cover the cost of collecting and
disposing of the tires; and (ii) that if the tires have not been separated from
the rims, an additional fee as determined by the Public Works Director must be
paid in advance for separating the tires from the rims. (Ord. of 12/6/04)
Section 4-2025   Town assistance in providing mobile containers.
   (a)   The town shall provide to all premises that receive (or are entitled
to receive) solid waste collection service from the town (except those premises
required to be served by dumpsters in accordance with Section
4-2021), and without charge to the owners of such premises, the following
number of mobile containers described in subsection
4-2021(d):
   (1)   For residential premises, one mobile container per dwelling unit.
   (2)   For non-residential premises, the number of mobile containers deemed
necessary by the Public Works Director in accordance with Section 1.1-10.
   (b)   To assist persons who desire mobile containers in addition to the
containers distributed in accordance with subsection (a), the town shall keep
an inventory of mobile containers and make such containers available at cost to
those who wish to purchase them. In cases where the purchase of such containers
poses a severe financial hardship, the town may provide an installment purchase
option whereby a person may pay the purchase price over a period not in excess
of twelve months.
   (c)   The public works department may assist persons who own mobile
containers in repairing such containers if they are reparable and the town may
provide spare parts. No charge shall be made for any labor involved in this
service. (Ord. of 12/6/04)
Section 4-2026   Appeals of discretionary determinations.
   (a)   Subject to subsection (b), whenever this article authorizes the Public
Works Director to make a discretionary determination, all persons affected by
the determination shall comply with it within fifteen days after receiving
written notice of the determination.
   (b)   Any person who receives a written determination in accordance with
section (a) may appeal that determination to the manager by filing a written
notice of appeal within fifteen days after receiving such written
determination. An appeal stays any further enforcement until the appeal is
disposed of in accordance with this section.
   (c)   The town manager shall hear the appeal in any manner that fairly gives
the appellant and the Public Works Director an opportunity to present their
respective sides of the matter at issue. The appeal shall be heard and decided
as expeditiously as possible and the manager shall inform the appellant in
writing of his decision.
   (d)   The town manager may refer the appeal to the town council to obtain
the council's recommendation on the appeal.
   (e)   If an appeal is taken as provided in subsection (a), and a decision is
entered and delivered as provided in subsection (c), then all persons shall
comply with that decision within ten days after receipt of notice of such
decision. (Ord. of 12/6/04)
Section 4-2027   Miscellaneous.
   (a)   Collection routes and schedules. The Public Works Director shall
establish collection routes and schedules and may alter these routes and
schedules from time to time. A copy of the current routes and schedules shall
be kept on file in the office of the town clerk. Notice of any changes in
routes or schedules shall be published in the local newspaper or given by
letter at least ten day before the changes are to become effective.
   (b)   No person may damage, displace, or otherwise interfere with solid
waste receptacles or solid wastes stored or prepared for collection except with
the consent of the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises where those
receptacles or solid wastes are located.
   (c)   To assist the town in the enforcement of this article, the owner of
any premises that is occupied by another shall provide to the town upon request
the name of such lessee or occupant.
   (d)   In addition to other enforcement remedies set forth in Article IV of
this chapter, the town may refuse to provide collection service to any premises
where violations of this article exist. Without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, the town may refuse to service any dumpster or mobile container that
contains wastes that are not permitted to be stored therein. (Ord. of 12/6/04)
Section 4-2028   Recycling.
   (a)   The town strongly encourages recycling efforts. Recycling containers
(one per dwelling) are provided by the town at no charge and remain the
property of the town. Additional containers will be provided by the town upon
payment of a fee established by the town.
   (b)   Recycling containers shall be stored and placed for collection in
accordance with the same requirements applicable to mobile containers (see
Section
4-2023).
   (c)   Only those materials that are acceptable for recycling shall be placed
within the recycling containers. The public works department shall provide
adequate public notice of the types of solid wastes that may be placed within
these recycling containers for collection by the town. (Ord. of 12/6/04)
Section 4-2029 reserved.
ARTICLE D
Enforcement
Section 4-2030   Penalties and remedies.
   (a)   Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided in G.S. 14-4.
   (b)   A violation of any of the provision of Articles B or Article C of this
chapter shall subject the offender to a civil penalty of $100. If the offender
fails to pay this penalty within fifteen calendar days after being cited for a
violation, the penalty may be recovered by the town in a civil action in the
nature of a debt.
   (c)   Each day that any violation continues after a person has been notified
that such violation exists and that he is subject to the penalties specified in
subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall constitute a separate offense.
   (d)   This chapter may also be enforced by any appropriate equitable action,
including injunctions or orders of abatement.
   (e)   The town may enforce this chapter by any one of or any combination of
the foregoing remedies. (Ord. of 12/6/04)
Section 4-2031   Violations resulting from continuing conditions.
   (a)   Whenever a violation of this chapter results from a continuing
condition rather than a single event, a written notice shall be sent to the
last known address of the responsible person specifying the nature of the
violation and what must be done to correct it, requiring the responsible person
to correct the violation within ten calendar days after delivery of the notice,
and informing the responsible person of the possible consequences of his
failure to comply.
   (b)   Whenever a violation of this chapter results from a continuing
condition rather than a single event, the penalties and remedies provided for
in Section
4-2030 may not be invoked until after the ten-day correction period specified
in subsection (a) has expired. (Ord. of 12/6/04)
Section 4-2032   Summary abatement of condition dangerous or prejudicial to the
public health.
   If the town council concludes, after notice and hearing as provided in this
part, that any condition or situation prohibited by this chapter or any other
condition or situation is dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or
safety, it may order town officials to summarily remove, abate, or remedy
everything so found within the town limits, and impose a lien upon the land
affected to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement. (Ord. of 12/6/04)
Section 4-2033   Notice required.
   Before the action authorized by Section
4-2032 is taken, notice shall be sent to the respondent, informing him:
   (1)   What condition or situation is alleged to be dangerous or prejudicial
to the public health or safety;
   (2)   When and where the town council will meet to hold a hearing on the
issue of whether the condition cited is dangerous or prejudicial to public
health;
   (3)   That if the town council determines that the cited condition is
dangerous or prejudicial to public health or safety, it may order town
officials to summarily abate, remedy, or correct the offending condition;
   (4)   That the expenses incurred by the town in connection with the actions
described in subdivision (3) of this section, if not paid by the respondent,
shall become a lien upon the land where the offending condition is located, to
be collected as unpaid taxes. This notice shall be sent by mail (certified,
deliver to addressee only, return receipt requested) not later than five
calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing, or delivered to the respondent by
a town officer or employee not later than three days prior to the scheduled
hearing. For purposes of this part, the respondent is the person who is
responsible for the offending condition, as well as the owner of the property
where the offending condition is located, if different from the former. (Ord.
of 12/6/04)
Section 4-2034   Hearing procedures.
   At the hearing held pursuant to this part, the town administration shall be
responsible for presenting sufficient evidence to the town council to
substantiate a finding that a condition exists that is dangerous or prejudicial
to the public health or safety. The town council may consider all reliable
evidence and need not be bound by the strict rules of evidence applicable to
courts of law, but all witnesses shall be sworn. The respondent may be
represented by counsel and may present evidence. All parties may cross-examine
adverse witnesses. At the conclusion of the hearing, the town council shall
make findings of fact, state its conclusions, and enter an appropriate order.
The town council’s findings of fact, conclusion, and order shall be reduced to
writing and a copy sent by mail or delivered to the respondent within three
days following the hearing. (Ord. of 12/6/04)
Section 4-2035   Order.
   If the town council concludes that a situation or condition exists that is
dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or safety, it may:
   (1)   Order appropriate town officials or employees to summarily remove,
abate, or remedy everything so found and to assess the cost of this action
against the respondent in accordance with Section
4-2032 of this article; or
   (2)   Order the respondent to correct the situation within a specified time
period and order town officials to abate, correct, or remedy the offending
condition if the respondent fails to act within the prescribed time limits.
(Ord. of 12/6/04)
CHAPTER 3
Municipally Owned Cemeteries
Section
4-3001   Cemetery lot sales.
Section
4-3002   General rules.
Section
4-3003   Prohibited activities.
Section
4-3004   Memorials.
Section
4-3005   Automobiles and other vehicles.
Section
4-3006   General supervision.
Appendix I   Certificate for grave site in municipal cemetery.
Appendix II   Assignment of grave site.
Section 4-3001   Cemetery lot sales.
   (a)   The sales price of grave sites in the town- owned cemetery shall be
$300 for persons residing within the corporate limits of the town and $500 for
persons residing outside of the corporate limits of the town.
   (b)   The right to use the grave site as a burial place is vested in the
owner of the grave site as listed in the records of the town only. No
assignment or transfer of a grave site shall be valid until approved by the
town. Upon presentation of a document assigning the grave site in the form
approved by the town, signed by the owner or, if applicable, the executor or
administrator of the owner's estate, or upon presentation of other written
evidence satisfactory to the town that the grave site has been sold or
transferred to the grantee, and upon payment of a $25 transfer fee, the town
shall then issue a new certificate for the grave site to the grantee.
   (c)   The deed for a grave site in the town cemetery shall be in the form
approved by the town council. The town manager is authorized to execute deeds
for grave sites on behalf of the town.
   (d)   Copies of the aforementioned forms appear as Appendices I and II at
the end of this chapter. (Ord. of 4/6/92; as amended by Ord. of 8/1/94; Ord. of
2/2/04)
Section 4-3002    General rules.
   (a)   All persons are reminded that the cemetery grounds are sacredly
dedicated to the interment and repose of the dead and strict observance of the
decorum due to such a place will be expected and required by all.
   (b)   The town reserves the right to determine, establish, modify, alter or
change the grade of each andevery grave site, road, driveway, pathway or part
thereof, and it shall not be liable to anyone for any such action.
   (c)   No grave site owner shall make any changes or alteration in or on any
grave site including the removal or change in position of any memorial of any
kind without the written consent of the town and if so made, the town will
restore such site to its former condition without notice and at the expense of
the owner of such site.
   (d)   No coping, curbing, fencing, hedging, borders, corner posts, or
enclosure of any kind will be allowed around any grave site and no walks of
brick, cinders, tile, stone, sand, cement, gravel or wood or other materials
will be allowed on any grave site. The town reserves the right to remove the
same if so erected, platted, or placed.
   (e)   No trinkets, toys, shells, pickle jars, tin cans, sand, artificial
material, or any item, which in the opinion of the town is unsightly, will be
allowed on any grave site, and all such articles, materials and items will be
removed without notice and the town shall not be responsible for the loss or
destruction of the items.
   (f)   Opening and closing of graves shall be done by a state-licensed
undertaker, using commonly accepted practices to insure that the site is
restored to its natural state.
   (g)   No person shall dig, exhume or cause to be dug or exhumed any grave or
body in the cemetery without first having obtained a permit from the county
health officer and from the town manager.
   (h)   The width of graves shall not be less than 3 inches greater than the
liner width on each side. A minimum of 15 inches of soil shall be placed over
the liner and the grave made approximately level with the lot. The grave shall
be seeded or covered with sod as conditions allow.
   (i)   Concrete, steel or fiberglass grave liners shall be used for all
burials. Wooden or other short term liners may not be used.
   (j)   No person shall take any dog, cat or other animal into the town-owned
cemetery or allow any animal to run at large therein. (Ord. of 4/6/92)
Section 4-3003   Prohibited activities.
   The following activities are not permitted in or on the cemetery grounds:
   (1)   Loud, boisterous or obscene language or whistling and singing, except
when part of a memorial and interment service.
   (2)   Improper conduct or unseemly noise.
   (3)   Picnicking, lunching, camping, hunting, playing, loitering, lounging,
sledding or other recreational activities.
   (4)   Cutting, picking or pulling flowers or plants whether cultivated or
wild; breaking branches from any shrub or trees; scratching, marring, defacing,
injuring or disturbing any monument or head or footstone, or any other thing
being a part of or placed or used in connection with the cemetery grounds, or
any lot, pathway, street or roadway therein.
   (5)   Putting or depositing paper, rubbish, dead or wilted flowers, shrubs,
plants, branches or any unsightly or unseemly thing on any lot, walk, drive or
other part of the cemetery, except in receptacles provided for that purpose.
   (6)   Sitting or climbing on a marker, monument of fixture of any kind.
   (7)   Peddling, begging, soliciting or collecting.
   (8)   The display or distribution of signs, cards, handbills, circulars or
anything relating to any business, profession, office or other matters.
   (9)   The placing of flowers, floral or other arrangements in alcohol or
other preservatives, or under glass or other enclosures. (Ord. of 4/6/92)
Section 4-3004   Memorials.
   (a)   Definitions.
   (1)   Grave ledger. A tablet of cut stone covering an entire grave and
installed flush with the ground.
   (2)   Headstone. A memorial of granite or other natural cut stone approved
by the town, extending above the surface of the ground and being of such size
and inscription to mark an individual grave.
   (3)   Marker. A memorial of granite or other natural cut stone approved by
the town installed flush with the ground and of a size and inscription as to
mark an individual grave.
   (4)   Memorial. Any monument, marker, headstone, tablet or other object
memorializing the deceased.
   (5)   Monument. A memorial of granite or other natural cut stone approved by
the town, extending above the surface of the ground and being of such size and
inscription to mark two or more graves.
   (6)   Tablet. A flat piece of marble or granite used as a base for a
memorial of real bronze and of a size as to mark an individual grave (herein
called a small tablet) or two or more graves (herein called a large tablet).
   (b)   Approval by town. The town reserves the right to approve and prescribe
the kind, size, design, symbolism, craftsmanship, quality and material of
memorials placed in the town cemetery. Only those materials conforming to the
specifications contained herein shall be allowed and permission shall be
secured from the town. Any installation of memorials without the town's
approval is prohibited and memorials so installed or otherwise not conforming
to these regulations may be removed by the town.
   (c)   Memorial allowed.
   (1)   A single grave site is allowed one headstone and one marker or small
tablet. A headstone shall not exceed 60 inches in length, including the base,
36 inches in total height, and 18 inches in width at the base. A marker shall
not exceed 28 inches in length, 18 inches in depth and shall be installed flush
with the surface of the ground. A small tablet shall not exceed 30 inches in
length, 18 inches in depth and shall not project above the surface of the
ground.
   (2)   A lot consisting of two or more adjacent grave sites is allowed one
family monument or large tablet in lieu of any headstones. In addition, one
marker will be allowed for each grave site. Markers shall meet the dimensional
requirements as established for single grave sites. A large tablet may not
exceed 84 inches in length, 24 inches in width, and shall not project above the
surface of the ground. A family monument shall not exceed 96 inches in length
including the base, 48 inches in total height, and 24 inches in depth at the
base.
   (3)   No family monument or large tablet will be allowed if individual
headstones exist nor will individual headstones be allowed if a family monument
or large tablet exists. Only one family monument or large tablet will be
permitted on any lot.
   (d)   Inscriptions on memorials shall be carefully spaced and accurately set
in line, both vertically and horizontally. Names, dates, inscriptions and
emblems shall be arranged so as to result in an orderly and neat appearance. No
paint or other artificial coloring other than a lithochrome shadow which shall
meet standards accepted by the monument industry shall be used. Inscriptions
shall contain no words, pictures or emblems of an inflammatory or insulting
nature and shall be in keeping with the propriety and sanctity of the cemetery.
Memorials not meeting these requirements will not be allowed.
   (e)   (1)   All memorials shall be erected upon sound foundations.
Foundations shall be as long and as wide as the memorial base and shall extend
to undisturbed soil at the top of the grave liner. Foundations shall be
installed in such a manner as to prevent sinking or movement of a memorial.
   (2)   Persons or firms installing a memorial shall secure the town
manager's, or his designee's, approval of the foundation and shall clean the
site of debris or materials upon completion of work. In the event of the
sinking or moving of a memorial, repairs to the installation shall be made
within 15 days of request, or the town may withhold permission for further
installations until work is corrected.
   (f)   Exceptions to specifications where nonconforming memorials exist.
Where memorials do not conform to the dimensional requirements herein currently
exist on a cemetery lot, the installation of new memorials of the same size may
be approved by the town manager. (Ord. of 4/6/92; as amended by Ord. of 8/1/94)
Section 4-3005   Automobiles and other vehicles.
   The following actions involving automobiles and other vehicles are
prohibited:
   (1)   The driving of automobiles or other vehicles on the cemetery grounds
at speeds in excess of 15 mph.
   (2)   Driving any automobile or other vehicle across or upon any grave, lot,
lawn or parking or leaving the same thereon.
   (3)   Parking or leaving any automobile or other vehicle in any driveway
within the cemetery grounds at such location or in such position as to prevent
any other automobiles or vehicles from passing. If an automobile or vehicle is
left in such position, the cemetery will cause it to be removed.
   (4)   Leaving an automobile or vehicle parked on the grounds of the cemetery
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any other time when not
visiting the cemetery or at the cemetery for authorized business. (Ord. of 4/6/
92)
Section 4-3006   General supervision.
   The town shall take reasonable precautions to protect grave site owners and
the burial rights of grave site owners within the town cemetery from loss or
damage; but it distinctly disclaims all responsibility for loss or damage from
causes beyond its reasonable control, whether damage be direct or collateral.
The town shall not be responsible for any plantings, memorials or private
equipment located within the cemetery. (Ord. of 4/6/92)
APPENDIX I   TOWN OF VALDESE CERTIFICATE FOR GRAVE SITE IN MUNICIPAL CEMETERY
Grave site no.    $
      THIS IS TO CERTIFY that the right to use the following grave site in the
Town of Valdese Municipal Cemetery for burial purposes is hereby vested in:
    
    
                     whose address is
    
    
    
      This certificate is subject to the rules, regulations and ordinances
governing the Town of Valdese Municipal Cemetery which have been or may
hereafter be adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Valdese, North
Carolina.
   Only the Grantee named above shall have the right to use the above-described
grave site as a burial site. The assignment or other transfer of this grave
site shall not be valid until presentation to the Town of Valdese of a properly
executed document in the form proscribed by the Town of Valdese assigning this
grave site to a Grantee and upon payment of any transfer fee established by the
Town of Valdese.
      IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Town of Valdese through its Town Manager has
caused this certificate for grave site to be executed this    day of   , 19.
                                                TOWN OF VALDESE
                                             by:  
                                              Town Manager
APPENDIX II   ASSIGNMENT GRAVE SITE
      The undersigned does hereby convey and assign the following grave site in
the Town of Valdese Municipal Cemetery to:
    
    
                     whose address is
    
    
Grave site no.    
      I request the Town of Valdese to make such transfer on its records and
issue a new certificate for grave site to the above-named person.
      THIS the    day of   , .
      (SEAL)
      (SEAL)
      (SEAL)
STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA
COUNTY OF
      I,   , Notary Public, do certify that    personally appeared before me
this day and acknowledged the due execution of the foregoing instrument.
      Witness my hand and notarial seal this    day of   , .
My Commission Expires:      (SEAL)
                                             Notary Public
PART 5
Municipal Utilities
Chapter 1.   Water Supply and Distribution
Chapter 2.   Sewage Collection and Disposal
Chapter 3.   Sewer Use
Chapter 4.   Fats, Oils and Grease Control
CHAPTER 1
Water Supply and Distribution
Section
5-1001   Definitions.
Section
5-1002   Council to regulate water system.
Section
5-1003   Permit for connection required.
Section
5-1004   Separate connections required.
Section
5-1005   Water required.
Section
5-1006   Use of town water.
Section
5-1007   Utility rates; cutting off water.
Section
5-1008   Tampering with or obstructing water lines prohibited.
Section
5-1009   Water superintendent.
Section
5-1010   Work on water system.
Section
5-1011   Owners of more than one house.
Section
5-1012   Non-payment of bills.
Section
5-1013   Resale of water.
Section
5-1014   Access to property.
Section
5-1015   Fire hydrants.
Section
5-1016   Adjustment of bills for meter.
Section
5-1017   Meter accuracy and test rates.
Section
5-1018   Separate connections required; exceptions.
Section
5-1019   Water rates generally.
Section
5-1020   Water bills generally.
Section
5-1021   Partial payments of bills.
Section
5-1022   Water conservation practices.
Section 5-1001   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Apartment. Living accommodation with a separate hall or outside entrance and
containing separate kitchen facilities which include a stove, refrigerator and
sink, and a bath or shared bath. (Ord. of 10/8/79)
   Unit. Includes the following:
   (1)   A dwelling used for residential purposes by a single family, including
additional separate structures used for residential purposes by the single
family.
   (2)   A house or building in which at least 60% of the heated space is used
as a single-family dwelling by the owner and one (1) additional apartment.
   (3)   Each additional apartment in excess of one (1) in houses or buildings
set out in division (2) above.
   (4)   Each separate building used for industrial or commercial purposes by
an owner or tenant.
   (5)   Each apartment and each commercial or industrial tenant of a single
house or building, except as provided in division (2) above. (Ord. of 10/8/79)
Section 5-1002   Council to regulate water system.
   The water system of the town shall be under the control of, and the duty of
prescribing and enforcing a full compliance with all rules and regulations
governing all connections with the water system shall be vested in, the council
or its authorized agent.
Section 5-1003   Permit for connection required.
   No person shall connect with the water system of the town until they shall
have made application for permission to so connect in writing to the clerk, and
this application shall be made before any part of the drainage system of the
house or other connection shall have been laid or constructed. Such application
shall be accompanied with a plan or drawing showing the location of the
building and the entire proposed connection from the public sewerage lines
through the building to its terminus, showing the location of all the fixtures,
traps, ventilating pipes, etc., and shall state the name of the street and the
name of the person.
Section 5-1004   Separate connections required.
   Each individual business and each residential building or structure is
required to have a separate water connection. Separate water meters are
required for new in-ground irrigation systems that are connected to the Town of
Valdese water system.
(As amended 6/1/09)
Section 5-1005   Water required.
   All owners of improved property located within the corporate limits and upon
or within a reasonable distance of any water line owned and operated by the
town shall be required to connect their premises with the town water system.
(As amended 11/3/80)
State Law Reference: Authority to require connections, G.S. 160A-317.
Section 5-1006   Use of town water.
   No person shall take or carry away water from any watering trough, public
fountain, or other public place.
Section 5-1007   Utility rates; cutting off water.
   (a)   Water rates, deposits, connection and reconnection charges shall be
determined from time to time by the council and shall be kept on file in the
office of the clerk.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person other than a person authorized by
the town officials to cut off the town supply of water.
Section 5-1008   Tampering with or obstructing water lines prohibited.
   No person shall touch, tamper with or in any manner manipulate or turn the
cut-offs on the water mains forming a part of the water system of the town, nor
shall any person tamper with or harm in any manner whatsoever any water line,
main or any appurtenance thereto. No person shall throw or deposit any material
or substance into any water line that will in any manner obstruct such line.
Section 5-1009   Water superintendent.
   The manager may select some competent person to supervise under his general
control the entire water system of the town. The manager may from time to time
prescribe the duties and responsibilities of the superintendent.
Section 5-1010   Work on water system.
   All work on the water system and all connections or disconnections thereto
shall be performed by the authorized employees of the town or their
representatives or plumbers approved by the town. All work shall be performed
in accordance with the plumbing code of the state and the town and such
amendments thereto that the council may from time to time adopt.
Cross Reference:All technical codes, including plumbing, are covered in section
9-2021 et seq.
Section 5-1011   Owners of more than one house.
   Any property owner having more than one house using water from the same
watertap shall be responsible for water bills for all the houses.
Section 5-1012   Non-payment of bills.
   When the water that is being used by any person, firm or corporation has
been cut off because of the non-payment of the water account, such person, firm
or corporation shall pay a fee fixed by the board and kept on file in the
office of the clerk before such water shall be turned back on.
State Law Reference: Discontinuance of service for delinquency. G. S.160A-314.
Section 5-1013   Resale of water.
   No residence, or finn or corporation shall furnish water for any other
residence, firm or corporation through any one meter, by way of piping or
tubing. Each additional residence, firm or corporation must have its own
separate water meter, if it is to be served by the town.
Section 5-1014   Access to property.
   The superintendent or his assistant shall at all reasonable hours have free
access to all premises for the purpose of examining hydrants, fixtures or
connections on which town water pressure is maintained.
Section 5-1015   Fire hydrants.
   No person, except employees of the town, or other persons authorized by the
manager, shall take water from any public hydrant, plug, street washer, draw
cock, hose pipe or fountain, except for fire purposes, nor shall anyone in any
way use or take water for private use unless such person shall pay for the
privilege and receive a permit from the manager.
Section 5-1016   Adjustment of bills for meter error.
   The superintendent may, with the approval of the manager, adjust and settle
inequitable and abnormal water bills due to meter error.
Section 5-1017   Meter accuracy and test rates.
   The town shall test or cause to be tested and make a thorough examination of
water meters and all fixtures where so desired by the consumer under the
following conditions:
   (1)   Should the test of meter and inspection prove the excessive bill to be
caused by negligence of the town, or inaccuracy of the meter, then the expense
of the investigation shall be borne by the town.
   (2)   Should the test and inspection prove to be the fault of the consumer
or any person not connected with or in the employ of the town, then the actual
cost of the investigation is to be borne by the consumer making the protest and
asking for the inspection, said actual cost to be fixed by the council.
Section 5-1018   Separate connections required; exceptions.
   Every house or building abutting any water or sewer main and requiring a
water or sewer connection shall be separately and independently connected.
However, in those cases where laterals have already been lain in macadam or
approved streets from the main without provisions being made for the house or
building, the connection may be made to an existing lateral. If the house or
building is on a macadam or improved street where laterals have not been laid,
the connection may be made to any convenient lateral. When two (2) or more
units are connected with the same water lateral, a separate water meter shall
be provided for each such unit. (Ord. of 10/8/79)
Section 5-1019   Water rates generally.
   All units shall have individual meters. In existing cases, a customer
supplying two (2) or more units through one (1) meter will be charged, in
addition to the regular rate, the regular minimum charge per month for each
additional unit so supplied. However, two (2) or more units occupying the same
building or house, all using the same opening, shall be considered as one (1)
unit. (Ord. of 10/8/79)
Section 5-1020   Water bills generally.
   Bills for water rents shall be based on the actual reading of the amount of
water used. However, when the amount of water used is not registered because of
a defective meter, the bill rendered shall be for the average amount heretofore
used by the premises served by the meter during the preceding three (3)
quarters or months (as the quarterly or monthly rate is allowed), or during the
portion of that period for which water rent records are available. Or, if water
was not consumed by the premises through the meter during the preceding period,
the bill rendered shall be for the average amount for other services of the
same class in the town during the period covered by the bill. Bills shall be
rendered separately for each service or connection. When more than one (1) unit
is furnished water through a single meter, the bill therefore shall be
furnished only to the person upon whose application the water was furnished.
All bills shall be made out and mailed as early as practicable after the close
of the month covered by the bills. (Ord. of 10/8/79)
Section 5-1021   Partial payments of bills.
   Partial payments toward a bill covering recycling, sewage and water services
are to be applied among these services in the following order:
   (1)   Recycling services;
   (2)   Sewage services; and
   (3)   Water services. (Ord. of (9/8/92)
Section 5-1022   Water conservation practices.
   (a)   Purpose. It is the purpose and intent of this section to maintain and
protect the valuable but limited water resources available to the town for
redistribution for essential community and business water uses during droughts
and other emergencies that affect the supply of water from the Catawba River
and its system of reservoirs. This section seeks to achieve that purpose by
providing for the issuance of an official water shortage declaration and the
implementation of water conservation controls during the time when a
declaration is in effect. It is intended that the declaration and
implementation of water conservation controls shall be consistent throughout
the cities, counties and towns having water intakes on the Catawba River, its
tributaries and its series of reservoirs. Further, this section is intended to
implement the low inflow protocol issued by the Catawba Wateree Drought
Management Advisory Group as defined below. This section shall therefore be
liberally construed to effect such purpose and intent and shall apply to the
entire distribution system of the town.
   (b)   Definitions.
   (1)   Drought Management Advisory Group (“CW-DMAG” or “DMAG”) means the team
of owners of large water intakes in the Catawba River Basin, state agencies and
Duke Power Company LLC tasked with formulating a basin wide response to low
inflow conditions as further defined in the low inflow protocol.
   (2)   Low inflow protocol (“LIP”) means the set of procedures for reductions
in water use during periods of drought or other emergency conditions issued by
the CW-DMAG in written form, as amended from time to time. The LIP is
incorporated herein by reference and the current copy of the LIP shall be
maintained and available for inspection in the office of the Clerk of the town.
   (3)   Stage refers to the level of severity of the water shortage emergency
and the water conservation measures implemented during the emergency. Under the
current LIP, there are stages 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4.
   (4)   Water Shortage Management Plan means a plan prepared by the Water
Superintendent for the town implementing the low inflow protocol by indicating
in greater details the measures that will be taken by the town in order to
conserve water during an emergency. The water shortage management plan, as
amended, is incorporated herein by reference.
   (c)   Imposition of mandatory water conservation controls.  The Town Manager
is authorized to impose mandatory water conservation controls as authorized by
this section on the use of water obtained either directly or indirectly from
the publicly owned water treatment works (“water system”) by declaring a water
shortage. In declaring a water shortage, the Town Manager shall, among other
things, consider the following:
   (1)   Recommendations from the Water Superintendent.
   (2)   Available pressures at various points throughout the water system.
   (3)   The ability to maintain adequate storage levels in storage tanks
throughout the water system.
   (4)   Issues related to the quantity as well as the quality of the water in
the near future.
   (5)   Downstream conditions including water shortages in public water
suppliers downstream.
   (6)   Any declaration of drought stages by the CW-DMAG as further defined in
the LIP based upon preset trigger points.
   (7)   Declaration of drought stages by the North Carolina Department of
Environment and Natural Resources.
   (8)   Any other factors set out in the Water Shortage Management Plan issued
by the Water Superintendent pursuant to subsection (d), or the LIP.
   (d)   Water shortage management plan. The Water Superintendent for the town
(the “Water Superintendent”) with the approval of the Town Manager is
authorized to adopt and issue a water shortage management plan which shall be
consistent with the LIP and will further implement and enforce the provisions
of this section, including the water conservation measures applicable to the
stage then in effect under the declaration.
   (e)   Procedure for issuance of water shortage declaration. The Town Manager
may issue a water shortage declaration (sometimes referred to as the
“declaration”) by signing a written notice of water shortage declaration. The
declaration will take effect on the date and time specified in the notice. A
water shortage declaration, or any amendments thereto, may be issued for the
entire water system or for any designated portion thereof. Upon issuance, a
water shortage declaration shall remain in effect until terminated by the Town
Manager, unless sooner terminated, suspended or amended by the Town Council.
   (1)   As conditions warrant, a water shortage declaration may be amended,
suspended, delayed or terminated at any time by the Town Manager or may expire
without further action by the Town Manager in accordance with the terms of the
declaration.
   (2)   A water shortage declaration shall, among other things, include the
date the declaration is to take effect, the expiration date, if any, a brief
statement of the facts supporting the issuance of the declaration, the stage of
water conservation being imposed, a description of the areas affected by the
declaration and a brief summary of any requirements imposed by the particular
stage of water conservation controls. The method of enforcement of this
section, the water shortage management plan, the LIP and/or the declaration
may, but need not be, described.
   (f)   Stages of water conservation. Those stages described in the most
recent LIP may be implemented and enforced by the issuance of the water
shortage declaration, either singularly, in sequence or in any combination of
stages.
   (g)   Termination and/or suspension of water service.  In order to comply
with the water shortage declaration, the LIP, the water shortage management
plan or this section, the Water Superintendent, with the approval of the Town
Manager, may reduce, establish limits and limit or terminate service to
customers and users connected to the water system, including bulk customers for
the duration of the water emergency except public schools satisfying compulsory
education requirements of the state; public facilities for police, sheriff,
fire or other emergency medical services; hospitals; and fire departments
during the time such department is actively fighting a fire, except by specific
direction of the Town Council.
   (1)   Further, during stages requiring mandatory water conservation, the
Water Superintendent, with the approval of the Town Manager, may suspend or
direct the appropriate town official to suspend the issuance of zoning permits
and other approvals that involve waterline connections or extensions or any
upgrade in capacity for water usage for the duration of the water emergency.
   (2)   Any plan to ration, limit, establish limitations on the quantity of
water a specific user is authorized to consume, suspend or terminate service
must be approved by the Town Council; however, the termination of water service
to a particular customer for specific violation of the water shortage
management plan, the LIP or the declaration or for terminations under normal
town policy regarding the payment of user fees shall not require Town Council
approval.
   (3)   During the time that a water shortage declaration is in effect, it
shall be unlawful for any customer, user or owner of a plumbing system taking
or receiving water from the water system to fail to repair a leak in such
plumbing system within a reasonable period of time while the water shortage
declaration is in effect. Any customer, user or owner who fails to repair a
leak in such plumbing system within five (5) calendar days after notice to do
so from the Water Department shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount
of one hundred dollars ($100), to be collected as hereinafter provided, and/or
the termination of service or both.
   (h)   Variances. The Water Superintendent is authorized to issue a variance
under limited circumstances permitting any user or customer satisfying the
requirements of this subsection to use water for a purpose that would otherwise
be prohibited by the water conservation controls then in effect. In giving
consideration to and issuing a variance, the Water Superintendent shall take
into consideration the stage of water conservation, the type of mandatory
limitations required for that stage, the anticipated quantity of water to be
used and any other factors required by the water shortage management plan and/
or the LIP. After giving consideration to the specified factors, variances may,
but are not required to, be granted in the following circumstances:
   (1)   A customer with a new lawn and/or landscaped area installed within
thirty (30) days of the application for a variance, but before mandatory
conservation controls were imposed.
   (2)   A public or volunteer fire department during any training exercise
using water from the water system under such circumstances when training is
reasonably necessary to maintain effective fire fighting capabilities.
   (3)   A customer or user undertaking any activity required by law.
   (4)   Any customer or user proposing to eliminate or reduce unsanitary
conditions that pose a substantial risk of injury or disease.
   (5)   In granting a variance, the Water Superintendent may impose such
additional conditions and/or restrictions as are reasonably necessary to
minimize the effect the variance shall have on the mandatory water conservation
controls.
   (6)   Any variance granted pursuant to this subsection shall contain an
expiration date at which time the variance shall no longer apply. In the event
the variance is granted and limited to a particular stage of water conservation
control, then such variance shall automatically expire on the effective date
and time to coincide with the expiration of the particular stage.
   (7)   Any person or entity receiving a variance granted under this
subsection that violates the terms of the variance shall be subject to a civil
penalty under subsection (i) below and is also subject to having the granted
variance revoked.
   (i)   Enforcement.
   (1)   The use of water from the water system in violation of any mandatory
water conservation control imposed pursuant to this section, the LIP, the water
shortage management plan or the term of any variance issued pursuant to
subsection (h) is unlawful. Further, the refusal or failure of a customer or
other person acting on the customer’s behalf to cease immediately a violation
of a water conservation control, after being directed to do so by a person
authorized to enforce the provisions of this article, is unlawful. Each
customer is responsible for any use of water that passes through the service
connection associated with the customer’s account or otherwise passes through
the customer’s private water system.
   (2)   Any customer who violates or permits the violation of any mandatory
water conservation control imposed pursuant to the LIP, the declaration, or the
water shortage management plan then in effect, shall be subject to a civil
penalty according to the following schedule of penalties:
   STAGE 2 CIVIL PENALTIES:
   First Offense   $ 50   Second Offense   $100   Third and subsequent
offenses   $200
   STAGE 3 CIVIL PENALTIES:
   First Offense   $100   Second Offense   $200   Third and subsequent
offenses   $300
   (3)   Any customer who violates or permits the violation of any variance
issued pursuant to subsection (h) shall be subject to a civil penalty of one
hundred dollars ($100).
   (4)   Any customer or other person acting on behalf of the customer who
refuses or otherwise fails to cease immediately a violation of a water
conservation control after being directed to do so by a person authorized to
enforce the provisions of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty
equal to twice the amount of the civil penalty applicable to the violation
which such customer or person was directed to cease.
   (5)   The violation of any water conservation control or provision of this
section may be enforced by all remedies authorized by law for noncompliance
with municipal ordinances, including the assessment of a civil penalty, an
action for injunction, order of abatement or other equitable relief.
   (6)   Each civil penalty assessed against a customer pursuant to this
article shall be added to the customer’s water bill and shall be paid in the
same manner as set forth in this chapter for the payment of water bills.
Failure to pay all or any portion of a water bill, including any civil penalty
assessed pursuant to this section, in a timely manner may result in the
termination of water service in accordance with normal town policy.
   (7)   Except as provided in this subsection, each day that a violation of a
mandatory water conservation control occurs shall be considered to be a
separate violation.
   a.   If a customer or other person acting on behalf of the customer refuses
or otherwise fails to cease immediately a violation of a water conservation
control after being directed to do so by a person authorized to enforce the
provisions of this section, such failure shall constitute a separate violation;
and
   b.   After receiving a notice of violating a water conservation control and
ceasing such violation, a customer who resumes the violation of said water
conservation control on the same day shall be guilty of a separate violation.
   (8)   Any town employee or person designated by the Town Manager shall be
authorized to enforce the provisions of this article.
   (j)   Applicability to combined distribution system. This section, and the
low inflow protocol and water shortage management plan incorporated into this
section, as amended and/or superseded shall apply to and be deemed a condition
of service for each municipal customer, any water corporation, any other unit
of government purchasing water from the town or any other user supplied water
by the town, whether inside or outside the municipal limits and as a condition
of continued service or the contracts under which such service is provided to
any such customer, this section is binding upon and enforceable against such
customer.
(Ord. of 9/4/07)
   (b) Within 30 days of receipt of the application for a building sewer and
for a connection permit, the Burke County Inspection Office shall advise the
applicant as to whether sewer service will be available. If sewer service will
not be available, the full fee filed with the application will be refunded. If
sewer service is to be available, the applicant or owner may proceed with the
construction of the building sewer in accordance with the procedures defined
herein.
CHAPTER 2
Sewage Collection and Disposal
Section
5-2001   Definitions.
Section
5-2002   Use of public sewers required.
Section
5-2003   Unlawful to construct or maintain privies.
Section
5-2004   Owners required to connect to system.
Section
5-2005   Private wastewater disposal.
Section
5-2006   Same; permit required.
Section
5-2007   Permit effective upon completion of work.
Section
5-2008   Facilities to be operated in sanitary manner.
Section
5-2009   Additional authority of state and county.
Section
5-2010   When direct connections required.
Section
5-2011   Alteration of system requires permit.
Section
5-2012   Classes of sewer permits.
Section
5-2013   Costs to be borne by owner.
Section
5-2014   Independent sewer for each building.
Section
5-2015   Sewer to conform to code requirements.
Section
5-2016   Grades for sewers.
Section
5-2017   Standards of connection.
Section
5-2018   Notice to inspection office.
Section
5-2019   Excavations to be guarded and public property restored.
Section
5-2020   Inspection of excavation.
Section
5-2021   Substances not to be discharged.
Section
5-2022   Contaminants.
Section
5-2023   Interceptors.
Section
5-2024   Same; owners to maintain.
Section
5-2025   Certain discharges subject to surcharge.
Section
5-2026   Preliminary treatment facilities; owner to provide and maintain.
Section
5-2027   When manholes required.
Section
5-2028   Test standards.
Section
5-2029   Special arrangements.
Section
5-2030   Protection from damage.
Section
5-2031   Powers and authority of inspectors.
Section
5-2032   Penalties.
Section 5-2001   Definitions.
Unless the content specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
   (1)   Applicant shall mean the owner or his duly authorized agent acting on
his behalf in solicitation of a permit or permission to act as set forth
herein.
   (2)   A.S.T.M. shall mean the American Society of Testing Materials.
   (3)   BOD (Denoting biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five (5) days at 20 degrees C, expressed in milligrams
per liter.
   (4)   Building drain shall mean the part of the lowest horizontal piping of
a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer, beginning five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
   (5)   Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
   (6)   Domestic sewage shall mean wastewater derived principally from
dwellings, businesses, and institutions.
   (7)   Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the dome tic an? commercial
preparation. cooking. and dtspensmg of food, and from the handling, storage,
and sale of produce.
   (8)   Industrial or commercial or residential shall mean classifications
which bear upon applications, rates, fees or other considerations: such
classification shall be determined solely by the town.
   (9)   Industrial wastes shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   (10)   Inflow shall mean the water discharged mto a sewer system, including
service connections from such sources, as. but not limited to, roof leaders,
cellar, yard, and area drains. foundation drains, cooling water discharges.
drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from
storm sewers and combined sewers, catch basins, storm waters. surface runoff,
street wash waters, or drainage. Inflow does not include, and is distinguished
from, infiltration.
   (11)   Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch,
lake, or other body or surface or groundwater.
   (12)   Ownershall mean the person having ownership of bmldmg, sewer,
proposed building sewer, or real property from which sewage is anttctpated to
be or discharged.
   (13)   Person shall mean an individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation, or group.
   (14)   pH shalmean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the wetght of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.
   (15)   Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, wtth no particle greater than one­half (1/2) inch
in any dimension.
   (16)   Public seller shall mean a sewer owned by the town.
   (17)   Sanitary sewage shall mean wastewater discharging from the sanitary
conveniences of residences, businesses, institutions, and industrial
establishments.
   (18)   Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer which carries wastewater and to
which storm surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   (19)   Sewerage system shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping,
treating, and disposing of wastewater.
   (20)   Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater.
   (21)   Shall is mandatory; may is permissive.
   (22)   Storm drain or storm sewer shall mean a sewer which carries storm and
surface waters and drainage. but excludes sewage and industrial wastes. other
than unpolluted cooling water.
   (23)   Suspended solids shall mean solids that either float on the surface
of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are
removable by laboratory filtering. expressed in milligrams per liter.
   (24)   Town shall mean the Town of Valdese, Burke County, North Carolina.
   (25)   Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a f1ow of water occurs,
either continuously or intermittently.
   (26)   W.P.C.F. shall mean the Water Pollution Control Federation.
   (27)   Wastewarer shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments.
   (28)   Wastewater treatment plant shall mean any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating wastewater.
Section 5-2002   Use of public sewers required.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the
town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town. any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within or
under the jurisdiction of the town, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
Section 5-2003   Unlawful to construct or maintain privies.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
Section 5-2004   Owners required to connect to system.
   The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation, or other purpose, situated within the corporate limits
of the town, and whose property line is located within 200 feet from a public
sanitary sewer of the town, shall do one of the following:
   (1)   at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to
connect the facilities to the proper sewer in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so; or
   (2)   shall pay the administrative billing charge which would be chargeable
against such parties if they were tapped on the sewer line and have not.
Section 5-2005   Private wastewater disposal.
   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
section
5-2004, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal
system, complying with North Carolina Department of Human Resources, North
Carolina Division of Environmental Management, and Burke County Health
Department requirements.
Section 5-2006   Same; permit required.
   Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system,
the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the Burke County Inspection
Office. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by
the town. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, and other information as is deemed necessary by the town. A
permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the Burke County Inspection Office
at the time the application is filed.
Section 5-2007   Permit effective upon completion of work.
   A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Burke County
Inspection Office. Inspection shall be allowed by the owner at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
Burke County Inspection Office when the work is ready for final inspection, and
before any underground portions are covered.
Section 5-2008   Facilities to be operated in sanitary manner.
   No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural
outlet. The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
system in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the town.
Section 5-2009   Additional authority of state and county.
   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with
the authority and regulations of the North Carolina Department of Human
Resources, the North Carolina Division of Environmental Management, or the
Burke County Health Department.
Section 5-2010   When direct connections required.
   Upon notification by the town that a public sewer is available, the owner
shall apply for a connection permit within 30 days. The owner shall have the
connection completed and approved within 90 days of the notification. The
private wastewater disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with
gravel.
Section 5-2011   Alteration of system requires permit.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter, disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the Burke County Building Inspection
Office.
Section 5-2012   Classes of sewer permits.
   (a)   There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: (I) for
residential and commercial service and (2) for service to establishments
producing industrial wastewaters. In either case, the owner or his agent shall
make application for connection on a special form furnished by the town. The
permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent to the judgment of the town. A permit and
inspection fee for a residential, commercial or industrial building sewer
permit shall be paid to the Burke County Building Inspection Office at the time
the application is filed.
   (b)   Within 30 days of receipt of the application for a building sewer and
for a connection permit, the Burke County Inspection Office shall advise the
applicant as to whether sewer service will be available. If sewer service will
not be available, the full fee filed with the application will be refunded. If
sewer service is to be available, the applicant or owner may proceed with the
construction of the building sewer in accordance with the procedures defined
herein.
Section 5-2013   Costs to be borne by owner.
   All cost and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the town
from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer.
Section 5-2014   Independent sewer for each building.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found acceptable by the Burke County Building Inspection Office.
Section 5-2015   Sewer to conform to code requirements.
   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer,
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of pipe, jointing, testing,
and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
town. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in the North Carolina State Building Code,
Volume II, Plumbing, latest edition, and appropriate specifications of the
A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
Section 5-2016   Grades for sewers.
   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
Section 5-2017   Standard of connection.
   (a)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the town or the procedures set forth in the
North Carolina State Building Code, Volume II, Plumbing, latest edition, and
appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No.
9. All such connections shall be made gastight and water- tight. Any deviation
from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the town
before installation.
   (b)   The maximum allowable infiltration allowance for new service lines in
200 gallons per day/inch- diameter/mile. The town may require repairs or
replacement of the existing service lines in order to meet the same
infiltration allowance requirements as specified for new service lines and
connections. In such cases, all work shall be performed by or under the
supervision of a licensed plumber and in accordance with the applicable
plumbing code and at the expense of the owner/user. The town may require or
replace the existing connections at the expense of the owner/user or may permit
the owner to have the repairs made under the town’s supervision by a licensed
plumber at the expense of the owner/user.
   (c)   Sewer service lines extended to the main shall be maintained and kept
free from stoppage by the owner/user to the owner’s property line. Relocation
or replacement of any service line connection for individual improvement or
development shall be made by the town at the expense of the owner/user. (Res.
of 6-26-95)
Section 5-2018   Notice to inspection office.
   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Burke County
Building Inspection Office when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of a representative from the Burke County Building Inspection
Office.
Section 5-2019   Excavations to be guarded and public property restored.
   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the town.
Section 5-2020   Inspection of excavation.
   When trenches are opened for the laying of building sewers, such trenches
shall be inspected by the Burke County Inspection Office before the trenches
are filled, and the plumber performing such work shall notify the Burke County
Inspection Office when the laying of building sewer is completed. The filling
of a trench before inspection is made will subject the owner, to whom a permit
is issued, to a penalty for each offense. Payment of the penalty shall not
constitute acceptance. The work shall be uncovered for actual inspection at the
owner’s expense.
Section 5-2021   Substances not to be discharged.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, inflow,
surface water, roof runoff, or subsurface drainage to any sanitary sewer.
Section 5-2022   Reserved.
(Res. of 6-26-95)
Section 5-2023    Interceptors.
   (a)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the town they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, and
other harmful substances, except that such interceptors shall not be required
for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the town, and shall be so located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   (b) Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials
capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall
be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable
covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight.
Section 5-2024   Same; owners to maintain.
   When installed all grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be maintained by
the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times and
shall be readily accessible and open to inspection by the town at any time.
Section 5-2025   Reserved.
(Res. of 6-26-95)
Section 5-2026   Reserved.
(Res. of 6-26-95)
Section 5-2027   When manholes required.
   When required by the town, the owner of any property served by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in
the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be constructed in accordance with
approved plans. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and
shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
Section 5-2028   Reserved.
(Res. of 6-26-95)
Section 5-2029   Special arrangements.
   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the town and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual character may be accepted by the town
for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern.
Section 5-2030   Protection from damage.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance,
or equipment which is a part of the town sewerage system. Any person violating
this provision shall be subject to the penalties prescribed by the General
Statutes of the State of North Carolina.
Section 5-2031   Reserved.
(Res. of 6-26-95)
Section 5-2032   Penalties.
   (a)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter except
for provisions of section
5-2030 shall be served by the town with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations.
   (b)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the established
time limit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall
be fined in accordance with the General Statutes of North Carolina. Each day in
which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (c)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the town for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the town
by reason of such violation.
CHAPTER 3
Sewer Use
ARTICLE A
General Provisions
Section
5-3001   Purpose and policy.
Section
5-3002   Definitions and abbreviations.
ARTICLE B
General Sewer Use Requirements
Section
5-3011   Prohibited discharge standards.
Section
5-3012   National categorical pretreatment standards.
Section
5-3013   Local limits.
Section
5-3014   State requirements.
Section
5-3015   Right of revision.
Section
5-3016   Dilution.
Section
5-3017   Pretreatment of wastewater.
Section
5-3018   Accidental discharge/slug control plans.
Section
5-3019   Hauled wastewater.
ARTICLE C
Fees
Section
5-3031   Purpose.
Section
5-3032   User charges.
Section
5-3033   Surcharges.
Section
5-3034   Pretreatment program administration charges.
Section
5-3035   Partial payment of bills
ARTICLE D
Wastewater Discharge Permit Application and Issuance
Section
5-3041   Wastewater discharges.
Section
5-3042   Wastewater permits.
ARTICLE E
Reporting Requirements
Section
5-3051   Baseline monitoring reports.
Section
5-3052   Compliance schedule progress reports.
Section
5-3053   Reports on compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard deadline.
Section
5-3054   Periodic compliance reports.
Section
5-3055   Reports of changed conditions.
Section
5-3056   Reports of potential problems.
Section
5-3057   Reports from unpermitted users
Section
5-3058   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting.
Section
5-3059   Discharge of hazardous waste.
Section
5-3060   Analytical requirements.
Section
5-3061   Sample collection.
Section
5-3062   Timing.
Section
5-3063   Record keeping.
ARTICLE F
Compliance Monitoring
Section
5-3071   Monitoring facilities.
Section
5-3072   Inspection and sampling.
Section
5-3073   Search warrants.
ARTICLE G
Confidential Information
Section
5-3081   Confidential information.
ARTICLE H
Enforcement
Section
5-3091   Administrative remedies.
Section
5-3092   Civil penalties.
Section
5-3093   Other available remedies.
Section
5-3094   Remedies nonexclusive.
ARTICLE I
Annual Publication of Significant Noncompliance
Section
5-3101   Annual Publication of Significant Noncompliance.
ARTICLE J
Section
5-3105   Adjudicatory hearings.
ARTICLE K
Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
Section
5-3111   Upset.
Section
5-3112   Prohibited discharge standards defense.
Section
5-3113   Bypass.
Section
5-3114   Severability.
Section
5-3115   Conflict.
ARTICLE A
General Provisions
Section 5-3001   Purpose and policy.
   (a)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the Town
of Valdes, hereafter referred to as the Town, and enables the Town to comply
with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33
United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40
CFR Part 403).
   (b)   The objectives of this chapter are:
   (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or
contaminate the resulting sludge.
   (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated,
into any waters of the state or otherwise be incompatible with the system.
   (3)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludges
from the municipal system.
   (4)   To protect both municipal personnel who may be affected by sewage,
sludge, and effluent in the course of their employment and the general
public.   
   (5)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operation,
maintenance and improvement of the municipal wastewater system.
   (6)   To ensure that the town complies with its NPDES or Non-discharge
Permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal
or state laws to which the municipal wastewater system is subject.
   (c)   This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits
to certain non-domestic users and through the enforcement of general
requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement
activities, requires user reporting, and provides for the setting of fees for
the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established
herein.
   (d)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the municipal wastewater
system as authorized by N.C.G.S. 160A-312. The Town shall designate an
administrator of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works or POTW and pretreatment
program hereafter referred to as the POTW Director. Except as otherwise
provided herein, the POTW Director shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to imposed upon the POTW
Director may be delegated by the POTW Director to other Town personnel. By
discharging wastewater into the municipal wastewater system, industrial users
located within or outside the Town limits agree to comply with the terms and
conditions established in this chapter, as well as with any permits,
enforcement actions, or orders issued hereunder. This includes all industrial
users discharging in the wastewater system owned by any Satellite POTW. (Ord.
of 12/6/82; Ord. of 6/26/95; Amendment of 11/5/12)
Section 5-3002   Definitions and abbreviations.
   (a)   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following
terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated:
   Act or “the Act.” The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq.
   Approval authority. The Director of the Division of Water Quality of the
North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources.
   Authorized representative of the industrial user may be:
   (1)   A principle executive officer of at least the level of vice president,
if the industrial user is a corporation.
   (2)   A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively.
   (3)   A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if
such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities
from which the discharge to the POTW originates.
   (4)   A director or the highest official appointed or designated to oversee
the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or
his designee, if the industrial user is a federal, state or local facility.
   (5)   If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of
this section must be submitted to the POTW director prior to or together with
any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
   Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen used in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
for five days at 20º degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration
(e.g. mg/l).
   Building sewer. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to
the POTW.
   Bypass. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a
user’s treatment facility.
   Categorical pretreatment standards. Regulations promulgated by the State of
North Carolina or local agencies or by the EPA in accordance with Section 307
(b) and (1) of the Act and designated as national categorical pretreatment
standards or pretreatment standard.
   Control Authority. Refers to the POTW organization if the POTW
organization’s Pretreatment Program approval has not been withdrawn.
   Environmental Protection Agency, or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the
Administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency.
   Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis,
without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to
exceed 15 minutes.
   Hauled wastewater. Any waste transported by a moving vehicle, such as a
septic tank hauler, to a disposal site.
   Holding tank waste. Any waste from holding tanks, including but not limited
to such holding tanks as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic
tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
   Indirect discharge or discharge. The discharge or the introduction of waste
from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the
Act, (33 U.S.C. 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged
into the system).
   Industrial user or user. Any user of a publicly owned treatment works
identified in the U.S. “Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972,” or
latest revision under the following divisions:
      Division A - Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing.
      Division B - Mining.
      Division D - Manufacturing.
      Division E - Transportation, Communication, Electric, Gas, and Sanitary
Services.
      Division I - Services.
      Division J - Public Administration.
      Division K - Nonclassifiable establishments.
   Interference. The inhibition or disruption of the POTW collection system,
treatment processes, operations, or its sludge process, use, or disposal, which
causes or contributes to a violation of any requirement of the Control
Authority’s (and/or POTW’s, if different from the Control Authority) NPDES,
collection system or Non-discharge Permit or prevents sewage sludge use or
disposal in compliance with specified applicable state and federal statutes,
regulations, or permits. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or
disposal by the POTW in accordance with section 405 of the Act, (33 U.S.C.
1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the
Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (42 U.S.C. § 6901, et seq.), the Clean Air Act,
the Toxic Substances Control Act, the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuary
Act (MPRSA) or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any
state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable
to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.
   Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis
wastes.
   National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in
accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which
applies to a specific category of industrial users, and which appears in 40 CFR
Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, or NPDES, Permit. A permit
issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. §1342), or pursuant to
N.C.G.S. 143-215.1 by the state under delegation from EPA.
   National Prohibitive Discharge Standard or Prohibitive Discharge Standard.
Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these
prohibitions appear in section
5-3011 of this chapter and are developed under the authority of 307(b) of the
Act and 40 CFR, section 403.5.
   New source.
   (1)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there
may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the
publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under section 307(c)
of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307(c), provided that:
   (A)   The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located; or
   (B)   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at
an existing source; or
   (C)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the building,
structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should
be considered.
   (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create
a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of
section (1)(B) or (C) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing
process or production equipment.
   (A)   For purposes of this definition, construction of a new source has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
   1.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction
program:
   2.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
   3.   Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or
removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for
the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment;
or
   (B)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering,
and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
definition.
   Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or
finished product.
   Non-discharge permit. A permit issued by the State pursuant to G.S. 143-
215.1(d) for a waste which is not discharged directly to the surface waters of
the State or for a wastewater treatment works which does not discharge directly
to surface waters of the State.
   Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the state in
quantities or concentrations which, alone or with discharges from other
sources, causes a violation, including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of a violation, of the Control Authority’s (and/or POTW’s if different from the
Control Authority) NPDES, collection system or non-discharge permit, or a
downstream water quality standard even if not included in the permit.
   Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local government
entities.
   pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed as
standard units, and calculated as the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of
the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
   Pollutant. Any “waste” as defined in N.C.G.S. 143-213(18) and dredged spoil,
solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials,
heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial,
municipal, and agricultural waste and certain characteristics of wastewater
(e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, metals, BOD, COD, toxicity, and
odor).
   POTW Director. The Town Administrator designated with the responsibility for
the pretreatment program and enforcement of the sewer use ordinance.
   POTW treatment plant. That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment
to wastewater.
   Pretreatment or treatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollution into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be
obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes or
other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless
allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
   Pretreatment program. The program for the control of pollutants introduced
into the POTW from non- domestic sources which was developed by the town in
compliance with 40 CFR 403.8 and approved by the approval authority as
authorized by N.C.G.S. 143-215.3(a)(14) in accordance with 40 CFR 403.11.
   Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard.
   Pretreatment standards. Prohibited discharge standards, categorical
standards, or local limit which applies to an industrial user.
   Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) or Municipal Wastewater System. A
treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which
is owned in this instance by the town. This definition includes any devices or
systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation
of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes
sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to the POTW
treatment plant. For the purposes of this chapter, “POTW” shall also include
any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the town
who are, by contract or agreement with the town, or in any other way, users of
the Town’s POTW.
   Sewage. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, mobile sources,
treatment facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface
water, and storm water that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which
are contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
   Severe property damage. Substantial physical damage to property, damage to
the user’s treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
   Significant industrial user or SIU. An industrial user that discharges
wastewater into a publicly owned treatment works and that:
   (1)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary sewer, noncontact cooling water and
boiler blowdown wastewaters; or
   (2)   Contributes process wastewater which makes up five percent (5%) or
more of the NPDES or Non- discharge permitted flow limit or five percent (5%)
or more of the maximum allowable headworks loading of the POTW treatment plant
for any POTW pollutant of concern; or
   (3)   Is subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR Part
403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, parts 405-471; or
   (4)   Is found by the Town, the Division of Water Quality or the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have the potential for impact, either
singly or in combination with other contributing industrial users, on the
wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system’s effluent
quality, or compliance with any pretreatment standards or requirements.
   Significant Noncompliance or SNC. The status of noncompliance of a
Significant Industrial User when one (1) or more of the following criteria are
met. Additionally, any Industrial User which meets the criteria in Subparagraph
(b)(35), Parts (C), (D), or (H) shall also be in SNC.
   (A)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all the measurements taken
for the same pollutant parameter (not including flow) during a six-month period
exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(1).
   (B)   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of all the measurements taken for the
same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product
of the numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement including instantaneous
limits, as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(1) multiplied by the applicable TRC;
(TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, 1.2 for all other pollutants
(except flow and pH).
   (C)   Any other violation of a Pretreatment Standard or Requirement as
defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous
limit, or narrative standard) that the Control Authority and/or POTW determines
has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference, pass
through (including endangering the health of the POTW personnel or the general
public);
   (D)   Any discharge of a pollutant or wastewater that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in
either the Control Authority’s or the POTW’s, if different from the Control
Authority, exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR Part 403.8(f)(1)
(vi)(B) and Section
5-3091(e) of this SUO to halt or prevent such discharge;
   (2)   Violations of compliance schedule milestones, contained in a
pretreatment permit or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing
construction, and attaining final compliance by 90 days or more after the
schedule date.
   (3)   Failure to provide reports for compliance schedule, self-monitoring
data, baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, and periodic
compliance reports within forty-five (45) days from the due date.
   (4)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
   (5)   Any other violation or group of violations that the control authority
and/or POTW determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local pretreatment program.
   Slug load or discharge. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which
has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass-through, or in any
other way violates the POTW’s regulations, local limits, or industrial user
permit conditions. This can include but is not limited to spills and other
accidental discharges; discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature; a non-
customary batch discharge; or any other discharges that can cause a violation
of the prohibited discharge standards Section
5-3011 of this chapter.
   Standard industrial classification (SIC). A classification pursuant to the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the
President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987.
   Storm water. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
   Superintendent. The person designated by the town to supervise the operation
of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties
and responsibilities by this chapter, or his duly authorized representative.
   Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of,
or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable
by laboratory filtering.
   Upset. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond
the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to
the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment
facilities, inadequate treatment facilities lack of preventive maintenance, or
careless or improper operation.
   Wastewater. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, mobile sources,
treatment facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface
water, and storm water that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which
are contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
   Wastewater permit. As set forth in Section
5-3042 of this chapter.
   Waters of the state. All streams, rivers, brooks, swamps, sounds, tidal
estuaries, bays, creeks, lakes, waterways, reservoirs and all other bodies or
accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public
or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state
or any portion thereof.
   (b)   This chapter is gender neutral and the masculine gender shall include
the feminine and vice-versa. Shall is mandatory; may is permissive or
discretionary. The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural
and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its
use.
   The following abbreviations when used in this chapter shall have the
designated meanings:
   (1)   BOD - Biochemical oxygen demand.
   (2)   CFR - Code of federal regulations.
   (3)   COD - Chemical oxygen demand.
   (4)   EPA - Environmental protection agency.
   (5)   gpd - Gallons per day.
   (6)   l. - Liter.
   (7)   mg - Milligrams.
   (8)   mg/l. - Milligrams per liter.
   (9)   N.C.A.C. - North Carolina Administrative Code.
   (10)   N.C.G.S. - North Carolina General Statutes.
   (11)   NPDES - National Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
   (12)   O & M - Operation and maintenance.
   (13)   POTW - Publicly-owned treatment works.
   (14)   RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
   (15)   SIC - Standard industrial classification.
   (16)   SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act.
   (17)   TSS - Total suspended solids.
   (18)   TKN - Total kjeldahl nitrogen.
   (19)   U.S.C. - United States Code.
(Ord. of 12/6/82; Ord. of 6/26/95; Ord. of 11/6/06; Amendment of 11/5/12)
ARTICLE B
General Sewer Use Requirements
Section 5-3011   Prohibited discharge standards.
   (a)   General prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater
which causes interference or pass through. These general prohibitions apply to
all users of a POTW whether or not the user is a significant industrial user or
subject to any national, state, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements.
   (b)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
   (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of
less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
   (2)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of
the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case solids greater
than one half inch (1/2") in any dimension.
   (3)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
   (4)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or wastewater having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage to the POTW or equipment.
   (5)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen-demanding
pollutants, (BOD, etc) in sufficient quantity, (flow or concentration) either
singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to cause interference with the
POTW.
   (6)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (66°C), or
which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 140°F (40°C).
   (7)   Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems.
   (8)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants.
   (9)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to
prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
   (10)   Any substance which may cause the POTW’s effluent or any other
product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case
shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance
with sludge use or disposal regulations or permits issued under section 405 of
the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances
Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being
used.
   (11)   Any wastewater which imparts color which is not removed by the
treatment process, including, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts sufficient color to the treatment
plant’s effluent to render the waters injurious to public health or secondary
recreation or to aquatic life and wildlife or to adversely affect the
palatability of fish or aesthetic quality or impair the receiving waters for
any designated uses.
   (12)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except
as specifically approved by the POTW Director in compliance with applicable
state or federal regulations.
   (13)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof
runoffs subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless
specifically authorized by the POTW Director.
   (14)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than three hundred (300) mg/l unless authorized by the
POTW Director.
   (15)   Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes.
   (16)   Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the POTW
Director in a wastewater discharge permit.
   (17)   Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts, or other chelating
agents which will produce metallic complexes that interfere with the municipal
wastewater system.
   (18)   Any material that would be identified as hazardous waste according to
40 CFR Part 261 if not disposed of in a sewer except as may be specifically
authorized by the POTW Director.
   (19)   Any wastewater causing the treatment plant effluent to violate State
Water Quality Standards for toxic substances as described in 15A NCAC 2B.0200.
   (20)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the
treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test.
   (21)   Recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy.
   (22)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other
substances which may cause excessive foaming in the municipal wastewater
system.
   (23)   Any wastes causing two successive readings on an explosion hazard
meter at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system)
of more than five percent (5%) or which causes any single reading ten percent
(10%) of higher than the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.
Pollutants, substances, wastewater, or other wastes prohibited by this section
shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged
to the municipal wastewater system. All floor drains located in process or
materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial user’s pretreatment
facility before connecting with the system.
When the POTW Director determines that a user is contributing to the POTW any
of the above enumerated substances in such amounts which may cause or
contribute to interference of POTW operation or pass through, the POTW Director
shall:
   (1)   Advise the user of the potential impact of the contribution on the
POTW in accordance with Section
5-3091; and
   (2)   Take appropriate actions in accordance with Section
5-3041 and
5-3042 for such user to protect the POTW from interference or pass through.
(Ord. of 12/6/82; Ord. of 6/26/95; Ord. of 11/6/06; Amendment of 11/5/12)
Section 5-3012   National categorical pretreatment standards.
   Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are required to comply
with applicable standards as set out in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts
405-471 and incorporated herein.
   (a)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the POTW
Director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with
40 CFR 403.6(c).
   (b)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the POTW Director
shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40
CFR 403.6(e).
   (c)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard
if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in
40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally
different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical
pretreatment standard.
   (d)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
   (e)   A user may request a removal credit adjustment to a categorical
standard in accordance with CFR 403.7.
(Ord. of 12/6/82; Ord. of 6/26/95; Amendment of 11/5/12)
Section 5-3013   Local limits.
   To implement the general and average discharge prohibitions listed in this
chapter, industrial user-specific discharge limits will be developed ensuring
that the POTW’s maximum allowable headworks loading is not exceeded for
particular pollutants of concern for each industrial user. Where specific local
limits are not contained for a given parameter or pollutant in an industrial
user permit, the following limits will apply to all users:
 
250    mg/l BOD
250    mg/l TSS
25     mg/l NH3
0.003  mg/l arsenic
0.003  mg/l cadmium
0.061  mg/l copper
0.015  mg/l cyanide
0.049  mg/l lead
0.0003 mg/l mercury
0.021  mg/l nickel
0.005  mg/l silver
0.05   mg/l total chromium
0.175  mg/l zinc
 
Industrial user-specific discharge limits for appropriate pollutants of concern
shall be included in wastewater permits and are considered pretreatment
standards. The POTW Director may impose mass limits in addition to, or in place
of, the concentration-based limits above.
(Ord. of 12/6/82; Ord. of 6/26/95/ Ord. of 11/6/06; Amendment of 11/5/12)
Section 5-3014   State requirements.
   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or
those in this chapter.
(Ord. of 12/6/82; Ord. of 6/26/95)
Section 5-3015   Right of revision.
   The town reserves the right to establish limitations and requirements which
are more stringent than those required by either state or federal regulation if
deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in Section
5-3001 of this chapter or the general and specific prohibitions in Section
5-3011 of this chapter, as is allowed by 40 CFR 403.4.
(Ord. of 12/6/82; Ord. of 6/26/95)
Section 5-3016   Dilution.
   No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards unless expressly authorized by an applicable
pretreatment standard or other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the
town or state.
(Ord. of 12/6/82; Ord. of 6/26/95)
Section 5-3017   Pretreatment of wastewater.
   (a)   Pretreatment facilities.
   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this
chapter and wastewater permits issued under Section
5-3042 of this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out
in Section
5-3011 of this chapter within the time limitations as specified by EPA, the
state, or the POTW Director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities
necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the
user’s expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and
operating procedures shall be submitted to the town for review, and shall be
approved by the POTW Director before construction of the facility. The review
of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from
the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an
effluent acceptable to the town under the provisions of this chapter. Any
subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall
be reported to and be approved by the POTW Director prior to the user’s
initiation of the changes.
   (b)   Additional pretreatment measures.
   (1)   Whenever deemed necessary, the POTW Director may require users to
restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate
points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams,
and take such other actions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and enable
the Pretreatment Director to determine whether the user is complying with the
requirements of this chapter.
   (2)   The POTW Director may require any person discharging into the POTW to
install and maintain, on his property and at his expense, a suitable storage
and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater
discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
   (3)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the POTW Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that
such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception
units shall be of type and capacity approved by the POTW Director and shall be
so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by
the user at his expense.
   (4)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
(Ord. of 12/6/82; Ord. of 6/26/95; Amendment of 11/5/12)
Section 5-3018   Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans.
   (a)   At least once every two (2) years, the POTW Director shall evaluate
whether each significant industrial user needs a plan to control and prevent
slug discharges and accidental discharges as defined in Section 3002 Slug load
or discharge. All SIU’s must be evaluated within one year of being designated
an SIU. The POTW Director may require any user to develop, submit for approval
and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the POTW Director may develop such a
plan for any user.
   (b)   All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of any changes at
its facility affecting the potential nature for spills and other accidental
discharge, discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non- customary batch
discharge, or a slug load. Also, see Sections 3055 and 3056.
   (c)   An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum,
the following:
   (1)   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
   (2)   Description of stored chemicals;
   (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW Director of any
accidental or slug discharge, as required by Section
5-3056 of this chapter; and
   (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(Ord. of 12/6/82; Ord. of 6/26/95; Ord. of 11/6/06; Amendment of 11/5/12)
Section 5-3019   Hauled wastewater.
   Hauled wastewater is prohibited.
(Ord. of 12/6/82; Ord. of 6/26/95; Ord. of 11/6/06)
ARTICLE C
Fees
Section 5-3031   Purpose.
   The town shall adopt, at least annually, an adequate schedule of user
charges and surcharges and tap fees to defray the cost of administering,
operating and maintaining the wastewater disposal system. The costs to be used
as a basis for determining the charges shall include, but are not necessarily
limited to, administration, direct operation and maintenance, collection and
billing of charges, bond redemption, studies and reports, professional fees,
repairs, capital improvements and cost of service line connections. The user
charges, surcharges and tap fees are to be used only for the purpose of
administering, operating, and maintaining the wastewater disposal system, and
shall be published on a form for public distribution and notice and shall
become Appendix A and B of this chapter upon adoption and public notification.
The current fees and charges schedule shall continue in effect until revised by
the town.
(Ord. of 12/6/82; Ord. of 6/26/95)
Section 5-3032   User charges.
   A user charge shall be levied on all users including, but not limited to,
persons, firms, corporations or governmental entities that discharge, cause or
permit the discharge of sewage into the POTW.
   (a)   The user charge shall reflect at least the cost of debt service,
operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the POTW.
   (b)   Each user shall pay its proportionate cost based on volume of flow.
   (c)   The Town Manager shall review annually the sewage contributions of
users, the total costs of debt service, operation and maintenance of the POTW
and make recommendations to the Town Council for adjustments in the schedule of
charges and fees as necessary.
   (d)   Charges for flow to the POTW not directly attributable to the users
shall be distributed among all users of the POTW based upon the volume of flow
of the users.
(Ord. of 12/6/82; Ord. of 6/26/95)
Section 5-3033   Surcharges.
   An industrial user of the POTW whose wastes exceed the limitations
established by Section
5-3013 of this chapter is in the discretion of the Town of Valdese Town Council
subject to an industrial waste surcharge as set forth in Appendix A to this
chapter.
   (a)   The volume of flow used in determining the total discharge of
wastewater for payment of user charges and surcharges shall be based on the
following:
   (1)   Metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter readings
maintained by the town; or
   (2)   If required by the town or at the individual dischargers option, other
flow monitoring devices which measure the actual volume of wastewater
discharged to the sewer. Such devices shall be accessible and safely located,
and the measuring system shall be installed in accordance with plans approved
by the town. The metering system shall be installed and maintained at the
user’s expense according to arrangements that may be made with the town.
   (3)   Where any user procures all or part of his water supply from sources
other than the town, the user shall install and maintain at his own expense a
flow measuring device of a type approved by the town.
   (b)   The character and concentration of the constituents of the wastewater
used in determining surcharges shall be determined by samples collected and
analyzed by the town. Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be
representative of the actual discharge and shall be analyzed using procedures
set forth in 40 CFR Part 136.
   (c)   The determination of the character and concentration of the
constituents of the wastewater discharge by the POTW Director or his duly
appointed representatives shall be binding as a basis for charges.
(Ord. of 12/6/82; Ord. of 6/26/95; Amendment of 11/5/12)
Section 5-3034   Pretreatment program administration charges.
   The schedule of charges and fees adopted by the town may include charges and
fees for:
   (a)   Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the Pretreatment
Program;
   (b)   Monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
   (c)   Reviewing slug control plans, including accidental and/or slug load
discharge procedures and construction plans and specifications;
   (d)   Permitting;
   (e)   Other fees as the town may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements of the Pretreatment Program.
(Ord. of 12/6/82; Ord. of 6/26/95; Ord. of 11/6/06)
Section 5-3035   Partial payments of bills.
   Partial payments toward a bill covering recycling, sewage and water services
are to be applied among these services in the following order:
   (1)   Recycling services;
   (2)   Sewage services; and
   (3)   Water services.
(Ord. of 9/8/92; Ord. of 6/26/95)
ARTICLE D
Wastewater Discharge Permit Application and Issuance
Section 5-3041   Wastewater discharges.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or discharge without first
obtaining the permission of the town. When requested by the POTW Director, a
user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its
wastewater within 90 days of the request. The POTW Director is authorized to
prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update
this information.
(Ord. of 12/6/82; Ord. of 6/26/95; Amendment of 11/5/12)
Section 5-3042   Wastewater permits.
   All significant users shall obtain a significant industrial user permit
prior to the commencement of discharge to the POTW. Existing industrial users
who are determined by the POTW Director to be significant industrial users
shall obtain a significant industrial user permit within 180 days of receiving
notification of the POTW Director’s determination. Industrial users who do not
fit the significant industrial user criteria may at the discretion of the POTW
Director be required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit for non-
significant industrial users.
   (a)   Significant Industrial User Determination.
   All persons proposing to discharge non-domestic wastewater, or proposing to
change the volume or characteristics of an existing discharge of non-domestic
wastewater, shall request from the POTW Director a significant industrial user
determination. If the POTW Director determines or suspects that the proposed
discharge fits the significant industrial user criteria, he will require that a
significant industrial user permit application be filed.
   (b)   Significant industrial user permit application.
   Users required to obtain a significant industrial user permit shall complete
and file with the town, an application in the form prescribed by the POTW
Director, and accompanied by a fee in the amount prescribed in the schedule of
charges and fees. Significant industrial users shall apply for a significant
industrial user permit within 90 days after notification of the POTW Director’s
determination in Section
5-3042(a) above. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units
and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
   (1)   Name of industrial user;
   (2)   Address of industrial user;
   (3)   Standard industrial classification (SIC) code(s) or expected
classification and industrial user category;
   (4)   Wastewater flow;
   (5)   Types and concentrations (or mass) of pollutants contained in the
discharge;
   (6)   Major products manufactured or services supplied;
   (7)   Description of existing on-site pretreatment facilities and practices;
   (8)   Locations of discharge points;
   (9)   Raw materials used or stored at the site;
   (10)   Flow diagram or sewer map for the industrial user;
   (11)   Number of employees;
   (12)   Operation and production schedules; and
   (13)   Description of current and projected waste reduction activities in
accordance with G.S. 143-215.1(g).
   (c)   Application Signatories and Certification.
   All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed
by the current authorized representative of the user on file with the Control
authority and/or municipality as defined in Section
5-3002 and contain the following certification statement:
      “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
   (d)   Application review and evaluation.
   The POTW Director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information.
   (1)   The POTW Director is authorized to accept applications for the town
and shall refer all applications to the POTW staff for review and evaluation.
   (2)   Within thirty (30) days of receipt the POTW Director shall acknowledge
and accept the complete application or, if not complete, shall return the
application to the applicant with a statement of what additional information is
required.
   (e)   Tentative determination and draft permit.
   (1)   The POTW staff shall conduct a review of the application and an on-
site inspection of the significant industrial user, including any pretreatment
facilities, and shall prepare a written evaluation and tentative determination
to issue or deny the significant industrial user permit.
   (2)   If the staffs tentative determination in Paragraph (1) above is to
issue the permit, the following additional determinations shall be made in
writing:
   (A)   Proposed discharge limitations for those pollutants proposed to be
limited;
   (B)   A proposed schedule of compliance, including interim dates and
requirements, for meeting the proposed limitations; and
   (C)   A brief description of any other proposed special conditions which
will have significant impact upon the discharge described in the application.
   (3)   The staff shall organize the determinations made pursuant to
Paragraphs (1) and (2) above and the town’s general permit conditions into a
significant industrial user permit.
   (f)   Permit supporting documentation.
   The Control Authority staff shall prepare the following documents for all
Significant Industrial User permits.
   (1)   An allocation table (AT) listing permit information for all
Significant Industrial Users, including but not limited to permit limits,
permit effective and expiration dates, and a comparison of total permitted
flows and loads with Division approved maximum allowable loadings of the POTW,
including flow, on forms or in a format approved by the Division. The AT shall
be updated as permits are issued or renewed, and as permits are modified where
the permitted limits or other AT information is revised.
   (2)   The basis, or rationale, for the pretreatment limitations, including
the following:
   (A)   Documentation of categorical determination, including documentation of
any calculations used in applying categorical pretreatment standards; and
   (B)   Documentation of the rationale of any parameters for which monitoring
has been waived under 40 CFR Part 403.12(e)(2).
   (g)   Final action on significant industrial user permit applications.
   (1)   The POTW Director shall take final action on all applications not
later than ninety (90) days following receipt of a complete application.
   (2)   The POTW Director is authorized to:
   (A)   Issue a significant industrial user permit containing such conditions
as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter and N.C.G.S. 143-
215.1;
   (B)   Issue a significant industrial user permit containing time schedules
for achieving compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements;
   (C)   Modify any permit upon not less than 60 days notice and pursuant to
Section
5-3042(i) of this chapter;
   (D)   Revoke any permit pursuant to Section
5-3091 of this chapter;
   (E)   Suspend a permit pursuant to Section
5-3091 of this chapter;
   (F)   Deny a permit application when in the opinion of the POTW Director
such discharge may cause or contribute to pass-through or interference of the
wastewater treatment plant or where necessary to effectuate the purposes of
G.S. 143-215.1.
   (h)   Permit Modification.
   (1)   Modifications of permits shall be subject to the same procedural
requirements as the issuance of permits except as listed below. Any changes or
new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for
compliance.
   (A)   changes in the ownership of the discharge when no other change in the
permit is indicated,
   (B)   a single modification of any compliance schedule not in excess of four
(4) months,
   (C)   modification of compliance schedules (construction schedules) in
permits for new sources where the new source will not begin to discharge until
control facilities are operational.
   (2)   Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users subject to such
standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the
timeframe prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted an application
for a wastewater discharge permit as required by Section
5-3042(b), the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within one
hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of the applicable National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard.
   (3)   A request for a modification by the permittee shall constitute a
waiver of the sixty (60) day notice required by G.S. 143-215.1(b) for
modifications.
   (i)   Permit conditions.
   (1)   The POTW Director shall have the authority to grant a permit with such
conditions attached as he believes necessary to achieve the purposes of this
chapter and N.C.G.S. 143-215.1. Wastewater permits shall contain, but are not
limited to, the following:
   (A)   A statement of duration (in no case more than five years);
   (B)   A statement of non-transferability;
   (C)   Applicable effluent limits based on categorical standards or local
limits or both;
   (D)   Applicable monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample
type based on federal, state and local law;
   (E)   Requirements for notifying the POTW in the vent of an accidental
discharge or slug load as defined in Section
5-3002(a)(Significant Noncompliance);
   (F)   Requirements to implement a Plan or other controls for prevention of
accidental discharges and/or slug loads as defined in Section
5-3002(a)(Significant Noncompliance), if determined by the POTW Director to be
necessary for the User and,
   (G)   Requirements for immediately notifying the POTW of any changes at its
facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental discharges, or
slug load as defined in Section
5-3002(a)(Significant Noncompliance). Also see Sections
5-3055 and
5-3056.
   (H)   A statement of applicable civil and/or criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable
compliance schedule.
   (2)   In addition, permits may contain, but are not limited to, the
following:
   (A)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, and/or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
   (B)   Limits on the instantaneous, daily and/or monthly average and/or
maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater
pollutants or properties.
   (C)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or
construction of appropriate containment devices, etc., designed to reduce,
eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works.
   (D)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce
the amount of pollutants discharged to the municipal wastewater system.
   (E)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the system.
   (F)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment.
   (G)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests, and
reporting schedules.
   (H)   Requirements for immediate reporting of any instance of noncompliance
and for automatic resampling and reporting within thirty (30) days where self-
monitoring indicates a violation(s).
   (I)   Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment standards and
requirements.
   (J)   Requirements for submission of periodic self- monitoring or special
notification reports.
   (K)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plans and records relating
to wastewater discharges as specified in Section
5-3063 and affording the POTW Director, or his representatives, access thereto.
   (L)   Requirements for prior notification and approval by the POTW Director
of any new introduction of wastewater pollutants or of any significant change
in the volume or character of the wastewater prior to introduction in the
system.
   (M)   Requirements for the prior notification and approval by the POTW
Director of any change in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process used by
the permittee.
   (N)   A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the
permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and
state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the
terms of the permit.
   (O)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the POTW Director to ensure
compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
   (k)   Permits duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a
year or may be stated to expire on a specific date.
   (l)   Permit transfer. Wastewater permits are issued to a specific user for
a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or
transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or
changed operation.
   (m)   Permit reissuance. A significant industrial user shall apply for
permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application in accordance
with Section
5-3042 a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the existing permit.
(Ord. of 6/26/95; Ord. of 11/6/06; Amendment of 11/5/12)
ARTICLE E
Reporting Requirements
Section 5-3051   Baseline monitoring reports.
   (a)   Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date
of a categorical pretreatment standard or the final administrative decision on
a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the
POTW shall submit to the POTW Director a report which contains the information
listed in paragraph (b), below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement
of their discharge, new sources and sources that become categorical users
subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard shall
submit to the POTW Director a report which contains the information listed in
paragraph (b) below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it
intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also
shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be
discharged.
   (b)   Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
   (1)   Identifying information. The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.
   (2)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
   (3)   Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average
rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s)
carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process
diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated
processes.
   (4)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403,6(e).
   (5)   Measurement of pollutants as follows:
   (A)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated
process.
   (B)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the POTW
Director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass,
where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
Section
5-3060 of this chapter.
   (C)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in
Section
5-3061 of this chapter and 40 CFR 403.12(b) and (g), including 40 CFR 403.12(g)
(4).
   (6)   Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user’s current authorized
representative as defined in Section
5-3002(a)(3) and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether
additional operation and maintenance (O & M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
   (7)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O & M. The completion
date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established
for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to
this section must meet the requirements set out in Section
5-3052 of this chapter.
   (8)   Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be
signed and certified in accordance with Section
5-3042(c) of this chapter.
(Ord. of 6/26/95; Ord. of 11/6/06; Amendment of 11/5/12)
Section 5-3052   Compliance schedule progress reports.
   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
Section
5-3051(b)(7) of this chapter:
   (a)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation);
   (b)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;
   (c)   The user shall submit a progress report to the POTW Director no later
than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date
of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay and, if appropriate, the steps
being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and
   (d)   In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such
progress reports to the POTW Director.
(Ord. of 6/26/95; Amendment of 11/5/12)
Section 5-3053   Reports on compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard
deadline.
   Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source,
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the POTW Director a report containing the information described in Section
5-3051(b)(4) through (6) of this chapter. For users subject to equivalent mass
or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR
403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long-
term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section
5-3042(c) of this chapter.
(Ord. of 6/26/95; Amendment of 11/5/12)
Section 5-3054   Periodic compliance reports.
   Municipalities may sample and analyze user discharges in lieu of requiring
the users to conduct sampling and analysis.
   (a)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by
the POTW Director but in no case less than once every six (6) months, submit a
report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by pretreatment standards and the applicable flows for the
reporting period. Sampling and analysis must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in Sections
5-3060 and
5-3061 of this chapter. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with Section
5-3042(c) of this chapter.
   (b)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW Director,
using the procedures prescribed in Sections
5-3060 and
5-3061 of this chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the
report.
(Ord. of 6/26/95; Ord. of 11/6/06; Amendment of 11/5/12)
Section 5-3055   Reports of changed conditions.
   Each user must notify the POTW Director of any planned significant changes
to the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or
volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the change. The
permittee shall not begin the changes until receiving written approval from the
Control Authority and/or Municipality. See Section
5-3056(d) for other reporting requirements.
   (a)   The POTW Director may require the user to submit such information as
may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the
submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under Section
5-3042 of this chapter.
   (b)   The POTW Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under
Section
5-3042 of this chapter or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under
Section
5-3042 of this chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed
conditions.
   (c)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are
not limited to, flow or pollutant increases of twenty percent (20%) or greater,
and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. Increases or
decreases to production; increases in discharge of previously reported
pollutants; discharge of pollutants not previously reported to the Control
Authority and/or Municipality; new or changed product lines; new or changed
manufacturing processes and/or chemicals; or new or changed customers.
(Ord. of 6/26/95; Ord. of 11/6/06; Amendment of 11/5/12)
Section 5-3056   Reports of potential problems.
   (a)   In the case of any discharge including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a non- routine, episodic nature, a non-customary
batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in Section
5-3002(a) Slug Load or Discharge, that may cause potential problems for the
POTW, the user shall immediately notify the POTW Director of the incident in
person or by telephone. This notification shall include the location of the
discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective
actions taken by the user.
   (b)   Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless
waived by the POTW Director, submit a detailed written report describing the
cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent
similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or
property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties,
or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter.
   (c)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
discharge described in paragraph (a), above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency
notification procedure.
   (d)   All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of any changes at
its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental discharge,
discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge,
or a slug load as defined in Section
5-3002(a) Slug Load or Discharge.
(Ord. of 6/26/95; Ord. of 11/6/06; Amendment of 11/5/12)
Section 5-3057   Reports from unpermitted users.
   All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports to the POTW Director as the POTW Director may require.
(Ord. of 6/26/95; Amendment of 11/5/12)
Section 5-3058   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting.
   (a)   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must
notify the POTW Director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the
results of the repeat analysis to the POTW Director within thirty (30) days
after becoming aware of the violation. If allowed by the POTW Director, the
user is not required to resample:
   (1)   If the POTW Director monitors at the user’s facility at least once a
month, or
   (2)   If the POTW Director samples between the user’s initial sampling and
when the user receives the results of this sampling.
   (b)   If the POTW Director has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu
of the industrial user and the POTW sampling of the user indicates a violation,
the POTW Director shall repeat the sampling and obtain the results of the
repeat analysis within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violations,
unless one of the following occurs:
   (1)   The POTW Director monitors at the user’s facility at least once a
month; or
   (2)    The POTW Director samples the user between their initial sampling and
when the POTW receives the results of the initial sampling; or
   (3)   The POTW Director requires the user to perform sampling and submit the
results to the POTW Director within the 30 day deadline of the POTW becoming
aware of the violation.
(Ord. of 6/26/95; Ord. of 11/6/06; Amendment of 11/5/12)
Section 5-3059   Discharge of hazardous waste.
   Discharge of hazardous waste is prohibited.
(Ord. of 6/26/95)
Section 5-3060   Analytical requirements.
   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed
in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless
otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40
CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance
with procedures approved by EPA and Town. Analyses must be performed by a State
certified lab for each parameter analyzed, if such certification exists for
that parameter.
(Ord. of 6/26/95; Amendment of 11/5/12)
Section 5-3061   Sample collection.
   (a)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The
failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall
not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative
of its discharge.
   (b)   Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and
grease, sulfide, volatile organic compounds, and any other pollutant as
required by 40 CFR 136. The POTW shall determine the number of grabs necessary
to be representative of the user’s discharge. See 40 CFR 403.12(g)(5) for
additional grab sample number requirements for BMR and ninety (90) day
compliance reports. Additionally, the POTW Director may allow collection of
multiple grabs during a twenty-four (24)-hour period which are composited prior
to analysis as allowed under 40 CFR 136.
   (c)   Composite samples: All wastewater composite samples shall be collected
with a minimum of hourly aliquots or grabs for each hour there is a discharge.
All wastewater composite samples shall be collected using flow proportional
composite collection techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or
grab sampling is authorized by the Pretreatment Director. When authorizing
time-proportional composites or grabs, the samples must be representative and
the decision to allow the alternative sampling must be documented.
(Ord. of 6/26/95; Ord. of 11/6/06; Amendment of 11/5/12)
Section 5-3062   Timing.
   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed postage prepaid at a mail facility
serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report
shall govern.
(Ord. of 6/26/95)
Section 5-3063   Record keeping.
   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain,
and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter and any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include
the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name(s) of the
person(s) taking the samples, the dates analyses were performed; the name(s) of
the person(s) who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods
used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available
for a period of at least three (3) years. This period may also be automatically
extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the town, or
where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by
the POTW Director.
(Ord. of 6/26/95; Amendment of 11/5/12)
ARTICLE F
Compliance Monitoring
Section 5-3071   Monitoring facilities.
   (a)   The town requires the user to provide and operate, at the user’s
expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow
measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The
monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user’s premises, but the
town may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to
the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk
area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked
vehicles.
   (b)   There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility
to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The
facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in
a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.
   (c)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the town’s
requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
written notification by the town.
(Ord. of 6/26/95)
Section 5-3072   Inspection and sampling.
   The town will inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the
user is complying with the requirements of this chapter. Persons or occupants
of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the town,
approval authority and EPA or their representatives access at all reasonable
times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
records examination, copying and otherwise performing their duties. The town,
approval authority and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user’s
property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection,
compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security
measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance
before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements
with his security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification,
personnel from the town, approval authority and EPA will be permitted to enter,
without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
Denial of the Town’s approval authority’s, or EPA’s access to the user’s
premises shall be a violation of this ordinance. Unreasonable delays in
allowing entry and/or inspection shall constitute denial of access.
(Ord. of 6/26/95; Amendment of 11/5/12)
Section 5-3073   Search warrants.
   If the Town, approval authority, or EPA has been refused access to a
building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program of the town designed to verify compliance with
this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall
public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the Town, approval
authority, or EPA may seek issuance of a search warrant.
(Ord. of 6/26/95; Amendment of 11/5/12)
ARTICLE G
Confidential Information
Section 5-3081   Confidential information.
   (a)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall
be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction
unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the POTW Director that the release of such information would
divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection
as trade secrets of the user. Any such request must be asserted at the time of
submission of the information or data.
   (b)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets shall not be made available for
inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon written request to
governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit, Non-discharge permit and/or the
pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall
be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential
information.
   (c)   All records relating to compliance with Pretreatment Standards shall
be made available to officials of the approval authority and EPA upon request.
(Ord. of 6/26/95; Amendment of 11/5/12)
ARTICLE H
Enforcement
Section 5-3091   Administrative remedies.
   (a)   Notification of violation.
   Whenever the POTW Director finds that any industrial user has violated or is
violating this chapter, wastewater permit, or any prohibition, limitation or
requirements contained therein or any other pretreatment requirement the POTW
Director shall serve upon such a person a written notice stating the nature of
the violation. Within 30 days from the date of this notice, an explanation for
the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction of the violation shall
be submitted by the user to the town. Submission of this plan does not relieve
the discharger of liability for any violations occurring before or after
receipt of the notice of violation.
   (b)   Consent orders.
   The POTW Director is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar agreements with the person
in noncompliance. Such orders and agreements will include specific action to be
taken by the discharger to correct the noncompliance within a time period also
specified by the order. Consent orders and voluntary compliance agreements
shall have the same force and effect as an administrative order issued pursuant
to Section
5-3091(d), below.
   (c)   Show cause hearing.
   The POTW Director may order any industrial user who causes or is responsible
for an unauthorized discharge or who has violated this chapter or is in
noncompliance with a wastewater discharge permit to show cause why a proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. In the event the POTW Director
determines that a show cause order should be issued, a notice shall be served
on the user specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user
show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice
of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail
(return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service
may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation.
   The POTW Director shall review the evidence presented at the hearing and
determine whether the proposed enforcement action is appropriate.
   A show cause hearing under this section is not a prerequisite to the
assessment of a civil penalty under Section
5-3092 nor is any action or inaction taken by the POTW Director under this
section subject to an administrative appeal under Section
5-3042(h).
   (d)   Administrative orders.
   When the POTW Director finds that an industrial user has violated or
continues to violate this chapter, permits or orders issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment requirement, the POTW Director may issue an order to cease
and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to do
any of the following:
   (1)   Immediately comply with this chapter, the permits or orders issued
under this chapter and with all other applicable requirements;
   (2)   Comply in accordance with a compliance time schedule set forth in the
order;
   (3)   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the event of a
continuing or threatened violation;
   (4)   Disconnect from the sewer system unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated
within a specified time period.
   Appeal of an administrative order issued in accordance with this section
shall be as provided in Section
5-3042(h).
   (e)   Emergency suspensions.
   The POTW Director may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or
wastewater permit when such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual
or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the
environment, interferes with the POTW or causes the POTW to violate any
condition of its NPDES or Non-discharge permit.
   Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or
the wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the noncompliant
contribution. A hearing will be held within fifteen (15) days of the notice of
suspension to determine whether the suspension should be lifted or whether the
user’s waste discharge permit terminated. In the event of a failure to comply
voluntarily with the suspension order, the POTW Director shall take such steps
as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to
prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any
individuals. The POTW Director shall reinstate the wastewater permit and the
wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncompliant
discharge. The industrial user shall submit a detailed written statement
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence to the POTW Director prior to the date of the
above-described hearing.
   (f)   Termination of permit or permission to discharge.
   The POTW Director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit or permission to
discharge for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
   (1)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of his discharge;
   (2)   Failure to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater
constituents and characteristics;
   (3)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of
inspection or monitoring; or,
   (4)   Violation of conditions of the permit or permission to discharge,
conditions of this ordinance or any applicable State and Federal regulations.
   Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the proposed termination
of their wastewater permit and will be offered an opportunity to show cause
under Section
5-3091 of this chapter why the proposed action should not be taken.
(Ord. of 6/26/95; Ord. of 11/6/06; Amendment of 11/5/12)
Section 5-3092   Civil penalties.
   (a)   Any user who is found to have failed to comply with any provision of
this chapter, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder
may be assessed a civil penalty of up to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000)
per day per violation.
   (1)   Penalties between ten thousand dollars ($10,000) and twenty-five
thousand dollars ($25,000) per day per violation may be assessed against a
violator only if:
   (A)   For any class of violation, only if a civil penalty has been imposed
against the violator within the five (5) years preceding the violation, or
   (B)   In the case of failure to file, submit, or make available, as the case
may be, any documents, data, or reports required by this chapter, or the
orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, only if the POTW
Director determines that the violation was intentional and a civil penalty has
been imposed against the violator within the five (5) years preceding the
violation.
   (b)   In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the POTW Director
shall consider the following:
   (1)   The degree and extent of the harm to the natural resources, to the
public health, or to public or private property resulting from the violation;
   (2)   The duration and gravity of the violation;
   (3)   The effect on ground or surface water quantity or quality or on air
quality;
   (4)   The cost of rectifying the damage;
   (5)   The amount of money saved by noncompliance;
   (6)   Whether the violation was committed willfully or intentionally;
   (7)   The prior record of the violator in complying or failing to comply
with the pretreatment program;
   (8)   The costs of enforcement to the town.
   (c)   Appeals of civil penalties assessed in accordance with this section
shall be as provided in Section
5-3042(h).
(Ord. of 6/26/95; Ord. of 11/6/06; Amendment of 11/5/12)
Section 5-3093   Other available remedies.
   Remedies, in addition to those previously mentioned in this chapter are
available to the POTW Director who may use any one or combination of additional
remedies against a noncompliant user. Additional available remedies include,
but are not limited to:
   (a)   Criminal violations. The District Attorney for the 25th Judicial
District may, at the request of the town, prosecute noncompliant users who
violate the provisions of N.C.G.S. 143-215.6B.
   (b)   Injunctive relief. Whenever a user is in violation of the provisions
of this chapter or an order or permit issued hereunder, the POTW Director,
through the Town Attorney, may petition the Superior Court of Burke County for
the issuance of a temporary restraining order, a preliminary injunction and/or
a permanent injunction which restrains or compels the activities in question.
   (c)   Water supply severance. Whenever an industrial user is in violation of
the provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued hereunder, water
service to the industrial user may be severed and service will only recommence,
at the user’s expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to
comply.
   (d)   Public nuisances. Any violation of the prohibitions or effluent
limitations of this chapter or of a permit or order issued hereunder, is hereby
declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the
POTW Director. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the
provisions of the G.S. 160A-193 governing such nuisances, including reimbursing
the POTW for any costs incurred in removing, abating or remedying said
nuisance.
(Ord. of 6/26/95; Amendment of 11/5/12)
Section 5-3094   Remedies nonexclusive.
   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The POTW
Director may take any, all, or any combination of enforcement actions against a
noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in
accordance with the Town’s enforcement response plan. However, the POTW
Director may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant.
(Amendment of 11/5/12)
ARTICLE I
Annual Publication of Significant Noncompliance
Section 5-3101   Annual publication of significant noncompliance.
   At least annually, the POTW Director shall publish in a newspaper of general
circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction(s)
served by the POTW, a list of those industrial users which were found to be in
significant noncompliance, also referred to as reportable noncompliance, in 15A
NCAC 2H .0903(b)(10), with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements,
during the previous twelve (12) months.
(Ord. of 6/26/95; Amendment of 11/5/12)
ARTICLE J
Adjudicatory Hearings
Section 5-3105   Adjudicatory hearings.
   Hearings: The local government may conduct hearings in accordance with its
regular hearing procedure.
   (a)   Adjudicatory Hearing. An applicant whose permit is denied, or is
granted subject to conditions he deems unacceptable, a permittee/user assessed
a civil penalty under Section
5-3092, or one issued an administrative order under Section
5-3091, shall have the right to an adjudicatory hearing before the POTW
Director or other hearing officer appointed by the POTW Director upon making
written demand, identifying the specific issues to be contested, to the POTW
Director within thirty (30) days following receipt of the significant
industrial user permit, civil penalty assessment, or administrative order.
Unless such written demand is made within the time specified herein, the action
shall be final and binding and further appeal is barred. For modified permits,
only those parts of the permit being modified may be adjudicated. The hearing
officer shall make a final decision on the contested penalties within ninety
(90) or less days of the receipt of the written demand for a hearing. The
hearing officer shall make a final decision on contested permits or orders
within ninety (90) days of receipt of the written demand for a hearing. The
POTW Director shall transmit a copy of the hearing officer's decision by
registered or certified mail as described in paragraph (b) below. The decision
is a final decision for the purpose of seeking judicial review. The terms and
conditions of a permit under appeal shall be as follows:
   (1)   New permits: Upon appeal, including judicial review in the General
Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions of a newly issued permit, the
terms and conditions of the entire permit are stayed and the permit is not in
effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties
reach a mutual resolution.
   (2)   Renewed permits: Upon appeal, including judicial review in the General
Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions of a renewed permit, the terms
and conditions of the existing permit remain in effect until either the
conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution.
   (3)   Terminated permits: Upon appeal, including judicial review in the
General Courts of Justice, of a terminated permit, no permit is in effect until
either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a mutual
resolution.
   (b)   Official Record. When a final decision is issued under paragraph (a)
above, the Hearing Officer shall prepare an official record of the case that
includes:
   (1)   All notices, motions, and other like readings;
   (2)   A copy of all documentary evidence introduced;
   (3)   A certified transcript of all testimony taken, if testimony is
transcribed. If testimony is taken and not transcribed, then a narrative
summary of any testimony taken.
   (4)   A copy of the final decision of the Hearing Officer.
   (c)   Judicial Review. Any person against whom a final order or decision of
the Hearing Officer is entered, pursuant to the hearing conducted under
paragraph (a) above, may seek judicial review of the order or decision by
filing a written request for review by the Superior Court of Burke County
within thirty (30) days after receipt of notice by registered or certified mail
of the order or decision, but not hereafter, along with a copy to the Town.
Within thirty (30) days after the receipt of copy of the written request for
review by the Court, the Hearing Officer shall transmit to the reviewing court
the original or a certified copy of the official record.
(Amendment of 11/5/12)
ARTICLE K
Affirmative Defenses to Discharges Violations
Section 5-3111   Upset.
   (a)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements
of paragraph (b), below, are met.
   (b)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset must
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
   (1)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
   (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
   (3)   The user submitted the following information to the Pretreatment
Director orally within twenty-four (24) hours after becoming aware of the upset
and in writing within five (5) days after the user became aware of the upset:
   (A)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
   (B)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if
not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue;
and
   (C)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
recurrence of the noncompliance.
   (c)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   (d)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
   (e)   Each user shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
(Ord. of 6/26/95)
Section 5-3112   Prohibited discharge standards defense.
   A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in Section
5-3011(a) of this chapter or the specific prohibitions in Sections
5-3011(b)(2),(3),(5) through (7), and (9) through (23) of this chapter if it
can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge,
alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass
through or interference and that either:
   (a)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit immediately prior to, and during, the pass through
or interference; or
   (b)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially
in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge when the town was
regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference,
was in compliance with applicable sludge use and disposal requirements.
(Ord. of 6/26/95)
Section 5-3113   Bypass.
   (a)   Bypass is prohibited, and the Pretreatment Director may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass unless:
   (1)   The bypass did not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be
violated and the bypass was necessary in order to perform essential maintenance
to ensure efficient operation.
   (2)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or
severe property damage.
   (3)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of
auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance
during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if
adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during
normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance.
   (b)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the Pretreatment Director, at least ten (10) days before the
date of the bypass, if possible. The Pretreatment Director may approve the
anticipated bypass after considering its adverse effects and determining
whether it will meet any of the exceptions set forth in (a) above.
   (c)   A user shall submit oral notice to the Pretreatment Director of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within
twenty- four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written
submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of this time the user
becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description
of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates
and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it
is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Treatment Director may waive the
written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received
within twenty-four (24) hours.
(Ord. of 6/26/95)
Section 5-3114   Severability.
   If any provision, paragraph, word, section or article of this chapter is
invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions,
paragraphs, words, sections, and chapters shall not be affected and shall
continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. of 11/6/06)
Section 5-3115   Conflict.
   All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or
conflicting with any part of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of
such inconsistency or conflict.
(Ord. of 11/6/06)
CHAPTER 4
Fats, Oils and Grease Control
Section
5-4001   Purpose.
Section
5-4002   Definitions.
Section
5-4003   Grease interceptors required.
Section
5-4004   Compliance date.
Section
5-4005   Discharge criteria.
Section
5-4006   Service/inspection ports and monitoring ports.
Section
5-4007   Under the sink grease interceptors.
Section
5-4008   Interceptor maintenance.
Section
5-4009   Grease interceptor treatment products.
Section
5-4010   Monitoring, inspection and entry.
Section
5-4011   Prohibited discharges.
Section
5-4012   Enforcement.
Section
5-4013   Severability.
Appendix:   Fats, Oils and Grease Chapter Schedule of Penalties.
Section 5-4001   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer
blockages and obstructions from the accumulation of fats, oils and grease in
the town’s sewer system.
(Ord. of 8/1/05)
Section 5-4002   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   Fats, oils and grease. Organic polar compounds derived from animal
and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules.
   (b)   Food service establishment. Any commercial, industrial or
institutional facility discharging kitchen or food preparation wastewater
including, but not limited to, the following: restaurants, motels, hotels,
cafeterias, hospitals, schools, nightclubs, delicatessen, meat cutting-
preparation, bakeries, bagel shops, grocery stores, gas stations, and any other
facility that the Pretreatment Director determines to be in need of a grease
interceptor by virtue of its operation.
   (c)   Grease interceptor. A device used to effect the separation of fats,
oils and grease in wastewater effluent which prevents the discharge of fats,
oils and grease in excess of 300 milligrams per liter (mg/l) concentration, or
has been found by the Pretreatment Director to prevent the discharge of fats,
oils and grease in quantities sufficient to cause POTW line stoppages or
necessitate increased maintenance of the POTW in order to keep line stoppages
from occurring. An interceptor may be of the “outdoor” or underground type
normally of a one thousand (1,000)-gallon capacity or more, or “under-the-
counter” package unit, which is typically less than one hundred (100)-gallon
capacity. For the purpose of this definition, the terms “grease interceptor”,
“interceptor” and “grease trap” are used interchangeably.
   (d)   Inspector. The Pretreatment Director and persons acting under the
Pretreatment Director’s direction who are investigating compliance with this
chapter.
   (e)   Operator. The operator of a food service establishment.
   (f)   Owner. An individual, person, firm, company, association, society,
corporation, or other entity upon whose property the building or structure
containing the food service establishment is located or will be constructed.
“Owner” shall also include the owner of a food service establishment which is
leasing the building, structure, or a portion thereof containing the food
service establishment.
   (g)   Plumbing Code. The current edition of the North Carolina Plumbing
Code.
   (h)   POTW (Publicly Owned Treatment Works). The treatment works as defined
by Section 212 of The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, (33 U.S.C. 1292), which is owned by the Town of Valdese. This
definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes
of a liquid or solid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other
conveyances only if they convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. For the
purposes of this resolution, “POTW” shall also include any sewers that convey
wastewater to the POTW from persons outside the town who are, by contract or
agreement with the town, or in any other way, users of the POTW.
   (i)   Pretreatment Director. The Pretreatment Director of the Town of
Valdese, or his authorized representative(s).
   (j)   Town. The Town of Valdese, North Carolina, or any duly authorized
agent(s) or official(s) acting on its behalf.
   (k)   Waste. Liquid and water-carried wastes, whether treated or untreated.
The terms “sewage” and “wastewater” shall be deemed to be waste by definition.
(Ord. of 8/1/05)
Section 5-4003   Grease interceptors required.
   Food service establishments shall discharge all waste from sinks,
dishwashers, drains and any other fixtures through which fats, oils and grease
may be discharged into a properly maintained and functioning grease
interceptor.
(Ord. of 8/1/05)
Section 5-4004   Compliance date.
   (a)   Operators of existing food service establishments which are not
equipped with a grease interceptor which is in compliance with the requirements
of this chapter shall install a grease interceptor within six (6) months of the
effective date of this chapter.
   (b)   New food service establishments shall be equipped with a grease
interceptor prior to commencement of discharge to the POTW.
   (c)   Any requests for extensions of time for installing a grease
interceptor must be made in writing to the Pretreatment Director at least
thirty (30) days in advance of the compliance date. The written request shall
include the reasons for the operator’s failure or inability to comply with the
applicable compliance date, the amount of additional time needed to complete
the remaining work, and the steps to be taken to avoid future delays. The
Pretreatment Director shall determine whether to grant an extension and the
date for compliance.
(Ord. of 8/1/05)
Section 5-4005   Discharge criteria.
   The following prohibitions shall apply to food service establishments:
   (a)   Where fats, oils and grease are byproducts of food preparation and/or
cleanup, reasonable efforts shall be made to separate waste fats, oils and
grease into a separate container for proper disposal. Except as contained in
byproducts of food preparation and/or clean up, waste fats, oils and grease
shall not be discharged to any drains or grease interceptors. Such waste shall
be placed in a container designed to hold such waste and either used by
industry or disposed of at a suitable location.
   (b)   The influent to interceptors shall not exceed one hundred forty
degrees Fahrenheit (140° F). The temperature at the interceptor’s flow control
device inspection port shall be considered equivalent to the temperature of the
influent.
   (c)   Toilets, urinals, and other similar fixtures shall not discharge
through a grease interceptor.
   (d)   Waste shall enter the grease interceptor only through the inlet flow
control device, then the inlet pipe.
   (e)   Where food-waste grinders are installed, the waste from those units
shall discharge directly into the building drainage system without passing
through a grease interceptor.
(Ord. of 8/1/05)
Section 5-4006   Service/inspection ports and monitoring ports.
   (a)   Except for under the sink grease interceptors, each interceptor shall
be located outside of a building or structure in an area accessible for
service, and so installed and connected that it shall be at all times easily
accessible for inspection and for cleaning and removal of the intercepted
waste. Inlet flow control inspection ports, interceptor inspection ports and
effluent monitoring ports shall be in areas where vehicles may not temporarily
block access for inspection. Interceptors shall be deemed to be inaccessible if
the use of ladders or the removal of bulky equipment or stored materials as
required to inspect inlet flow control devices, inspect or service
interceptors, or sample interceptor effluent. Inspection ports and monitoring
ports shall be located so as to allow inspectors quick and easy access to the
inlet flow control device, each compartment of the interceptor, and the
effluent from the interceptor. An interceptor shall not be installed in any
part of a building where food is handled. The location of all interceptors,
inspection ports, and monitoring ports must be approved by the Pretreatment
Director.
   (b)   An inspection port shall be provided for the flow control device
regulating flow into the interceptor.
   (c)   A one-piece removable metal plate covering the entire interceptor
shall be preferred as an interceptor inspection port although, in the
discretion of the Pretreatment Director, standard manhole ports may be
installed over each divider in the interceptor, but in either case all parts of
the interceptor shall be easily accessible for cleaning and visual inspection.
   (d)   A monitoring port shall be provided for ease in sampling the effluent
from the interceptor and shall be as close as possible to the connection with
the town POTW within the bounds of the facility property. The port shall be
installed and maintained at the operator’s expense. The operator shall properly
place, monitor, and maintain the monitoring port so that wastewater samples
taken from the monitoring port are representative of wastewater leaving the
interceptor. It shall be unlawful for a operator to divert sewage around a
monitoring point into the POTW.
(Ord. of 8/1/05)
Section 5-4007   Under the sink grease interceptors.
   (a)   If an outside grease interceptor is not practical, an under the sink
grease interceptor may be installed subject to the approval of the Pretreatment
Director. In addition to the general requirements for grease interceptors as
provided in this chapter, under the sink grease interceptors shall be subject
to the following additional requirements.
   (b)   Under the sink interceptor requirements.
   (1)   Under the sink interceptors shall be located within twenty-five (25)
feet of the wastewater source and as close to the wastewater source as is
reasonably possible.
   (2)   The lid shall be secured to the body with a single bolt. No wing nuts
or screws shall be permitted.
   (3)   Baffle systems and all other internal pieces shall be removable to
facilitate cleaning and replacement, but must be in place at all other times.
   (4)   The lid shall cover the deep seal interceptor. The deep seal
interceptor shall be constructed so as to eliminate the possibility of sewer
gas entering the kitchen area.
   (5)   The interceptors shall be constructed with bottom supports so that the
body of the interceptor does not corrode by coming into contact with the floor.
   (6)   The interceptor shall be coated with a powder coated electrostatically
applied cathodic epoxy coating so as to be resistant to corrosion.
   (7)   The interceptor shall be equipped with a flow control fitting.
   (c)   Installation requirements.
   (1)   The interceptor may be set on the floor, partially recessed in the
floor with top flush with the floor, or fully recessed below the floor to suit
piping and structural conditions, as acceptable to the Pretreatment Director.
   (2)   There shall be sufficient clearance for the removal of the interceptor
cover for cleaning.
   (3)   Unless specifically approved by the Pretreatment Director, runs of
pipe exceeding twenty-five (25) feet between fixture and interceptor shall not
be permitted.
   (4)   The interceptor shall not be installed in a waste line from a garbage
grinder. Any garbage grinder waste shall bypass the interceptor.
   (5)   A suitable flow control fitting shall be installed ahead of the
interceptor in the waste line beyond the fixture and as close as possible to
the underside of the lowest fixture. When wastes of two (2) or more sinks or
fixtures are combined to be used by one interceptor, a single flow control
fitting shall be used.
   (6)   Air intake for flow control either shall terminate under the sink
drain board as high as possible to prevent overflow, or shall terminate in a
return bend at the same height and on the outside of the building.
   (7)   To retain water and prevent siphoning, all interceptors must be a
vented and sized in accordance with the applicable plumbing codes.
   (8)    With the approval of Pretreatment Director, one interceptor may be
used to serve multiple fixtures if the fixtures are located close together and
the interceptor is sized to meet the combined flow of all the fixtures.
(Ord. of 8/1/05)
Section 5-4008   Interceptor maintenance.
   (a)   Required cleaning frequency.
   (1)   Unless otherwise specified by the Pretreatment Director, each
interceptor in active use shall be cleaned at least once every six (6) months
or more frequently as needed to prevent the discharge of fats, oils and grease
in excess of three hundred (300) mg/l into the POTW. The Pretreatment Director
may specify cleaning more frequently when pumping every six (6) months is shown
to be inadequate. Additional pumping may be required during time periods when
increased loading is anticipated.
   (2)   If the inspector determines that the interceptor is full, immediate
steps shall be taken by the operator to pump out and clean the interceptor as
soon as is practicable. The Pretreatment Director shall make an evaluation of
the advisability of allowing discharge to continue, and may at his discretion
order an immediate cessation of all discharge from the food service
establishment.
   (b)   Notice of cleaning. Every operator shall, within ten (10) days of each
cleaning of an interceptor located on the operator’s premises, notify the
Pretreatment Director in writing that the interceptor has been cleaned. The
notice of cleaning shall include the date of the cleaning, the identity of the
hauler, the site to which the contents of the interceptor were hauled and such
other information as the Pretreatment Director may reasonably require. The
operator shall submit with each notice of cleaning an invoice, manifest or
other similar document from the hauler evidencing the cleaning of the
interceptor. The operator shall also submit such other documentation relating
to the cleaning of the interceptor as the Pretreatment Director may reasonably
require.
   (c)   Cleaning procedures.
   (1)   The operator or an employee of the operator shall supervise the
interceptor cleaning. Such person shall be present during and observe the
entire cleaning operation.
   (2)   An operator shall cause the licensed waste hauler, transporter, or any
other person cleaning or servicing an interceptor to completely evacuate all
contents, including floating materials, wastewater, and bottom sludges and
solids during servicing. Skimming the surface layer of waste material, partial
cleaning of the interceptor or using any method that does not remove the entire
contents of the collection device is prohibited. The suction of the floating
materials shall be done prior to removal of other contents. After complete
evacuation, the walls, top, and bottom of the interceptor shall be thoroughly
scraped and the residue removed.
   (3)   It shall be unlawful for an operator to allow the decanting or
discharging of removed waste back into the interceptor from which the waste was
removed or into any other interceptor.
   (4)   When cleaned, the interceptor shall be fully evacuated unless the
interceptor volume is greater than the tank capacity on the vacuum truck in
which case the transporter shall arrange for additional transportation capacity
so that the interceptor is fully evacuated within a twenty-four (24) hour
period following the transporter’s inability to fully evacuate the interceptor.
   (d)   Disposal of interceptor pumpage. All waste removed from each
interceptor shall be disposed of at a facility permitted and authorized to
receive such waste in accordance with all applicable Federal, State, and local
regulations. Fats, oils and grease removed from an interceptor shall not be
recycled so as to become a food product or part of a food product for animal or
human consumption. The operator shall be responsible for assuring that the
waste is disposed of in accordance with all Federal, State and local disposal
regulations.
   (e)   Vacuum truck cleaning service. It shall be unlawful for an operator to
allow grease interceptor waste to be removed from its premises by a transporter
which does not have all applicable Federal, State and local permits or
registrations.
(Ord. of 8/1/05)
Section 5-4009   Grease interceptor treatment products.
   (a)   Use of grease interceptor treatment products, including bacteria
designed to digest fats, oils and grease, is specifically prohibited without
prior written consent of the Pretreatment Director.
   (b)   The Pretreatment Director may revoke permission to use such products
where the effluent from the interceptor or basin in which the product is used
fails to meet the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. of 8/1/05)
Section 5-4010   Monitoring, inspection and entry.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of a food service establishment to
refuse to allow inspectors to enter its premises during reasonable hours to
determine whether the operator is complying with all of the requirements of
this chapter. The operator shall allow the inspectors access to all parts of
the premises for purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and
copying, and the performance of additional duties reasonably required to
enforce this chapter.
(Ord. of 8/1/05)
Section 5-4011   Prohibited discharges .
   No person shall discharge fats, oils and grease into the POTW in excess of
three hundred (300) mg/l.
(Ord. of 8/1/05)
Section 5-4012   Enforcement.
   (a)   A violation of any of the provision of this chapter shall subject the
offender to a civil penalties as set forth in the attached schedule of
penalties. Penalties shall be assessed on a calendar year basis. If the
offender fails to pay this penalty within fifteen (15) calendar days after
being cited for a violation, the penalty may be recovered by the town in a
civil action in the nature of a debt.
   (b)   This chapter may also be enforced by any appropriate equitable action,
including injunctions or orders of abatement.
   (c)   The town may enforce this chapter by any one of or any combination of
the foregoing remedies.
   (d)   The remedies provided above are not exclusive and do not prohibit the
town from using any other remedy provided by law.
(Ord. of 8/1/05)
Section 5-4013   Severability.
   If any part or parts of this chapter shall be held to be invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect the remaining parts of this chapter.
(Ord. of 8/1/05)
Appendix
Fats, Oils and Grease Chapter
   Schedule of Penalties
A.   Minor Violations
   2nd Offense
   Failure to submit records   $ 50
   Inspection hindrance (equipment related)   $ 50
   Failure to pump FOG and submit records   $ 100
   3rd Offense
   Failure to submit records   $ 100
   Inspection hindrance (equipment related)   $ 100
   Failure to pump FOG and submit records   $ 300
   4th Offense
   Failure to submit records   $ 150
   Inspection hindrance (equipment related)   $ 150
   Failure to pump FOG and submit records   $ 300
   5th Offense and up
   Failure to submit records   $ 300
   Inspection hindrance (equipment related)   $ 300
   Failure to pump FOG and submit records   $1,000
B.   Intermediate Violations
   Failure to maintain necessary equipment (Sanitary T’s, FOG interceptor not
watertight, baffles, etc.)
   1st Offense   $ 150
   2nd Offense   $ 300
   3rd Offense   $ 500
   4th Offense and Up   $1,000
C.   Major Violation (Sewer Blockage)
   Failure to obtain permit   Water cutoff
   Source of sewer blockage (minimum)   $ 500
   Source of sanitary sewer overflow (minimum)   $1,000
   Falsification of maintenance records   $1,000
   Cost of repairs   No limit
(Ord. of 8/1/05)
PART 6
Licensing and Regulation
Chapter 1.   Businesses and Trades
Chapter 2.   Street and Sidewalk Use and Regulation
CHAPTER 1
Businesses and Trades
ARTICLE A
Taxicabs
Section
6-1001   Definitions.
Section
6-1002   Unlawful to operate without certificate.
Section
6-1003   Application required.
Section
6-1004   Board issues certificates.
Section
6-1005   Term; renewal.
Section
6-1006   Determination of convenience and necessity.
Section
6-1007   Hearing, notices.
Section
6-1008   Burden of proof.
Section
6-1009   Failure to begin operations.
Section
6-1010   Transfer.
Section
6-1011   Revocation of certificate.
Section
6-1012   Substitution of vehicles.
Section
6-1013   No person to hold more than one certificate.
Section
6-1014   Maximum number to be issued.
Section
6-1015    Liability insurance required.
Section
6-1016   Identification of vehicles.
Section
6-1017   Rates and fares.
Section
6-1018   Fee.
Section
6-1019   Drivers' permits.
Section
6-1020   Application for permit.
Section
6-1021   Determination of necessity - generally.
Section
6-1022   Same; burden of proof.
Section
6-1023   Issuance, etc., generally.
Section
6-1024   Fee.
Section
6-1025   Term; renewals.
Section
6-1026   Transferability.
Section
6-1027   Revocation of permit.
Section
6-1028 through section 6-1030 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Sunday Regulations
Section
6-1031   Sunday sales.
Section
6-1032 through section 6-1040 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Game Rooms
Section
6-1041   Definitions.
Section
6-1042   Permit required.
Section
6-1043   Restrictions.
Section
6-1044   Prohibited conduct.
Section
6-1045   Rules for operation of game rooms.
Section
6-1046   Revocation of permit.
Section
6-1047   Areas of operation.
Section
6-1048 through section 6-1050 reserved.
ARTICLE D
Street, Sidewalk and Itinerant Vendors
Section
6-1051   License required.
Section
6-1052   Vendor defined.
Section
6-1053   Application.
Section
6-1054   Fees.
Section
6-1055   Insurance.
Section
6-1056   License and identification badges.
Section
6-1057   Hours of operation.
Section
6-1058   Suspension or revocation of license.
Section
6-1059   Appeals.
Section
6-1060   Renewals.
Section
6-1061   Exemptions.
Section
6-1062 through 6-1070 reserved.
ARTICLE E
Transient Amusements
Section
6-1071   License required to operate circus, carnival or similar public
entertainment, or mechanical ride.
Section
6-1072   Application for license; consideration thereof; issuance of license.
Section
6-1073   Information given on application.
Section
6-1074   Grounds for denial of license.
Section
6-1075   License issued without payment of fee.
Section
6-1076   Inspections by mayor and police; suspension of license for unsanitary,
dangerous or hazardous conditions; nonliability of mayor or police.
Section
6-1077   Disorderly or immoral conduct; sale of obscene material; indecent,
immoral or lewd performances prohibited.
Section
6-1078   Suspension or revocation of licenses.
Section
6-1079   Certificate of public liability insurance to be filed in advance.
Section
6-1080   Licenses given only to local non-profit organizations.
ARTICLE F
Junk Dealers
Section
6-1081   Definitions.
Section
6-1082   Permit required.
Section
6-1083   Application for permit.
Section
6-1084   Issuance of permit.
Section
6-1085   Records required.
Section
6-1086   Maintenance of records.
Section
6-1087   Enclosure required.
Section
6-1088   Accessory buildings.
Section
6-1089   Burning prohibited.
Section
6-1090   Combustible materials.
Section
6-1091   Unlawful for unlicensed persons to keep junk; penalty.
Section
6-1092 through section 6-1100 reserved.
ARTICLE A
Taxicabs
Section 6-1001   Definitions.
   (a)   Persons, when used in this article, shall mean and include both
singular and plural, and shall also mean and include persons, individuals,
firms, corporations, partnerships and associations.
   (b)   Taxicab, when used in this article, shall be defined as any motor
vehicle seating nine (9) or fewer passengers, operated upon any street or
highway or call on demand, accepting or soliciting passengers indiscriminately
for hire between such points along streets or highways as may be directed by
the passenger or passengers so being transported, and shall not include motor
vehicles or motor vehicle carriers as defined in subsection (k) of Section 62-
103 of the General Statutes of North Carolina.
Section 6-1002   Unlawful to operate without certificate.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab upon and over the
streets of the town without first having applied for and secured from the
council a certificate of convenience and necessity as hereinafter set forth.
Section 6-1003   Application required.
   Every person desiring to operate a taxicab upon and over the streets of the
town shall file on forms supplied by the town clerk an application for
certificate of convenience and necessity. (Code 1970,
Sec. 18-5; As amended by Ord. of 9/12/94)
Section 6-1004   Board issues certificates.
   The council shall have power and it will be its duty to order certain
certificates issued or refuse to issue certain certificates or to issue
certificates for partial exercise of the rights granted only such certificate
such terms and conditions as in its judgment the public convenience and
necessity may require.
Section 6-1005   Term; renewal.
   A certificate of convenience and necessity issued under the provisions of
this article shall constitute a franchise from the town for the operation of
taxicabs within the town subject to the provisions of this article for one
year, unless a shorter period of time is specified in the certificate.
Application for renewal shall be filed annually and hearings conducted as
provided by this article. (Code 1970, Sec. 18-11)
Section 6-1006   Determination of convenience and necessity.
   (a)   In determining whether the public convenience and necessity require
the franchising of such taxicab or taxicabs, the council shall, among other
things, take into consideration the following factors:
   (1)   Whether or not the public convenience and necessity require such
proposed or additional taxicab service within the town.
   (2)   The financial responsibility for the applicant and the likelihood of
the proposed service being permanent, responsible and satisfactory.
   (3)   The number and condition of equipment.
   (4)   The schedule of proposed rates, if required by the council to be
charged.
   (5)   The number of taxicabs now operated and the demand for increased
service, if any, and whether or not the safe use of the streets by the public,
both vehicular and pedestrian, will be preserved, and whether or not adequate
provision has been made for off-street parking of said taxicabs.
   (6)   The experience of applicant in the taxicab business.
   (7)   Such other relative facts as may be deemed necessary and advisable.
   (b)   Before making any decision with respect to the issuance of a
certificate of convenience and necessity, the council, or a committee thereof
shall make a full and complete investigation of all facts, if it so desires,
subpoena witnesses and utilize the services of the chief of police or any other
officer or employee of the town.
Section 6-1007   Hearing, notices.
   Each application for a certificate of convenience and necessity shall be
scheduled for a hearing not later than 30 days after the same is filed, and the
applicant shall be notified by the town clerk by mail to the business address
set forth in the application of the date and time of such hearing, such
notification to be sent at least seven (7) days before the date set for the
hearing. In addition the town clerk shall cause to be published at least once
in a local paper, or posted on a suitable bulletin board at the town hall, a
notice setting forth the name of the applicant and the date of the hearing and
the time thereof. The cost of such publication shall be paid by the applicant.
(Code 1970, Sec. 18-9)
Section 6-1008   Burden of proof.
   The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish the existence
of public convenience and necessity for the operation of the taxicab or
taxicabs specified in this application, and all other facts required for the
granting of a certificate. (Code 1970, Sec. 18-7)
Section 6-1009   Failure to begin operations.
   If a certificate is granted to an applicant, and said applicant shall fail,
in accordance with the provisions of the certificate, to begin operations
within 30 days after the date of the certificate, then the certificate shall
become null and void, and no refund of any amount paid by the applicant will be
made by said town. (Code 1970, Sec. 18-22)
Section 6-1010   Transfer.
   A certificate is not transferable without the consent and approval of the
council. Applications for a permit to transfer shall be filed in the same
manner as an application for a certificate of convenience and necessity. The
proceedings upon such application for a transfer shall be the same as those
prescribed for the issuance of a certificate, except that the question of
public convenience and necessity need not be proved.
Section 6-1011   Revocation of certificate.
   The council may at any time after a public hearing revoke any certificate
issued by authority of this article for any one or more of the following
causes:
   (1)   Failure to operate the taxicab specified in the certificate in such
manner as to serve the public adequately and efficiently.
   (2)   Failure to maintain the taxicab in good repair.
   (3)   Failure to carry liability insurance or bond as required by law and as
required by this article.
   (4)   Failure to pay the town taxes or license fees imposed upon such
taxicab.
   (5)   Repeated and persistent violation by the taxicab drivers of traffic
and safety regulations and ordinances, or state laws.
   (6)   Failure of the taxicab driver to comply with any provision of this
article or other ordinances or state laws relating to the operation of
taxicabs.
   (7)   Failure to maintain off-street parking facilities.
   (8)   Failure to abide by and charge the fares set by the Town Council.
   (9)   Failure to operate a taxicab for a period of 30 days.
   (10)   A violation by a taxicab driver of the provisions of this article
relating to alcoholic beverages, prostitution or gambling.
   No certificate of convenience and necessity shall be revoked until the owner
has had at least five (5) days' notice by personal service or registered mail
of the charge(s) against him, and of the time and place of the hearing. If,
after the hearing, it is found by the town council that one or more of the
causes listed herein exist, the council shall have the power to revoke the
certificate, or to condition the revocation upon compliance with its order
within any time fixed by it. (Ord. of 9/12/94)
Section 6-1012   Substitution of vehicles.
   The person to whom a certificate has been issued may, by appropriate
endorsement, by the town clerk, substitute another vehicle, or other vehicles,
for the vehicle or vehicles, for which the certificate was granted. In such
instance, the liability insurance or bonds shall also be transferred to such
substitute vehicle or vehicles. (Code 1970, Sec. 18-15)
Section 6-1013   No person to hold more than one certificate.
   The council reserves the right to issue only one such certificate to any one
person, and the person holding such certificate shall be required to operate
his taxicab himself and shall have no power or authority by virtue of his
certificate to delegate the operation of such taxicab to any person.
Section 6-1014   Maximum number to be issued.
   The maximum number of certificates of convenience and necessity which may be
issued under this article, and the maximum number of taxicabs, which may be
operated at any one time thereunder shall be 10. (Code 1970, Sec. 18-14)
Section 6-1015   Liability insurance required.
   Each holder of a certificate of convenience and necessity under this article
shall have in full force and effect on each vehicle being operated as a taxicab
upon and over the streets of the town liability insurance in the amount of at
least $25,000 covering injury to any one person in any one accident and $50,000
to more than one person in any one accident, and not less than $15,000 covering
property damage in any one accident, or in the amounts required under
applicable state laws, whichever is greater. Such insurance shall be with an
insurance company licensed to operate and do business within the state.
Compliance with the above insurance provisions is declared to be a condition
precedent to the operation of any taxicab upon and over the streets of the
town. (Ord. of 11/7/94)
Section 6-1016   Identification of vehicles.
   Every holder of a certificate of convenience and necessity for one or more
taxicabs under the provisions of this article shall display upon each of his
taxicabs identification of his taxicab name, telephone number and the fact that
it operates from the town. This identification shall be either by dome lights
or lettering on the exterior of the automobile. Such lettering shall be at
least three (3) inches in height. In the event that it is necessary to replace
any such taxicab by another automobile, then a permit may be obtained from the
town for the temporary replacement of such vehicle. (Code 1970)
Section 6-1017   Rates and fares.
   Every holder of a certificate of convenience and necessity under this
article shall cause to be displayed in each taxicab under his control in a
conspicuous position where the same shall be plainly visible to passengers a
schedule of rates and fares authorized and required to be charged, in
accordance with the schedule established by the council, and available in the
office of the clerk.
Section 6-1018   Fee.
   The fee for a certificate of convenience and necessity for a taxicab shall
be $25 per year. (Ord. of 9/12/94)
Section 6-1019   Drivers' permits.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a taxicab over and
upon the streets and highways of the town without first having applied for and
secured a driver's permit from the council.
Section 6-1020   Application for permit.
   Every person desiring to drive a taxicab, either as an owner-driver or as an
employee-driver, shall make application for a driver's permit to the town using
such forms as the town may furnish for this purpose. (Code 1970, Sec. 18-19)
Section 6-1021   Determination of necessity - generally.
   (a)   In determining whether the public convenience and necessity requires
the issuance of a taxicab driver's permit, the council shall consider among
other factors:
   (1)   Whether the public necessity and convenience will be benefited and
served by the awarding of the permit to the applicant.
   (2)   The request of the owner of the taxicab to be driven.
   (3)   The general reputation of the applicant.
   (4)   The physical and mental condition of the applicant.
   (5)   The court record of the applicant, if any.
   (6)   Such other relative facts as may be deemed necessary and advisable.
   (b)   Before making any decision with respect to the issuance of a taxicab
driver's permit, the board shall make an investigation, either by a committee
of the council or by its appointed agent, of all the facts. For this purpose
the council shall have power to conduct hearings, subpoena witnesses, or to use
the town employees to gather information and report same.
Section 6-1022   Same; burden of proof.
   The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish the necessity
of the existence of a public need for the issuance of the taxicab driver's
permit applied for. (Code 1970, Sec. 18-21)
Section 6-1023   Issuance, etc., generally.
   The council shall have the power and it shall be its duty to order certain
taxicab driver's permits issued, or to refuse to issue or to condition the
issue of such permits, awarding a full or partial exercise of the privileges
sought, as the council may consider expedient and proper.
Section 6-1024   Fee.
   The fee for a taxicab driver's permit shall be $5 per year. (Ord. of 9/12/
94)
Section 6-1025   Term; renewals.
   A permit issued under the provisions of this article shall constitute a
permit to drive a taxicab within the town for a period of one year, unless a
shorter period of time is specified in the permit. Applications for renewal of
such permits shall be filed annually. (Code 1970, Sec. 18-24)
Section 6-1026   Transferability.
   A taxicab driver's permit issued under this article shall not be
transferable. (Code 1970, Sec. 18-25)
Section 6-1027   Revocation of permit.
   The council may at any time after a public hearing revoke any taxicab
driver's permit issued under authority of this article for any one or more of
the following causes:
   (1)   Failure to drive the vehicle assigned to his use, if same is in a good
state of repair and duly licensed under the provisions of this article.
   (2)   Failure to pay the annual license or permit fee.
   (3)   Repeated violations of traffic regulations or the provisions of this
article or other ordinances governing the operation of taxicabs and taxicab
drivers.
   (4)   Failure to abide by and charge the approved fares listed in section
6-1017 or other ordinances and scheduled in the operator's application for a
certificate of convenience and necessity.
   (5)   Violation of any provision of this code or other ordinance or state
law governing the operation of taxicabs, the use and sale or transportation of
alcoholic beverages or narcotics.
   (6)   Acting as a willful accessory in engaging in or promoting an act of
gambling, prostitution, adultery or a felony.
   (7)   A violation of this article.
Section 6-1028 through section 6-1030 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Sunday Regulations
Section 6-1031   Sunday sales.
   Pursuant to the authority granted by S.L. 2017-87, any establishment located
in the Town of Valdese that holds an ABC permit issued pursuant to G.S. 18B-
1001 is permitted to sell beverages allowed by its permit beginning at 10:00
a.m. on Sundays. (Ord. of 8/7/17)
ARTICLE B
Sunday Regulations
Section 6-1031 through section 6-1040 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Game Rooms
Section 6-1041    Definitions.
   (a)   A game room for the purpose of this article shall be any place of
business that principally operates mechanical, electronic and computer games,
or pay devices or tables for which a charge is made either directly or
indirectly.
   (b)   Examples of game rooms, hy way of illustration and not limitation, are
poolrooms, bowling alleys, billiard halls, amusement centers, and the like.
(Ord. of 12/6/82)
Section 6-1042   Permit required.
   (a)   Every operator of a game room shall ap­ ply for and obtain a permit
from the town council to operate a game room. Application for such a permit
shall be made upon forms provided by the town clerk.
   (b)   An application fee of $15 shall be paid to and collected by the town
clerk when the application is submitted to cover the cost of administration of
this article.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful to operate a game room within the town without a
permit as re­ quired by subsection (b). (Ord. of 12/6/82)
Section 6-1043   Restrictions.
   The town council shall not issue a permit to any applicant who:
   (1)   Has been convicted of unlawfully selling intoxicating liquors or
narcotic drugs; or
   (2)   Is not a resident of North Carolina; or
   (3)   Is of immoral character; or
   (4)   Is a habitual user of alcoholic beverages or narcotic drugs. (As
amended by Ord. of 12/6/82)
Section 6-1044   Prohibited conduct.
   Licensees under this article shall not, and neither shall their employees:
   (1)   Suffer or permit any gambling on the licensed premises at any time;
nor the sale or use of any racing, football, or other parlay cards or gambling
boards or devices;
   (2)   Suffer or permit the licensed premises to become disorderly; or permit
any profane, obscene, or indecent language thereon;
   (3)   Employ in carrying on the business any person who has been convicted
of unlawfully selling alcoholic beverages or narcotic drugs. (As amended by
Ord. of 12/6/82)
Section 6-1045   Rules for operation of game rooms.
   The following rules shall be observed by all operators of game rooms within
the town.
   (1)   All game rooms, with the exception of those game rooms providing on-
premises parking for 50 or more automobiles, shall be closed from eleven
o'clock (11:00) p.m. until seven o'clock (7:00) a.m. Monday through Thursday
and shall close at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Fridays and Saturdays.
Game rooms which provide on-premises parking for 50 or more automobiles shall
be closed from one o'clock (1:00) a.m. until seven o'clock (7:00) a.m. Tuesday
through Sunday, [e.g., on Monday nights such game rooms shall close at one
o'clock (1:00) a.m. the following Tuesday morning and on Saturday nights such
game rooms shall close at one o'clock (1:00) a.m. the following Sunday
morning].
   (2)   No play on any game shall be allowed during the time when game rooms
are required by this article to remain closed.
   (3)   Game rooms may be opened on Sunday only between the hours of one
o'clock (1:00) p.m. and six o'clock (6:00) p.m. except as allowed by subsection
(1) above.
   (4)   All game rooms shall be operated only on the ground floor of a
building, and plate glass windows shall be in those parts of the building
facing any street, so that a clear view inside may be had from the street.
   (5)   No screens, curtains, blinds, partitions, or other obstructions shall
be placed between the entrance to the room where games are played and the rear
wall of such room so that a clear view of the interior may be had from the
street.
   (6)   No loud noises shall be allowed to emanate beyond the licensed
premises.
   (7)   There must be an adult (18 years of age or older) managing the
business on the premises during hours of operation at all times. (As amended by
Ord. of 12/6/82; as amended by Ord. of 3/1/93)
Section 6-1046   Revocation of permit.
   After giving the operator of a game room adequate notice and an opportunity
to be heard, the town board may revoke the permit of any game room operator
who:
   (1)   Violates the provisions of sections
6-1044 or
6-1045; or
   (2)   Is convicted of unlawfully selling alcoholic beverages or narcotic
drugs. (Ord. of 12/6/82)
Section 6-1047   Areas of operation.
   The establishment of a game room in the town within 500 feet of property on
which a church or a school is located is prohibited. (Ord. of 5/4/87)
Section 6-1048 through 6-1050 reserved.
ARTICLE D
Street, Sidewalk and Itinerant Vendors
Section 6-1051   License Required.
   It shall be unlawful for any vendor to sell, display or offer for sale any
food, beverage, goods or merchandise without first obtaining a license from the
town. (Ord. of 5/6/90; Ord. of 10/2/95)
Section 6-1052   Vendor defined.
   Vendor shall mean any person, including an employee or agent of another, who
sells or offers to sell food, beverages, goods or merchandise on any public
street or sidewalk from a stand, motor vehicle or from his or her person, or
one who travels by foot, wagon, motor vehicle, pushcart or any other method of
transportation from house to house or street to street selling or offering to
sell food, beverages, goods or merchandise. (Ord. of 5/6/90; Ord. of 10/2/95)
Section 6-1053   Application.
   The application for a vendor's license shall contain all information
relevant and necessary to determine whether a particular license may be issued,
including but not limited to:
   (a)   Proof of the identity and business address of the applicant;
   (b)   A brief description of the nature, character and quality of the food,
beverages, goods or merchandise to be sold;
   (c)   If employed by another, the name and business address of the person,
firm, association, organization, company or corporation;
   (d)   If a motor vehicle is to be used in the vending business, a
description of the vehicle together with the motor vehicle registration number
and the license number;
   (e)   A description of the place where the applicant intends to conduct the
vending business and the length of time during which it is proposed that the
business shall be conducted. (Ord. of 5/6/90; Ord. of 10/2/95)
Section 6-1054   Fees.
   An applicant for a license under this Article shall pay a biannual license
fee of $25 per vendor.
(Ord. of 5/6/90; Ord. of 10/2/95)
Section 6-1055   Insurance.
   No license shall be issued to an applicant unless the applicant furnishes
proof to the town of a public liability bond or insurance policy in an amount
not less than $50,000 for property damage and injuries, including injury
resulting in death, caused by the operation of the vending business. (Ord. of
5/6/90; Ord. of 10/2/95)
Section 6-1056   Licenses and Identification Badges.
   (a)   The license issued to a vendor shall be carried with the vendor while
he or she is engaged in the business of vending.
   (b)   In addition to the license, the town shall issue an identification
badge to every vendor. Vendors shall wear their badges in such a way that the
badges may be easily read while doing business. If a badge becomes damaged or
obscured, the vendor shall return it to the town and receive another badge.
   (c)   Licenses and identification badges shall be used only by the person to
whom they were issued and may not be transferred to any other person.
   (d)   Licenses shall be valid for a period of six (6) months from the date
the license is issued. (Ord. of 5/6/90; Ord. of 10/2/95)
Section 6-1057   Hours of Operation.
   Vendors shall be allowed to engage in business of vending only between seven
o'clock (7:00) a.m. and nine o'clock (9:00) p.m. except that those vendors who
conduct their business by going door-to-door shall be allowed to operate only
between nine o'clock (9:00) a.m. and five o'clock (5:00) p.m. (Ord. of 5/6/90;
Ord. of 10/2/95)
Section 6-1058   Suspension or Revocation of License.
   (a)   Any license issued under this Article may be suspended or revoked for
any of the following reasons:
   (1)   Fraud or misrepresentation in the application for the license;
   (2)   Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting the business of
vending;
   (3)   Conducting the business of vending contrary to the conditions of the
license;
   (4)   Conducting the business of vending in such a manner as to create a
public nuisance or constitute a danger to the public health, safety or welfare.
   (b)   Upon suspension or revocation, the town shall deliver written notice
to the license holder stating the action taken and the reasons supporting such
action. The written notice shall be delivered to the license holder's place of
business or mailed to the license holder's last known address. (Ord. of 5/6/90;
Ord. of 10/2/95)
Section 6-1059   Appeals.
   Persons who are denied licenses or whose licenses have been suspended or
revoked may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the Town Council.
The appeal must be filed within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice of
denial, suspension or revocation. The Town Council shall hear and determine the
appeal and the decision of the Council shall be final. (Ord. of 5/6/90; Ord. of
10/2/95)
Section 6-1060   Renewals.
   Application for renewal of licenses shall be received thirty (30) days prior
to expiration of the current license. Applications received after that date
shall be processed as new applications. The town shall review each application
of renewal to determine that:
   (a)   The applicant is in full compliance with the provisions of this
Article;
   (b)   The applicant has a currently effective insurance policy in the
minimum amount provided for in section
6-1055. If the town finds that the application meets the above requirements,
the town shall issue a new license. (Ord. of 5/6/90; Ord. of 10/2/95)
Section 6-1061   Exemptions.
   The provisions of this Article shall not apply to bona fide members of
charitable, religious, civic or fraternal organizations which are exempt from
the payment of privilege licenses, and who receive no compensation of any kind
for their services or to vendors selling at events which are approved by or
conducted under the auspices of the town, such as the Festival of the Glorious
Return. (Ord. of 5/6/90; Ord. of 10/2/95)
Section 6-1062 through 6-1070 reserved.
ARTICLE E
Transient Amusements
Section 6-1071   License required to operate circus, carnival or similar public
entertainment, or mechanical ride.
   No person shall exhibit, show, conduct or operate at any place in the town,
or cause or permit to be exhibited, shown, conducted or operated in any place
within the town or on any property owned, leased or controlled by him, any
circus, carnival or outdoor show, or other similar public entertainment, or any
merry-go-round, ferris wheel, airplane ride, or any other type of mechanical
ride or any type of mechanical amusement, unless the same shall have been
licensed according to the provi­ sions of this article.
Section 6-1072   Application for license; con­ sideration thereof; issuance of
license.
   Any and all persons desiring to operate a circus, carnival, outdoor show, or
any other similar public entertainment, or a merry-go­round, ferris wheel, or
other mechanical ride, shall first make application to the council, upon a form
or forms prescribed by the council at least 60 days prior to the opening date
thereof. The council shall consider said application or applications and direct
that the same be granted or refused, and if granted a license shall be duly if
sued, which license shall be signed by the mayor.
Section 6-1073   Information given on application.
   The application shall contain the name and residence of the person to whom
the same shall be issued and shall contain a complete description of the type
of show, rides, and other amusements to be offered, as well as the place upon
which the same shall be held.
Section 6-1074   Grounds for denial of license.
   The council may refuse the issuance of such license on account of the
existence of any un­ sanitary, hazardous or dangerous condition or because the
location is deemed to be unsuitable, or on account of the creation of a traffic
hazard, or for the lack of accommodations for the num­ ber of persons or
vehicles likely to be attracted thereto.
Section 6-1075   License issued without payment of fee.
   No fee shall be charged for the license.
Section 6-1076   Inspections by mayor and police; suspension of license for
unsanitary, dangerous or hazardous conditions; non­liability of mayor or
police.
   After a license shall be granted under this article, officials of the town
shall inspect the premises and installations made thereon in order to determine
the existence of unsanitary, dangerous or hazardous conditions, and if the same
shall exist the council shall have the authority to suspend the license and
prohibit said circus, carnival or other outdoor show to continue, or may
suspend the operation of any mechanical ride or rides, or mechanical
amusements, if the same shall be deemed unsanitary, dangerous or hazardous per
se, which suspension shall continue in effect until said unsanitary, dangerous
or hazardous condition shall be eliminated.
Section 6-1077   Disorderly or immoral conduct; sale of obscene material;
indecent, immoral or lewd performances prohibited.
   No person granted a license under this article shall permit any disorderly
or immoral conduct upon the premises for which such license shall have been
granted, or the sale of any obscene literature or pictures, or any indecent,
immoral or lewd act or performance upon the premises.
Section 6-1078   Suspension or revocation of licenses.
   The mayor is hereby authorized to suspend or revoke any license granted
under this article in case of failure to maintain proper standards of safety
and sanitation, and in case the licensee shall permit the sale of any obscene
literature or pictures of any indecent, immoral or lewd act or performance.
Section 6-1079   Certificate of public liability insurance to be filed in ad­
vance.
   The sponsor of any circus, carnival or outdoor show or other similar public
entertainment, or the owner or operator thereof, or the operator of any
mechanical ride of any type, shall file with the town at least 10 days prior to
the opening of said circus, carnival or outdoor show, or the operation of any
merry-go-round, ferris wheel, airplane ride or any other type of mechanical
ride, or any type of mechanical amusement, a certificate of public liability
insurance in the sum of $50,000 to $100,000. The filing of said certificate of
public liability insurance shall be a condition precedent to the opening of the
circus, carnival or outdoor show, or other similar public entertainment, or the
operation of any merry-go-round, ferris wheel, airplane ride, or any other type
of mechanical ride or mechanical amusement. No circus, carnival or outdoor
show, or any mechanical ride or mechanical amusement shall be permitted to
perform or operate unless said certificate of insurance is first provided as
set forth herein.
Section 6-1080   Licenses given only to local non-profit organizations.
   Applications for licenses to conduct the activities described herein shall
be considered only if the organization sponsoring such activities is a non-
profit organization and is located in Burke County.
ARTICLE F
Junk Dealers
Section 6-1081   Definitions.
   The following words and phrases shall, for the purpose of this article, have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
   (1)   Junk. Any worn out, discarded, or old iron, other metal, automobiles
parts, chain, copper, parts of machinery, automobile tires, appliances, or old
wrecked, or unusable automobiles and trucks, and other articles commonly known
as junk.
   (2)   Junk yard. Any area larger than 100 feet by 100 feet in which junk is
stored or permitted to accumulate. (Ord. of 10/2/67, Sec. 1)
Section 6-1082   Permit required.
   Any person who shall engage in the business of buying, selling, handling,
storing or hauling junk shall first obtain a permit therefor and shall pay for
such permit a fee to be established by the council.
Section 6-1083   Application for permit.
   Application for a permit to engage in the junk business shall be made to the
building inspector and shall state the place where the business is to be
conducted and that the terms of this article shall be met. (Ord. of 10/2/67,
Sec. 1)
Section 6-1084   Issuance of permit.
   The building inspector shall issue a permit to engage in the junk business
to the applicant therefor if it shall appear that the location of the junk yard
shall not constitute a fire hazard or other hazardous condition to any adjacent
property. (Ord. of 10/2/67, Sec. 1)
Section 6-1085   Records required.
   Any person or corporation operating or maintaining a junk yard shall keep
records on each article of junk, which will show the following:
   (1)   Description of junk.
   (2)   Person or corporation from whom obtained.
   (3)   Serial or motor number, if any. (Ord. of 10/2/67, Sec. 1)
Section 6-1086    Maintenance of records.
   The records required to be kept by junk dealers shall not be destroyed until
three (3) years of age and shall be available for inspection by the building
inspector or chief of police at reasonable times. (Ord. of 10/2/67, Sec. 1)
Section 6-1087    Enclosure required.
   All junk yards shall be enclosed by a wire or metal fence of a minimum
height of six (6) feet, protected by gates which may be locked, and shall be
locked when an attendant is not present. The plans for construction of the
fence and gates shall be first submitted to the building inspector and approved
by him. (Ord. of 10/2/67, Sec. 1)
Section 6-1088    Accessory buildings.
   Nothing but automobile dismantling shall be carried on in any automobile or
truck junk yard, and if repairs are made at or in any junk yard to automobiles
or trucks, such repairs shall be made in a building meeting all the applicable
provisions of this Code and state law. (Ord. of 10/2/6 7, Sec. 1)
Section 6-1089    Burning prohibited.
   No junk or any vehicle, including automobiles and trucks, shall be burned in
or on any premises occupied as a junk yard. (Ord. of 10/2/67, Sec. 1)
Section 6-1090    Combustible materials.
   (a)   Gas and oil and all other combustible ma­ terials shall be stored in a
building of fireproof construction, which shall be constructed in full
compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code and state law.
   (b)   Upon being stored or placed in the junk yard, all gas and oil shall be
drained from vehicles and stored. (Ord. of 10/2/67, Sec. 1)
Section 6-1091    Unlawful for unlicensed persons to keep junk; penalty.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person other than licensed junk dealers,
to place, keep, store, or otherwise allow any worn out, discarded, or old iron,
other metal, automobile parts, chain, copper, parts of machinery, automobile
tires, appliances, or old wrecked, or unusable auto­ mobiles and trucks, and
other articles commonly known as junk.
   (b)   In event any of the above described junk shall be left upon the
premises located within the town, the town may at its option cause the same to
be removed after serving the property owner or parties in charge of the
property with a written notice, 10 days in advance of the removal of the same,
that the town does intend to remove said junk in accordance with this article.
(Ord. of 10/2/67, Sec. I)
Section 6-1092 through section 6-1110 reserved.
CHAPTER 2
Street and Sidewalk Use And Regulation
ARTICLE A
Obstructing
Section
6-2001   Assembly on sidewalk.
Section
6-2002   Display of goods prohibited.
Section
6-2003   Placing objects on streets and sidewalks.
Section
6-2004   Construction near sidewalk.
Section
6-2005   Structures and appurtenances over sidewalks.
Section
6-2006   Skating on sidewalk prohibited except in residential area.
Section
6-2007   Signs over sidewalks regulated.
Section
6-2008   Obstructions generally.
Section
6-2009   Gates opening on streets or sidewalks.
Section
6-2010   Injuring, defacing, etc., street or sidewalk.
Section
6-2011   Injuring trees, shrubs or flowers.
Section
6-2012   Injuring, destroying, etc., lights, etc.; removing sand, stone or turf
from street.
Section
6-2013   Poles and wires generally - permit required for placing poles.
Section
6-2014   Same; when permit not to be issued.
Section
6-2015   Same; use of poles of others.
Section
6-2016   Same; care and inspection of poles.
Section
6-2017   Same; use of poles and conduits for town purposes.
Section
6-2018   Advertising on streets, etc., generally; noise.
Section
6-2019   Marking or painting on streets and sidewalks.
Section
6-2020 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Use and Cleanliness
Section
6-2021   Littering prohibited.
Section
6-2022   Same; from vehicles.
Section
6-2023   Same; violation.
Section
6-2024   Maintenance of public areas.
Section
6-2025   Same; receptacles.
Section
6-2026   Same; violation.
Section
6-2027 through section 6-2030 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Parades and Demonstrations
Section
6-2031   Definitions.
Section
6-2032   Permit required.
Section
6-2033   Standards.
Section
6-2034   Requirements and issuance of permits.
Section
6-2035   Certain activities prohibited.
Section
6-2036   Revocation of permit.
Section
6-2037   Interference prohibited.
Section
6-2038   Additional regulations applicable to picketing.
Section
6-2039   Exceptions.
Section
6-2040 reserved.
ARTICLE A
Obstructing
Section 6-2001   Assembly on sidewalk.
   Except as provided in Article C of this chapter, all persons are forbidden
from assembling or collecting and standing so as to obstruct any sidewalk or
street, and all persons so collecting and standing shall disperse and move upon
the demand of any police officer.
Section 6-2002    Display of goods prohibited.
   No person shall place for display or sale any goods, wares or merchandise of
any kind upon any of the sidewalks of said town, which shall extend out on the
sidewalks.
Section 6-2003    Placing objects on streets and sidewalks.
   No brick, stone or wood or other substance obstructing the free passage of
persons and vehicles shall be placed or suffered to lie in any of the alley
ways, streets or other routes of the town, nor shall any person place on or in
any of the streets, sidewalks or alley ways of the town any boxes, crates,
casks, or barrels of any description, or any other obstruction of any kind.
Provided that any person erecting a building, may with permission place
building material for immediate use on the streets in such a way as to not
interfere with the usual traffic.
Section 6-2004   Construction near sidewalk.
   Before building or remodeling at any place where the same is in close
proximity to the side­ walk an overhead covered passage way shall be
constructed so as to leave the sidewalk unob­ structed and provide safe and
easy passage.
Section 6-2005    Structures and appurtenances over sidewalks.
   No person shall erect over any sidewalk or street any part of a building
except marquees and signs, which are approved by the building inspector.
Awnings may be attached to buildings provided they are supported upon metallic
frames and at least eight (8) feet above the level of the sidewalk.
Section 6-2006 Skating on sidewalk prohibited except in residential area.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to skate on the streets and sidewalks in
the business section of the town, or on any other street or highway other than
on sidewalks in residential sections.
Section 6-2007    Signs over sidewalks regulated.
   It shall be unlawful to hang or suspend any sign over or above the sidewalks
or streets at less than eight (8) feet from the ground over the sidewalk and
less than 15 feet from the ground above the street, and such sign shall be kept
securely fastened at all times. (Code 1970, Sec. 17-3)
Section 6-2008    Obstructions generally.
   It shall be unlawful to build, erect, construct or place any porch, steps,
fence, wall or other obstruction whatsoever in or over any of the streets or
sidewalks right-of-way; and it shall be unlawful to obstruct any sidewalk or
street with any wheelbarrow, automobile, truck or other vehicle, railroad car,
chair, bench, open gate, chicken coop, box or other article; provided, further,
that this section shall not apply to baby carriages and invalid chairs rolled
on the sidewalk in such manner as not to obstruct the same; provided further,
that this section shall not apply to benches erected by the town.
Section 6-2009   Gates opening on streets or sidewalks.
   No gate to any residence, lot or other enclosure shall swing or open outward
over the street or sidewalk. Each day any gate is allowed to open outward over
the sidewalk or street shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1970, Sec.
17-6)
Section 6-2010   Injuring, defacing, etc., street or sidewalk.
   No person shall injure, deface or mar in any manner whatsoever any of the
streets or sidewalks. The town shall have the right and privi­ lege to repair
any such injury, defacement or mar and assess the costs thereof against the of­
fender. (Code 1970, Sec. 17-7)
Section 6-2011   Injuring trees, shrubs or flowers.
   It shall be unlawful to pull down, cut, deface with signs, break or in any
way injure any of the trees, shrubs or flowers on the streets, parks or
squares. (Code 1970, Sec. 17-8)
Section 6-2012   Injuring, destroying, etc., lights, etc.; removing sand, stone
or turf from street.
   No person shall break, destroy or in any manner injure any light, pump, well
or tree in any street or public place, or deface, or in any man­ ner injure,
any building belonging to the town, nor remove any pavement, sand, stone or
turf from any street without the permission of the manager. (Code 1970, Sec.
17-9)
Section 6-2013   Poles and wires generally - permit required for placing poles.
   No poles for electric, telegraph, telephone or other purposes shall be
placed on any street without a permit therefor being obtained from the town.
(Code 1970, Sec. 17-18)
Section 6-2014   Same; when permit not to be issued.
   No permit shall be issued for the erection of poles on any street in
contravention of the provisions of section
4-1007,
4-1008 and
4-1009, or where there exists a line of poles on such street for the purpose of
supporting electric, telephone or telegraph wires. (Code 1970, Sec. 17-19)
Cross Reference: Sections
4-1007,
4-1008 and
4-1009 provide for underground placement of utilities.
Section 6-2015    Same; use of poles of others.
   (a)   Whenever any electric, telephone or telegraph company shall desire to
place lines or wires along any particular street upon which it does not have a
lien of poles, but upon which street there exists a line of poles owned by
another company, then such companies may maintain their wires upon the same
poles; provided, that such placement or maintenance does not violate the
provisions of section
4-1008 et seq.
   (b)   If an agreement cannot be reached be­ tween the companies owning the
poles and the companies desiring to place wires thereon, then such companies
may submit .the question of compensation to three (3) disinterested persons for
arbitration, or they may submit the same to the board for determination. This
section shall apply to poles owned by the town as well as poles owned by
companies operating under franchises from the town. (Code 1970, Sec. 17-20)
Section 6-2016   Same; care and inspection of poles.
   It shall be the duty of the owners of all poles supporting electric,
telephone or telegraph wires, to keep the same in a safe condition, and for
that purpose inspect the same once every three (3) months. (Code 1970, Sec. 17-
21)
Section 6-2017   Same; use of poles and conduits for town purposes.
One duct in all underground conduit systems shall be provided for the town free
of charge for the town's police or fire alarm telegraph system when required,
and the town shall have the use of all poles on streets for the same purposes.
(Code 1970, Sec. 17-22)
Section 6-2018   Advertising on streets, etc., generally; noise.
No person shall advertise any article of any kind for sale by crying out the
same on the streets or sidewalks. No person shall advertise any article of any
kind, or any event of any kind, by crying out the same or by using therefor any
megaphone, bell, horn or other noise making device on any street or sidewalk.
(Code 1970, Sec. 3-1)
Section 6-2019    Marking or painting on streets or sidewalks.
   It shall be unlawful to advertise, or attempt to advertise, by marking or
painting on any of the streets or sidewalks. (Code 1970, Sec. 3-2)
Section 6-2020 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Use and Cleanliness
Section 6-2021    Littering prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or­ ganization or private
corporation to throw or deposit upon any street or sidewalk, or upon any
private property, except with written per­ mission of the owner or occupant of
such pri­ vate property any trash, refuse, garbage, building material, cans,
bottles, broken glass, paper, or any type of litter.
Section 6-2022    Same; from vehicles.
   It shall be unlawful for any person while a driver or a passenger in a
vehicle to throw or deposit litter upon any street or other private place
within the town or upon private property.
Section 6-2023    Same; violation.
   Any person found guilty of violating sections
6-2021 and
6-2022 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $50,
or imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
Section 6-2024   Maintenance of public areas.
   Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant, or person in charge of any commercial
establishment or premises which maintains any paved or unpaved areas for the
use of the public, either for parking or as an access area incidental to the
carrying on of the principal business of any such commercial establishment or
premises and which parking or access areas abut or lie within 10 feet of any
public street or other public way, shall keep and maintain such areas clean and
free from trash, litter, rubbish and any materials liable to be blown,
deposited or cast upon such street or other public way.
Section 6-2025 Same; receptacles.
   Suitable receptacles shall be provided in all parking or access areas within
the meaning of section
6-2024 hereof. Such receptacles shall be plainly marked and constructed to
prevent scat­ tering of any trash, litter, rubbish or other material deposited
therein.
Section 6-2026    Same; violation.
   Any owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in charge of any commercial
establishment or premises who fails to abide by the provisions of section
6-2024 and
6-2025 shall be subject to a penalty of $50 in addition to the penal provisions
of state law for violations of municipal ordinances.
Section 6-2027 through section 6-2030 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Parades and Demonstrations
Section 6-2031   Definitions.
   For the purpose of section
6-2031 through
6-2039 the following terms shall have the definitions ascribed:
   (1)   Block is that portion of any street lying between its intersections
with other streets.
   (2)   Parade is any assemblage of two (2) or more persons participating in
or operating any vehicle in any march, ceremony, show, exhibi­ tion or
procession of any kind in or upon the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks,
or other public grounds or places.
   (3)   Person is any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or
other organization, whether formal or informal.
   (4)   Picket line is any two (2) or more persons formed together for the
purpose of making known any position or promotion of such persons, or on behalf
of any organization or class of persons.
   (5)   Group demonstration is any assembly together or concert of action
between or among two (2) or more persons for the purpose of pro­ testing any
matter or of making known any posi­ tion or promotion of such persons, or of or
on behalf of any organization or class of persons, or for the purpose of
attracting attention of such assembly.
Section 6-2032   Permit required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to organize, conduct or participate in
any parade, picket line, or group demonstration in or upon any street,
sidewalk, alley, or other public place within the town unless a permit therefor
has been issued by the town in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Section 6-2033   Standards.
   The chief of police shall not issue a permit for the proposed parade if he
finds that:
   (1)   Such parades, picket lines or group demonstrations are to commence
before six o'clock (6:00) a.m. or terminate after five o'clock (5:00) p.m., or,
   (2)   Such parades or group demonstrations are to be held at the same time
and place as those designated in a permit issued pursuant to a writ­ ten
application previously received by the chief of police or his designee; or,
   (3)   The conduct of the parade will substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; or,
   (4)   The conduct of the parade will require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the town to properly police the line of movement
of the parade and of contiguous areas so that adequate police protection cannot
be provided the remainder of the town; or,
   (5)   The conduct of the parade will require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances so that adequate ambulance service to portions of the town
not occupied by the parade and con­ tiguous areas will be prevented; or,
   (6)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points
of the parade will substantially interfere with adequate fire and police
protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly
areas; or,
   (7)   The conduct of the parade is reasonably likely to result in violence
to persons or property causing serious harm to the public; or,
   (8)   The parade is to be held for the primary purposes of advertising a
product, good, or event, and is designed to be held primarily for private
profit; or,
   (9)   The conduct of the parade will interfere with the movement of fire-
fighting equipment to such an extent that adequate fire protection can­ not be
provided to the town.
Section 6-2034    Requirements and issuance of permits.
   The chief of police or his designee shall issue permits as required in the
preceding section, and in the issuance thereof he shall:
   (1)   Require a written application for permit to be filed not less than 24
hours in advance of such parade, picket line, or group demonstration which
application shall specify the time and place for the commencement of any such
picket line and the time, place, route, and duration of any such parade or
group demonstration.
   (2)   Require that the application for a permit specify whether or not
minors below the age of 16 years will be permitted to participate.
   (3)   Require that the application for a permit shall specify and the permit
shall designate the person or persons in charge of the activity. Such person
shall be required to accompany the parade, picket line, or group demonstration
and shall carry such permit with him at that time. Such permit shall not be
valid in the possession of any other person.
Section 6-2035   Certain activities prohibited.
   The following acts or activities, when performed or undertaken in
conjunction with or as a part of, any parade, picket line, or group
demonstration, are hereby prohibited and declared unlawful:
   (1)   The carrying on or about the person any firearm, or any weapon or
article, including but not limited to blackjacks, nightsticks, or flashlights
which by their use might constitute a deadly weapon;
   (2)   The taking or keeping of any dog or other vicious animal, whether
leased or unleashed.
Section 6-2036   Revocation of permit.
   The chief of police shall revoke any permit granted for a parade, picket
line, or group demonstration for any of the following causes:
   (1)   The violation by any participant of section
6-2035 of this article;
   (2)   The failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit.
Section 6-2037   Interference prohibited.
   No person shall hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any parade,
picket line, or group demonstration being conducted under authority of a permit
duly issued by the chief of police.
Section 6-2038   Additional regulations applicable to picketing.
   Picket lines and picketing shall be subject to the following additional
regulations:
   (1)   Picketing may be conducted only on the sidewalks reserved for
pedestrian movement, and may not be conducted on the portion of a street used
primarily for vehicular traffic;
   (2)   Not more than 10 pickets promoting the same objective shall be
permitted to use either of the two (2) sidewalks within a single block at any
one time;
   (3)   Pickets may carry written or printed placards or signs not exceeding
two (2) feet in width and two (2) feet in length promoting the objective for
which the picketing is done; provided, the words used are not derogatory or
defamatory in nature;
   (4)   Pickets must march in single file and not abreast and must not march
closer together than 15 feet, except in passing one another.
Section 6-2039    Exceptions.
   Section
6-2031 through
6-2038 shall not apply to:
   (1)   Funeral processions;
   (2)   Any governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
Section 6-2040 reserved.
PART 7
Motor Vehicles and Traffic
Chapter 1.    General Traffic Regulations
CHAPTER 1
General Traffic Regulations
State Law Reference: Authority of municipality to regulate traffic is given by
G.S. 160A-300. Motor vehicles generally, Chapter 20 of the General Statutes.
ARTICLE A
Words and Phrases Defined
Section
7-1001   Definitions of words and phrases.
Section
7-1002 through section 7-1010 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Traffic Administration
Section
7-1011 through section 7-1020 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Enforcement and Obedience to Traffic Regulations
Section
7-1021   Application of chapter to person riding, propelling, etc., pushcarts,
tractors, trailers, carts, animals, etc.
Section
7-1022   Public employees to obey traffic regulations.
Section
7-1023   Authority of police and fire department officials.
Section
7-1024   Obedience to police and rue department officials.
Section
7-1025   Use of coasters, roller skates, and similar devices restricted.
Section
7-1026   Authorized emergency vehicles.
Section
7-1027 through section 7-1030 reserved.
ARTICLE D
Traffic-Control Devices
Section
7-1031   Obedience to signs, etc., generally.
Section
7-1032   Signs as prerequisite to enforcement.
Section
7-1033   Specifications for traffic-control devices.
Section
7-1034   Traffic-control signal legend.
Section
7-1035   Pedestrian control signals.
Section
7-1036   Flashing signals.
Section
7-1037   Display of unauthorized signs, signals, or markings.
Section
7-1038   Interference with official traffic-control devices, signs or signals.
Section
7-1039   Authority to establish play streets.
Section
7-1040   Traffic lanes.
Section
7-1041   Zone of quiet.
Section
7-1042   School zones.
Section
7-1043   Yield signs.
Section
7-1044 through section 7-1050 reserved.
ARTICLE E
Speed Regulations
Section
7-1051   General.
Section
7-1052   Exceptions.
Section
7-1053   Driving at reduced speeds.
Section
7-1054 through section 7-1060 reserved.
ARTICLE F
Turning Movements
Section
7-1061   Required position and method of turning at intersections.
Section
7-1062   Turning markers.
Section
7-1063   Authority to place restricted tum signs.
Section
7-1064   Obedience to no-turn signs.
Section
7-1065   Limitations on turning around.
Section
7-1066 through section 7-1070 reserved.
ARTICLE G
One-way Streets and Alleys
Section
7-1071   Authority to sign one-way streets and alleys.
Section
7-1072   One-way streets and alleys.
Section
7-1073 through section 7-1080 reserved.
ARTICLE H
Special Stops Required
Section
7-1081   Through streets designated.
Section
7-1082   Authority to erect stop signs.
Section
7-1083   Intersections where stop required.
Section
7-1084   Signs to bear the word "Stop."
Section
7-1085   Vehicles to stop at stop signs.
Section
7-1086   Emerging from alley, driveway, or building.
Section
7-1087   Stop when traffic obstructed.
Section
7-1088 through section 7-1090 reserved.
ARTICLE I
Miscellaneous Driving Rules
Section
7-1091   Hitchhiking.
Section
7-1092   Boarding or alighting from vehicle in motion.
Section
7-1093   Riding on vehicle or portion thereof not designed etc., for
passengers.
Section
7-1094   Unauthorized entering, etc., of vehicle.
Section
7-1095   Riding inside vehicles; hanging on vehicles.
Section
7-1096   Limitation on number of persons in front seat.
Section
7-1097   Clinging to moving vehicles while riding bicycle.
Section
7-1098   When passing on the right is permitted.
Section
7-1099   Driver to give way to overtaking vehicle.
Section
7-1100   Following too closely.
Section
7-1101   Reckless driving, etc.
Section
7-1102   Driving-through funeral processions.
Section
7-1103   Limitations on backing.
Section
7-1104   Emerging from alley or private driveway.
Section
7-1105   Driving within sidewalk area.
Section
7-1106   Unnecessary vehicular noise, etc. - "Scratching off."
Section
7-1107   Same; prevention of noise, smoke, etc.; muffler cut- outs regulated.
Section
7-1108   Operation of motorcycles.
Section
7-1109   Cruising.
Section
7-1110 reserved.
ARTICLE J
Pedestrians' Rights and Duties
Section
7-1111   Pedestrians subject to traffic-control signals.
Section
7-1112   Pedestrian's right-of-way in crosswalk.
Section
7-1113   Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk.
Section
7-1114   Crossing at right angles.
Section
7-1115   When pedestrian shall yield.
Section
7-1116   Pedestrians walking along roadways.
Section
7-1117   Pedestrians soliciting rides or business.
Section
7-1118   Drivers to exercise due care.
Section
7-1119 through 7-1120 reserved.
ARTICLE K
Regulations for Bicycles
Section
7-1121   Effect of regulations.
Section
7-1122   Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles.
Section
7-1123   Obedience to traffic-control devices.
Section
7-1124   Riding on bicycles.
Section
7-1125   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths.
Section
7-1126   Speed.
Section
7-1127   Emerging from alley or driveway.
Section
7-1128   Carrying articles.
Section
7-1129   Parking.
Section
7-1130   Riding on sidewalks.
Section
7-1131   Lamps and other equipment on bicycles.
Section
7-1132 through section 7-1140 reserved.
ARTICLE L
Methods of Parking
Section
7-1141   Standing or parking close to curb.
Section
7-1142   Signs or markings indicating angle parking.
Section
7-1143   Obedience to angle parking signs or markings.
Section
7-1144   Lights on parked vehicles.
Section
7-1145   Vehicles backed up to curb.
Section
7-1146   Unattended vehicles.
Section
7-1147   Moving cars from parked positions.
Section
7-1148 through section 1-1150 reserved.
ARTICLE M
Stopping, Standing, or Parking Prohibiting in Specified Places
Section
7-1151   Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited. No signs required.
Section
7-1152   Parking not to obstruct traffic.
Section
7-1153   Parking in alleys.
Section
7-1154   All-night parking prohibited.
Section
7-1155   Standing or parking for certain purposes prohibited.
Section
7-1156   Parking adjacent to schools.
Section
7-1157   Standing or parking on one-way roadways.
Section
7-1158   No stopping, standing, or parking near hazardous or congested places.
Section
7-1159   Stopping, standing or parking for primary purpose of advertising,
prohibited.
Section
7-1160   Loading and unloading of tractor trailers prohibited on certain
streets.
Section
7-1161 through section 7-1170 reserved.
ARTICLE N
Stopping for Loading or Unloading Only
Section
7-1171   Loading and unloading zones.
Section
7-1172   Passenger loading zones.
Section
7-1173   Commercial loading zones.
Section
7-1174   Public carriers stops and stands.
Section
7-1175   Stopping, standing, and parking of busses and taxicabs regulated.
Section
7-1176   Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.
Section
7-1177 through section 1-1180 reserved.
ARTICLE O
Stopping, Standing, or Parking Restricted or Prohibited on Certain Streets
Section
7-1181   Application of article.
Section
7-1182   Regulations not exclusive.
Section
7-1183   Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.
Section
7-1184   Parking time limited on certain streets.
Section
7-1185   Parking signs required.
Section
7-1186   Vehicles not to stop in streets, exceptions.
Section
7-1187   Parking prohibited between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
Section
7-1188   Parking prohibited between 9:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m.
Section
7-1189 through section 7-1190 reserved.
ARTICLE P
Parking on Private Property
Section
7-1191   Request of owner to regulate or restrict parking.
Section
7-1192   Application.
Section
7-1193   Parking restrictions; penalty.
Section
7-1194 through section 7-1200 reserved.
ARTICLE Q
Municipal Parking Lots
Section
7-1201   Parking prohibited between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m.
Section
7-1202 through section 7-1210 reserved.
ARTICLE R
Parking Meters
   (Reserved)
ARTICLE S
Civil Penalties for Parking Violations
Section
7-1230   Civil penalty procedure.
Section
7-1231   Unauthorized removal of traffic citation from vehicle.
ARTICLE T
Vehicle Restrictions on Certain Streets
Section
7-1240   Truck tractors or semi-tractors or combinations thereof with a gross
vehicle weight rating greater than five (5) tons.
ARTICLE A
Words and Phrases Defined
Section 7-1001   Definition of words and phrases.
   The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall, for the
purpose of this chapter shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except in any instance
where otherwise specifically provided or where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning.
   (1)   Alley. A thoroughfare through the middle of a block.
   (2)   Authorized emergency vehicle. Vehicles of the fire department, police
vehicles, and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal department or
public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the chief of
police.
   (3)   Bicycle. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person
may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is over 20 inches in
diameter.
   (4)   Block. A portion of any street located between any two (2)
intersections of any two (2) streets or public alleyways next adjacent to each
other.
   (5)   Business district. The territory continguous to and including a
highway, when within any 600 feet along such highway there are buildings in use
for business or industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels,
banks, or office buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings which
occupy at least 300 feet of frontage on one side or300 feet collectively on
both sides of the highway.
   (6)   Commercial vehicle. Every vehicle designed, maintained, or used
primarily for the transportation of property.
   (7)   Controlled-access highway. Every highway, street, or roadway in
respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other
persons have no legal right of access to or from the same, except at such
points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority
having jurisdiction over such highway, street, or roadway.
   (8)   Crosswalk. That portion of any street or roadway ordinarily included
within the prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at
intersections. Any portion of a roadway or street distinctly indicated for
pedestrian crossing py lines or other markings on the surface of such street or
roadway.
   (9)   Curb loading zone. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.
   (10)   Driver. Every person who shall drive or who shall be in actual
physical control of the operation of any vehicle.
   (11)   Freight curb loading zone. A space adjacent to a curb for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or
passengers.
   (12)   Intersection. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection
of the lateral lines of the roadways of the two (2) highways which join one
another at or approximately at right angles, or the area within which vehicles
traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in
conflict. Where a highway includes two (2) roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such
intersecting highway also includes two (2) roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of two (2) roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a
separate intersection.
   (13)   Laned roadway. A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
   (14)   Motorcycle. Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with
the ground, but excluding a tractor.
   (15)   Motor vehicle. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every
vehicle designed to run upon the streets which is pulled by a self-propelled
vehicle.
   (16)   Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they
shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in
this town.
   (17)   Official traffic-control device. Any sign, signal, marking or device,
not inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected by authority of the
governing body by a designated official · having jurisdiction through authority
given by the governing body, for the purpose of regu­ lating, warning,
prohibiting or guiding traffic upon the public streets and thorougfl.fares of
the town.
   (18)   Official traffic signals. Any device, whether manually, electrically
or mechanically operated, whereby traffic is alternately directed to stop and
to proceed, or to tum, or to proceed with caution.
   (19)   Park. The standing of any vehicle, whether occupied or unoccupied,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading passengers or cargo.
   (20)   Passenger curb loading zone. A place adjacent to a curb reserved for
the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
   (21)   Pedestrian. Any person afoot, partnership, association, or
corporation.
   (23)   Police officer. Every peace officer of the town, including every
employee of the town authorized and empowered to regulate traffic and to make
arrests for any violations of the provisions of this chapter.
   (24)   Private road or driveway. Every way or place in private ownership and
used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
   (25)   Public conveyance. Any vehicle other than a taxicab or railroad train
for transporting persons for a fare.
   (26)   Residence district. The territory continguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business district when the property on such highway
for a distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or
resi­ dences and buildings in use for business.
   (27)   Right-of-way. The privilege of the immediate use of the street or
roadway.
   (28)   Roadway. That portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the
event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term "roadway"
as used herein shall refer to any such roadways separately but not to all such
roadways, collectively.
   (29)   Safety zone. The area or space officiafiy set apart within any
roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which space shall be so
protected or marked or indicated by visible and adequate markers or signs as
shall be visible at all times while so set apart as a safety zone for
pedestrians.
   (30)   Sidewalk. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the
use of pedestrians.
   (31)   Standing. Any stopping of any vehicle, whether or not the vehicle is
occupied during such period of stopping.
   (32)   Stop. When required means the complete cessation of movement of any
vehicle.
   (33)   Stop or stopping. When prohibited, means any stopping of any vehicle,
except when such stopping means that it shall be necessary to stop such vehicle
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with direction of any
peace officer of the town or by reason of any traffic-control sign or signal or
by reason of any emergency.
   (34)   Street and highway. The entire width between property lines of every
way or place of whatever nature, when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public as a matter of right for the purposes of vehicular traffic.
   (35)   Through highway. Every street or highway or portion thereof at the
entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is
required by law to stop before entering or crossing the same and when stop
signs are erected as provided in this chapter.
   (36)   Traffic. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles of all
kinds, conveyances, tractors, bicycles, motorcycles and the like, either singly
or together, while using any street or alleyway for travel, including the
operation of, the loading or unloading of or the parking of any vehicle upon
any of the public streets of the town.
   (37)   Traffic bureau. The traffic division of the police department of this
town or in the event a traffic division is not established, then said term
whenever used herein shall be deemed to refer to the police department of this
town.
   (38)   Truck. A free-wheeled vehicle having dual tires on one or more axles,
or having more than two (2) axles, designed for the transportation of cargo
rather than passengers. Includes tractor-trucks, trailers and semitrailers when
used in combination. Excludes those two-axle, four-tired vehicles that may be
classifed as a truck for registration purposes, but which have operating
characteristics similar to those of a passenger car.
   (39)   Vehicle. Every device used in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon any street within the corporate
limits, and for the purposes of this chapter any bicycle shall be deemed a
vehicle.
Section 7-1002 through section 7-1010 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Traffic Administration
Section 7-1011 through section 7-1020 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Enforcement and Obedience to Traffic Regulations
Section 7-1021   Application of chapter to person riding, propelling, etc.,
pushcarts, tractors, trailers, carts, animals, etc.
   Every person operating, riding, propelling or driving any pushcart, tractor,
trailer, bicycle, buggy, cart or other type of machine or conveyance or any
person riding or driving or leading an animal upon any of the public streets of
the town shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter, except those
provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application.
Section 7-1022   Public employees to obey traffic regulations.
   The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon
streets shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the
service of the United States government, this state or any other state, or any
county or city. It shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any such
provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by
state statute.
Section 7-1023   Authority of police and fire department officials.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such
officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic
laws and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic.
   (b)   Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by
the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand,
or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, in the event of a
fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians,
officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
   (c)   Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.
Section 7-1024   Obedience to police and fire department officials.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a police officer or fire department official.
Section 7-1025   Use of roller skates, roller blades, skateboards, scooters,
and other similar devices restricted.
   (a)   No person ride or use roller skates, roller blades, skateboards,
scooters, or similar devices upon any public street, public vehicular area as
that term is defined by G.S. 20-4.01(32), or public sidewalk located in the
central business district, general business district, or office-institutional
district. This section shall not apply to bicycles, which are governed by
Sections
7-1121 through 7-1140 of this chapter.
   (b)   No person shall ride or use roller skates, roller blades, skateboards,
scooters, or similar devices upon any public sidewalk in a reckless manner or
without exercising due care for the safety of other persons using the sidewalk.
Any person riding or using roller skates, roller blades, skateboards, scooters,
or similar devices on a sidewalk shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Chief of Police is hereby
authorized and empowered specifically to designate from time to time certain
public streets or portions thereof upon which persons may be permitted to ride
or use roller skates, roller blades, skateboards, scooters, or similar devices
under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Chief of Police to
insure the public safety.
   (d)   In the event of a violation of any of the provisions of this section
by a minor, a police officer may issue a courtesy notice in writing to the
parent or guardian of such minor setting out the date and nature of the
offense. Thereafter, each violation of a provision of this section by the minor
shall subject the parent or guardian of the minor to whom the courtesy notice
was issued to a civil penalty of $50.
   (e)   A violation of any of the provisions of this section (with the
exception of paragraph (d)) shall be punishable as provided in Section
1-1005. A violation of any of the provisions of this section (with the
exception of paragraph(d)) shall also subject the offender to a civil penalty
of $50 for each violation. The town may seek to enforce the provisions of this
section (with the exception of paragraph (d)) by using either one or a
combination of
the foregoing. Paragraph (d) may be enforced only by civil penalty as provided
in that paragraph.
   (f)   If any offender fails to pay a civil penalty provided in this section
with twenty (20) days after being cited for a violation and notified of the
penalty, the offender shall be subject to an additional civil penalty of $25.
If any offender fails to pay a civil penalty provided in this section twenty
(20) days after being cited for a violation and notified of the penalty, the
town may seek to collect it and the additional $25 penalty in a civil action in
the nature of debt. (Ord. of 4/1/02)
Cross Reference: For provisions on play streets, see section
7-1039 of this chapter..
Section 7-1026   Authorized emergency vehicles.
   (a)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual suspected violator of the
law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may
exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the
conditions herein stated.
   (b)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
   (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter;
   (2)   Proceed past a red stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing
down as may be necessary for safe operation;
   (3)   Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not endanger
life or property;
   (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions.
   (c)   The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall
apply only when the driver of said vehicle while in motion sounds audible
signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and
when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a light
visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the
front of such vehicle, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as
a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a light visible from in
front of the vehicle.
   (d)   The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of
this reckless disregard for the safety of others.
Section 7-1027 through section 7-1030 reserved.
ARTICLE D
Traffic-Control Devices
Section 7-1031   Obedience to signs, etc., generally.
   Any person failing or refusing to comply with the directions indicated on
any sign, marker or device for the control or direction of traffic erected or
placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter when so placed or
erected shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. This section shall not be construed
to apply when the driver of a vehicle is otherwise directed by a police officer
or when an exception is granted to the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle under section
7-1026.
Section 7-1032   Signs as prerequisite to enforcement.
   No provisions of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced
against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation,
an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to an
ordinarily observant person. Whenever any particular section in this chapter
does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective without
signs being placed to give notice thereof.
Section 7-1033   Specifications for traffic; control devices.
   All traffic-control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to state
regulations. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose
shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location. All traffic-
control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state
law or this article shall be official traffic-control devices.
Section 7-1034   Traffic-control signal legend.
   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-con­ trol signals (
Appendix I, section 135) exhibiting the words "Go," "Caution," or "Stop," or
exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time, or with arrows,
the following colors only shall be used and said terms and light shall indicate
and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
   (1)   Green alone or "Go."
   a.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or
turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But
vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the
right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.
   b.   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any
marked or unmarked crosswalk.
   (2)   Yellow alone or "Caution" when shown following the green or "Go"
signal.
   a.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red or
"Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and such vehicular
traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or "Stop"
signal is exhibited.
   b.   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the
green or "Go" is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk"
signal.
   (3)   Red alone or "Stop."
   a.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before
entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or "Go" is
shown alone. Provided, however, that if a sign is not erected prohibiting turns
on red lights, the vehicles may turn right on red lights after coming to a
complete stop. Streets on which right turns on red are allowed are set out in
Appendix I, section 131 hereof.
   b.   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the
green or "Go" is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk"
signal.
   (4)   Red with green arrow.
   a.   Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but shall yield
the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other
traffic lawfully using the intersection.
   b.   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the
green or "Go" is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk"
signal.
   (5)   In the event an official traffic-control sig­ nal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
Section 7-1035   Pedestrian control signals.
Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or
"Don't Walk" are in place such signals shall indicate as follows:
   (1)   "Walk." Pedestrians facing such signals may proceed across the highway
in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the
drivers of all vehicles.
   (2)   "Don't Walk." No pedestrian shall start to cross the highway in the
direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his
crossing on the "Walk" signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island
while the "Don't Walk" signal is showing.
Section 7-1036   Flashing signals.
   Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require
obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
   (1)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall come to a complete stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when
marked, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after
making a stop at a stop sign. In no event shall such vehicle be driven into
such crosswalk unless and until such entry can be made with safety to other
persons and property at such place.
   (2)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). (
Appendix I, section 137). When a yellow lens is illumi­ nated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers or operators of vehicles may proceed through such
intersection past such signal only with caution.
Section 7-1037   Display of unauthorized signs, signals, or markings.
   (a)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be
or is imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device, sign or
signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides
from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic­control
device, sign or signal.
   (b)   No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority
permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
   (c)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private
property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information
and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
   (d)   Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is
hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice.
Section 7-1038   Interference with official traffic-control devices, signs or
signals.
   No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic-control device, sign
or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any other part
thereof.
Section 7-1039   Authority to establish play streets.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof
as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or
portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences
are within such closed area, and then any said driver shall exe cise the
greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
Section 7-1040   Traffic lanes.
   Where traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator
of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of
any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to
making a lawful turning movement.
Section 7-1041   Zone of quiet.
   Whenever authorized signs are placed indicating a zone of quiet, the person
operating a motor vehicle within such zone shall not sound the hom or any other
warning device, except in an emergency.
Section 7-1042   School zones.
   Whenever authorized signs are placed designating any street, or part
thereof, as a school zone, drivers of motor vehicles using said street, shall
exercise the greatest care for the protection of children.
Section 7-1043   Yield signs.
   Whenever yield right-of-way signs are used they shall require vehicular
traffic to yield the right-of-way to other- interseding traffic from ariy other
road or street. Yield right-of-way signs shall be located at the streets
designated in
Appendix I, section 132, hereby made a part hereof.
Section 7-1044 through section 7-1050 reserved.
ARTICLE E
Speed Regulations
Section 7-1051   General.
   Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to
operate a vehicle in excess of 35 miles per hour inside the municipal corporate
limits.
Section 7-1052   Exceptions.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of the speeds
listed below upon the streets or portions of streets of the state highway
system listed in each designated Appendix hereby made a part hereof:
   (1)   Twenty miles per hour (
Appendix I, section 115)
   (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour (
Appendix I, section 116)
   (3)   Thirty miles per hour (
Appendix I, section 117)
   (4)   Forty miles per hour (
Appendix I, section 118)
   (5)   Forty-five miles per hour (
Appendix I, section 119)
   (6)   Fifty miles per hour (
Appendix I, section 120)
   (7)   Fifty-five miles per hour (
Appendix I, section 121)
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of the speeds
listed below upon the streets or portions of streets, nor a part of the State
Highway System, listed in each designated Appendix, hereby made part hereof:
   (8)   Twenty miles per hour (
Appendix I, section 122)
   (9)   Twenty-five miles per hour (
Appendix I, section 123)
   (10)   Thirty miles per hour (
Appendix I, section 124)
   (11)   Forty miles per hour (
Appendix I, section 125)
   (12)   Forty-five miles per hour (
Appendix I, section 126)
   (13)   Fifty miles per hour (
Appendix I, section 127)
   (14)   Fifty-five miles per hour (
Appendix I, section 128)
   (c)   In those areas marked as school zones, it shall be unlawful to operate
a vehicle in excess of the speeds indicated as provided in
Appendix I, section 139, hereby made a part hereof.
Section 7-1053   Driving at reduced speeds.
   (a)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such slow speed as to impede
or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. Police
officers are hereby authorized to enforce this provision by directions to
drivers, and in the event of willful disobedience of this provision and refusal
to comply with the direction of an officer in accordance herewith, the
continued slow operation by a driver shall be a misdemeanor.
   (b)   Every person convicted of olating any of the provisions of the speeds
set forth in this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Code 1970, Sec.
11-2(d)
Section 7-1054 through section 7-1060 reserved.
ARTICLE F
Turning Movements
Section 7-1061   Required position and method of turning at intersections.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to tum at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
   (1)   Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right tum shall
be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (2)   Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection,
an approach for a left tum shall be made in that portion of the right half of
the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of such
center line where it enters the intersection and after entering the
intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the
right of the center line of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the
left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the
center of the intersection.
   (3)   Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where
traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the
driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall
approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to
traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered.
Section 7-1062   Turning markers.
   When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an
intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat,
no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications.
Section 7-1063   Authority to place restricted turn signs.
   The board shall determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles
shall not make a right, left, or U-turn and shall place proper signs at such
intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours
of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be
plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are
permitted. Restrictions on turning movements shall be as specified in
Appendix I, sections 111 through
114, hereby incorporated herein.
Section 7-1064 Obedience to no-turn signs.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indi­ cating that no right or left or
U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any
such sign.
Section 7-1065   Limitations on turning around.
   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in
the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not
upon any other street so turn a vehicle un­ less such movement can be made in
safety and without interfering with other traffic.
Section 7-1066 through section 7-1070 reserved.
ARTICLE G
One-way Streets and Alleys
Section 7-1071   Authority to sign one-way streets and alleys.
   Whenever any ordinance designates any one­way street or alley there shall be
signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless
such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic
movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the
opposite direction is prohibited.
Section 7-1072   One-way streets and alleys.
   Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described in
Appendix I, section 110, hereby made a part hereof, vehicular traffic shall
move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of
traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the
opposite direction is prohibited.
Section 7-1073 through section 7-1080 reserved.
ARTICLE H
Special Stops Required
Section 7-1081   Through streets designated.
   Those streets and parts of streets described in
Appendix I, section 108, hereby made a part hereof, are declared to be through
streets for the purpose of this article.
Section 7-1082   Authority to erect stop signs.
   Whenever any ordinance designates and describes a through street, there
shall be a: stop sign on each and every street intersecting such through street
or intersecting portion thereof described and designated as such by any ordi­
nance unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by
traffic-control signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of two (2)
such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy
traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches
of either of said streets.
Section 7-1083   Intersections where stop required.
   The board may determine and designate intersections where particular hazard
exists upon other than through streets and may determine whether vehicles shall
stop at one or more entrances to any such stop intersection, and shall erect a
stop sign at every such place where a stop is required. Such places are
specified in
Appendix I, section 109, hereby made a part hereof.
Section 7-1084   Signs to bear the word "Stop."
   Every sign erected pursuant to this article shall bear the word "Stop" in
letters not less than eight (8) inches in height and such signs shall at
nighttime be rendered luminous by steady or flashing internal illumination, or
by a fixed floodlight projected on the face of the sign, or by efficient
reflecting elements on the face of the sign. Every stop sign shall be located
as near as practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection or, if none, to the nearest line of the roadway.
Section 7-1085   Vehicles to stop at stop signs.
   When stop signs are erected as herein authorized at or near the entrance to
any intersection, every driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or in the event there is no
crosswalk shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection except when directed to proceed by a police. officer or traffic-
control signal.
Section 7-1086   Emerging from alley, driveway, or building.
   The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging
from an alley, driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior
to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway or driveway, yielding the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be
necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
Section 7-1087   Stop when traffic obstructed.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.
Section 7-1088 through section 7-1090 reserved.
ARTICLE I
Miscellaneous Driving Rules
Section 7-1091   Hitchhiking.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand in the streets and solicit
rides from the drivers of any passing vehicles. (Code 1970, Sec. 11-3)
Section 7-1092   Boarding or alighting from vehicle in motion.
   No person shall board, or alight from, any vehicle while the vehicle is in
motion. (Code 1970, Sec. 11A)
Section 7-1093   Riding on vehicle or portion thereof not designed, etc., for
passengers.
   No person shall ride on any vehicle, or any portion of a vehicle, not
designed or intended for use of passengers; provided, however, that this
provision shall not be construed to apply to any employee engaged in the
necessary discharge of a duty or to a person riding within a truck body in
space intended for merchandise. (Code 1970, Sec. 11-5)
Section 7-1094   Unauthorized entering, etc., of vehicles.
   No person shall enter, jump on or ride any vehicle without the consent of
the owner or driver of such vehicle. (Code 1970, Sec. l 16)
Section 7-1095   Riding inside vehicles; hanging on vehicles.
   No person when riding in a vehicle shall allow any part of his body to
protrude beyond the limits of the vehicle in which he is riding, except to give
such signals as are by law required. No person shall hang onto any vehicle
whatsoever. (Code 1970, Sec. 11-7)
Section 7-1096   Limitation on number of persons in front seat.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver, or the person in charge, of any motor
vehicle to permit more than three (3) persons, including the driver, to ride in
the front, or driver's seat of a
motor vehicle. (Code 1970, Sec. 11-8)
Section 7-1097   Clinging to moving vehicles while riding bicycle, etc.
   Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates
or any toy vehicle shall not attach the same, or himself, to any moving vehicle
upon any roadway. (Code 1970, Sec. 11-9)
Section 7-1098   When passing on the right is permitted.
   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
   (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is in a lane designated for left turns;
   (2)   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient
width which has been marked for two (2) or more lanes of moving vehicles in
each direction and which are not occupied by parked vehicles;
   (3)   Upon a one-way street, or upon a street or highway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement when such street or highway is free
from obstructions and is of sufficient width and is marked for two (2) or more
lanes of moving vehicles which are not occupied by parked vehicles;
   (4)   When driving in a lane designating a right turn ton a red traffic
signal light. (Code 1970, Sec. 11-15)
Section 7-1099   Driver to give way to overtaking vehicle.
   The driver of a vehicle about to be overtaken and passed by another vehicle
approaching from the rear shall, unless the overtaking and passing is being
made upon the right as permitted in section
7-1098, give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on suitable
and audible signal being given by the driver of the overtaking vehicle. In any
event the driver of the overtaken vehicle shall not increase the speed of his
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. (Code 1970, Sec. 11-
16)
Section 7-1100   Following too closely.
   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, with regard for the safety of others and due
regard to the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and condition of the
street or highway. (Code 1970, Sec. 11-17)
Section 7-1101   Reckless driving, etc.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon the
streets of the town in a reckless manner or at a rate of speed greater than is
reasonable and proper, having regard to the width, traffic and use of the
street; provided, that such rate of speed shall not exceed the maximum speed
limits established by sections
7-1051 and
7-1052.
Section 7-1102   Driving through funeral processions.
   No driver of a vehicle shall drive through a funeral procession; provided,
however, that this shall not be construed to apply to fire department vehicles,
police patrols and ambulances, when responding to calls. (Code 1970, Sec. 11-
25)
Section 7-1103   Limitations on backing.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same into any intersection, or
over a crosswalk, and shall not in any event, or at any place, back a vehicle
unless such movement can be made in safety, and he shall have given ample
warning to those who may be behind, by hand and horn or other signal. (Code
1970, Sec. 11-26)
Section 7-1104   Emerging from alley or private driveway.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into a
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway and, upon entering the roadway, he
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such roadway. (Code
1970, Sec. 11-27)
Section 7-1105   Driving within sidewalk area.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area, except at
a permanent or temporary driveway. (Code 1970, Sec. 11-28)
Section 7-1106   Unnecessary vehicular noise, etc., - "Scratching off."
   It shall be unlawful for any person to start, stop, turn or otherwise
operate a motor vehicle so as to create any unnecessary noise with the wheels,
tires or engine thereof, or so as to leave tire marks upon the pavement of any
street or other public place. (Code 1970, Sec. 11-29)
Section 7-1107   Same; prevention of noise, smoke, etc.; muffler cutouts
regulated.
   (a)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on a street or highway unless
such motor vehicle is equipped with a muffler in good working order and in
constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, annoying smoke and
smoke screens.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to use a "muffler cutout" on any motor vehicle
upon a street or highway. (Code 1970, Sec. 11-30)
Section 7-1108   Operation of motorcycles.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for persons operating motorcycles upon the public
streets or highways of the town to travel thereon more than two (2) abreast.
   (b)   Any persons operating motorcycles upon the public streets or highways
shall operate the same as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable,
exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the
same direction.
   (c)   Upon conviction of failure to comply with the foregoing provisions of
this section, the punishment therefor shall be a fine not to exceed $50, or
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days for each offense. (Code 1970, Sec. 11-31)
Section 7-1109   Cruising.
   (a)   No person shall drive or permit a motor vehicle under his care,
custody or control to be driven past a traffic-control point more than three
(3) times within a two-hour period between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m.
in an area designated as a "No Cruising Area." The passing of a traffic-control
point a fourth or subsequent time under the aforesaid conditions shall
constitute unnecessary, repetitive driving (also known as "cruising") and a
violation of this section.
   (b)   A "No Cruising Area" is defined as an area which has been designated
by resolution of the town council as an area in which unnecessary, repetitive
driving as defined in this section is prohibited.
   (c)   Signs shall be erected in each area designated by the town council as
an area in which unnecessary, repetitive driving as defined in this section is
prohibited to provide notice that the area has been designated a "No Cruising
Area."
   (d)   A traffic-control point as used in this section means any point or
points within a "No Cruising Area" established by the police department for the
purpose of monitoring unnecessary, repetitive driving.
   (e)   No area shall be designated or posted as a "No Cruising Area" except
upon passage of a resolution by the town council specifically designating the
area as a "No Cruising Area." (For streets declared to be "No Cruising Areas"
by resolution of the town council, see
Appendix I, section 141.)
   (f)   This section shall not apply to emergency vehicles, vehicles used in
public transportation, municipal vehicles and other vehicles being driven for
business purposes.
   (g)   This section may be enforced as follows:
   (1)   A civil penalty of $25 may be levied against any person who violates
this section and who has been issued a citation. The citation shall direct the
violator to pay the penalty within 10 days from the date of the issuance of the
citation. If the civil penalty is not paid within 10 days from the date of
issuance of the citation, an additional $25 delinquency charge shall be added
to the penalty. The penalty and delinquency charge may be recovered by the town
in a civil action.
   (2)   Upon any subsequent violation of this section by a person within a
seven (7) day period, the violator may be charged as provided in G.S. 14-4.
(Ord. of 6/6/94)
Section 7-1110   reserved.
ARTICLE J
Pedestrians' Rights and Duties
Section 7-1111   Pedestrians subject to traffic­control signals.
   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as heretofore
declared in section
7-1034 and
7-1035 of this chapter, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted
those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this article.
Section 7-1112   Pedestrians' right-of-way in crosswalk.
   (a)   When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if
need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is
traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave
a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle,
which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. A pedestrian's
right-of-way in a crosswalk is modified under the condition and as stated in
section
7-1112(b).
   (b)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
Section 7-1113   Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
Section 7-1114   Crossing at right angles.
   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at
right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except
in a crosswalk.
Section 7-1115 When pedestrian shall yield.
   (a)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (b)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
Section 7-1116   Pedestrians walking along roadways.
   (a)   Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (b)   Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along and upon
a highway shall when practicable walk only on the left side of the roadway or
its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction.
Section 7-1117   Pedestrians soliciting rides or business.
   (a)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride, employment, or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
   (b)   No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for
the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked
or about to be parked on a street or highway.
Section 7-1118 Drivers to exercise due care.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article every driver of a
vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any
roadway; shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary; and shall
exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person upon a roadway.
Section 7-1119 through section 7-1120 reserved.
ARTICLE K
Regulations for Bicycles
Section 7-1121   Effect of regulations.
   (a)   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this article.
   (b)   These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a
bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein.
Section 7-1122   Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable to
vehicles or by this chapter applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to
special regulations in this article and except as to those provisions of laws
and ordinances which by their nature can have no application.
Section 7-1123   Obedience to traffic-control devices.
   (a)   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic-control signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to
vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (b)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left
or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the
direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle
to make any such tum, in which event such person shall then obey the
regulations applicable to pedestrians. ·
Section 7-1124   Riding on bicycles.
   (a)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (b)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
Section 7-1125   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths.
   (a)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (b)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
(2) abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive
use of bicycles.
   (c)   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.
Section 7-1126   Speed.
   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
Section 7-1127   Emerging from alley or driveway.
   The operator of a bicycle, emerging from an alley, driveway or building,
shall upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said
sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-
of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
Section 7-1128   Carrying articles.
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article which
prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handle bars.
Section 7-1129   Parking.
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to s,upport the bicycle or
against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
Section 7-1130   Riding on sidewalks.
   (a)   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business
district.
   (b)   The chief of police is authorized to erect signs on any roadway
prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person and when such signs
are in place no person shall disobey the same.
   (c)   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal
before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
Section 7-1131   Lamps and other equipment on bicycles.
   (a)   Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp
on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of the type which
shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when
directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp
emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be
used in addition to the red reflector.
   (b)   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100
feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use
upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
   (c)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the brake wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
Section 7-1132 through section 7-1140 reserved.
ARTICLE L
Method of Parking
Section 7-1141   Standing or parking close to curb.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel
with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement
and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or
edge of the roadway except as otherwise provided in this article.
Section 7-1142   Signs or markings indicating angle parking.
   (a)   The council shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be
permitted and shall mark or sign such streets, which are specified in
Appendix I, section 107, hereby made a part hereof.
   (b)   Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where
passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side
of the street.
Section 7-1143   Obedience to angle parking signs or markings.
   Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no
person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or
edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings.
Section 7-1144 Lights on parked vehicles.
   (a)   Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime upon any street
within a business or residence district no lights need be displayed upon such
parked vehicle.
   (b)   Whenever a vehicle is parked upon a street or highway outside of a
business or residence district during the hours between one-half (1/2) hour
after sunset and one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise, such vehicle shall be
equipped with one or more lamps which shall exhibit a white light on the
roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle
and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear.
   (c)   Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or
dimmed.
Section 7-1145   Vehicles backed up to curb.
   In no case shall a vehicle remain backed up to the curb, except when
actually loading or unloading.
Section 7-1146   Unattended vehicles.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave the engine or motor of any
motor vehicle running while the same is standing parked upon the streets.
Section 7-1147   Moving cars from parked positions.
   Parked cars shall move out in the direction headed, or If they are parked at
an angle with the curb, they shall back at that angle until they have cleared
the other cars and shall then proceed in the direction they are most nearly
headed in.
Section 7-1148 through section 7-1150 reserved.
ARTICLE M
Stopping, Standing, or Parking Prohibited in Specified Places
Section 7-1151   Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited. No signs required.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the
following places:
   (1)   On a sidewalk;
   (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
   (3)   Within an intersection;
   (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
   (5)   On a crosswalk;
   (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
   (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or
traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
   (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless signs
or markings indicate a different length;
   (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
   (10)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station with­ in 75 feet
of said entrance (when properly signposted);
   (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (12)   On a roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
   (13)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within
a highway tunnel; (14) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
   (b)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
Section 7-1152   Parking not to obstruct traffic.
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the
width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
Section 7-1153   Parking in alleys.
   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under
such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop,
stand, or park a vehicle within an alley, in such position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property.
Section 7-1154   All-night parking prohibited.
   When respective signs are placed in certain streets, no person shall park a
vehicle between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock
(6:00) a.m. upon any of the streets described in
Appendix I, section 102, hereby made a part hereof, provided that this section
shall not apply to automobiles, or other vehicles, if their owners are at work
in the building, or on the premises, near which said vehicles are parked.
Section 7-1155   Standing or parking for certain purposes prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or park a vehicle upon any street
of the town for the principal purposes of:
   (1)   Displaying for sale;
   (2)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs made
necessary by a bona fide emergency;
   (3)   Storing by garages, dealers or other persons when such storing is not
incident to the bona fide use and operation of such automobile or other
vehicle; and
   (4)   Storing of any detached trailer or van when the towing unit has been
disconnected or for the purpose of transferring merchandise or freight from one
vehicle to another.
   (5)   Selling goods, wares or merchandise.
(Code 1970, Sec. 11-36)
   (6)   Advertising. (Code 1970, Sec. 11-37)
Section 7-1156   Parking adjacent to schools.
   When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a
street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, no person shall
park a vehicle in any such designated place.
Section 7-1157   Standing or parking on one-way roadways.
   In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and
traffic restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no per­ son shall
stand or park a vehicle upon the left­ hand side of such one-way roadway unless
signs are erected to permit such standing or parking.
Section 7-1158   No stopping, standing, or parking near hazardous or congested
places.
   When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places no person
shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any such designated place.
Section 7-1159   Stopping, standing, or parking for primary purpose of
advertising, prohibited.
   No person shall stand, or park, on any street any vehicle for the primary
purpose of advertising.
Section 7-1160   Loading and unloading of tractor trailers prohibited on
certain streets.
   (a)   For the purpose of speeding up traffic and avoiding congestion,
tractor trailer truck units shall not be allowed to stop at any point for
unloading or delivery purposes in the street areas specified in
Appendix I, section 140, hereby incorporated herein.
   (b)   Provided that pick up trucks or short trucks must be used in the
delivery of merchan­ dise on the above streets; provided further that any
business house having a back lot ample for standing a tractor trailer unit off
the street may be served by such tractor trailer unit provided it is entirely
parked off the street.
Section 7-1161 through section 7-1170 reserved.
ARTICLE N
Stopping for Loading Or Unloading Only
Section 7-1171   Loading zones, and unloading
   Whenever vehicle loading and unloading zones are designated and described by
this article and when signs are placed, erected or installed, giving notice
thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle
for any purpose or period of time except in accordance with the requirements of
this article.
Cross Reference: See section 7-1160 for prohibition of loading and unloading
tractor trailers on certain streets.
Section 7-1172   Passenger loading zones.
   The streets, or parts thereof, described in
Appendix I, section 129, hereby incorporated herein, are hereby designated as
passenger loading and unloading zones, and no person shall stop, stand or park
a vehicle therein during the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) a.m. to six o'clock
(6:00) p.m. for any purpose other than the expeditious loading or unloading of
passengers, and then only for a period not to exceed 10 minutes.
Section 7-1173   Commercial loading zones.
   The streets, or parts thereof, described in
Appendix I, section 130, hereby incorporated here­ in, are hereby designated as
commercial loading and unloading zones and no person shall stop, stand or park
a vehicle therein during the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) a.m. to six o'clock
(6:00) p.m. for any purpose other than the expeditious unloading and delivery,
or pickup and loading of materials and goods, and then only for a period not to
exceed 30 minutes.
Section 7-1174   Public carrier stops and stands.
   Bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common-carrier
motor vehicles designated by appropriate signs, shall be as specifled in
Appendix I, section 106, hereby made a part hereof.
Section 7-1175   Stopping, standing, and parking of buses and taxicabs
regulated.
   (a)   The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than at a bus stand so designated as pro­ vided
herein.
   (b)   The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at
any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage
other than at a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading zone so designated as
provided herein, except in case of an emergency.
   (c)   The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger
loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus when stopped to
load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in position with the right front
wheel of such vehicle not farther than 18 inches from the curb, and the bus
approximately parallel to the curb, so as not to unduly impede the movement of
other vehicular traffic.
   (d)   The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon
any street at any place other than a taxicab stand so designated as provided
herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from
temporarily stopping m accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at
any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious
load­ ing or unloading of passengers.
Section 7-1176   Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus
stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop as been
officially designated and appropriately stgn.ed, except that the driver of a
passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any bus, or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such
zone.
Section 7-1177 through section 7-1180 reserved.
ARTICLE O
Stopping, Standing, or Parking Restricted or Prohibited on Certain Streets
Section 7-1181   Application of article.
   The provisions of this article prohibiting the standing or parking of a
vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as
indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or official traffic- control device.
Section 7-1182   Regulations not exclusive.
   The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person from the duty of other and more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in
specified places or at specified times.
Section 7-1183   Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.
   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the streets described in
Appendix I, section 101, hereby made a part hereof.
Section 7-1184   Parking time limited on certain streets.
   When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle for longer than the times specified within the district or upon
any of the streets described in
Appendix I, sections 103 through
105 and
138 through
140, hereby made a part hereof.
(as amended by ord. of 11/7/16)
Section 7-1185   Parking signs required.
   Whenever by this or any other article any parking time limit is imposed or
parking prohibited on designated streets there shall be appropriate signs
giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall be effective unless said
signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense.
Section 7-1186   Vehicles not to stop in streets, exceptions.
   No vehicle shall stop in any street except for the purpose of parking as
prescribed in this chapter, unless such stop is made necessary by the approach
of fire apparatus, by the approach of a funeral or other procession which is
given right-of-way, by the stopping of a public conveyance, by the lowering of
railway gates, by being given countermanding traffic signals, by the passing of
some other vehicle or a pedestrian, or by some emergency; in all cases covered
by these exceptions said vehicles shall stop so as not to obstruct any footway,
pedestrian aisle, safety zone, crossing, or street intersection if it can be
avoided.
Section 7-1187   Parking prohibited between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   That no person shall park a vehicle after the hour of six o'clock (6:00)
p.m., and before the hour of six o'clock (6:00) a.m. on the streets or portion
of streets specified in
Appendix I, section 103, hereby made a part hereof.
Section 7-1188   Parking prohibited between 9:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m.
   No person shall park a vehicle between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) p.m.
and four o'clock (4:00) a.m. on any day along any of the streets or portions of
streets specified in
Appendix I, section 139, hereby made a part hereof.
Section 7-1189 through section 7-1190 reserved.
ARTICLE P
Parking on Private Property
Section 7-1191   Request of owner to regulate or restrict parking.
   Upon a written request of the owner or person in general charge of the
operation and control of any parking areas or driveways of a privately owned
hospital, shopping center, apartment house, condominium complex, commercial
office complex or other privately owned public vehicular area, as defined in
G.S. § 20-4.01(32), the town council may regulate or prohibit during specified
hours the stopping, standing, or parking of motor vehicles. (Ord. of 4/2/90)
Section 7-1192   Application.
   The owner or person in general charge of the operation and control of the
property must submit the request regulation in writing, on application forms
available from the town clerk. (Ord. of 4/2/90)
Section 7-1193   Parking restrictions; penalty.
   (a)   No person shall stop, leave standing, or park a motor vehicle in the
area specified in
Appendix I, section 138, in violation of posted signs, when signs are placed,
erected or installed, giving notice that stopping, standing, or parking is
regulated, or prohibited during certain hours, in that space or area.
   (b)   The locations set forth in
Appendix I, section 138 are designated as "No Parking After Business Hours" and
"Customer Parking Only" areas. All parking is prohibited on property owned or
controlled by said businesses except during the business hours of the business
operating at the location and parking during such business hours is restricted
to parking by the customers of the business.
   (c)   The provisions of this Article shall be enforceable in the same manner
as is used to enforce other parking regulations and ordinances, and penalties
shall be the same as for the corresponding violation on publicly owned or
controlled streets or property. (Ord. of 4/2/90)
Sec. 1194 through section 7-1200 reserved.
ARTICLE Q
Municipal Parking Lots
Sec. 7-1201   Parking prohibited between 9:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m.
   No person shall park a vehicle between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) p.m.
and four o'clock (4:00) a.m. on any day in any of the town parking lots
specified in
Appendix I, section 140, hereby made a part hereof.
ARTICLE R
Parking Meters
   (Reserved)
ARTICLE S
Civil Penalties for Parking Violations
Section 7-1230   Civil penalty procedure.
   (a)   The violation of any ordinance restricting, regulating or prohibiting
parking shall subject the offender to a civil penalty as hereafter enumerated.
Such violation shall not constitute a criminal offense or an infraction.
   (b)   Whenever a member of the police department or other person charged
with the enforcement of the provision of the chapter regulating parking of
vehicles shall find any of such provisions are being, or have been, violated by
the owner or operator of any vehicle, such officer or person shall notify such
owner or operator or such vehicle of such violation by conspicuously attaching
to such vehicle a parking violation notice or citation in such form as the
chief of police may direct.
   (c)   Such parking violation or notice shall, among other things:
   (1)   State upon its face that the amount of such penalty for the specified
violation shall be $25 if such penalty is paid within forty-eight (48) hours
from and after such violation;
   (2)   Notify such offender that a failure to pay the penalty within the
prescribed time shall subject such offender to a civil action in the nature of
a debt for the stated penalty plus an additional penalty in the amount of $25,
together with the costs of the action to be taxed by the court;
   (3)   Further provide that such offender may answer the town parking
citation by mailing the citation and the stated penalty to the Valdese Police
Department or may pay the amount at the Valdese Police Department and that upon
payment the claim by the town will be deemed compromised and settled;
   (4)   State that such penalty must either be paid or such failure to pay
must be cleared with the Valdese Police Department within forty-eight (48)
hours of issuance of the citation;
   (5)   The notice shall further state that if the parking violation citation
is not cleared within forty-eight (48) hours, court action by the filing of a
civil complaint for collection of the penalty may be taken. As used upon the
parking violation citation, the word “cleared” shall mean either: payment,
arrangements for payment to be made; or a prima facie showing that such parking
citation was received as a result of mistake, inadvertence or excusable
neglect.
   (d)   The Valdese Police Department is authorized to accept such payments in
full and final settlement of the claim or claims that the town may have to
enforce such penalty by civil action in the nature of debt. Acceptance of such
penalty shall be deemed a full and final release of any and all such claims
arising out of such contended violation or violations.
   (e)   All penalties paid to the Valdese Police Department or as may be
recovered in a civil action in the nature of debt as herein provided shall be
paid into the general fund of the town as such time and under such regulations
as may be prescribed by the town manager.
   (f)   Proof of ownership of a vehicle parked in violation of this article
shall be prima facie evidence that the owner parked the vehicle.(Ord. of 4/2/
90; as amended by Ord. of 6/6/94; as amended by Ord. of 11/7/16; as amended by
Ord. of 12/5/16)
Section 7-1231   Unauthorized removal of traffic citation from vehicle.
   It shall be unlawful to remove a traffic citation from a vehicle, or to
permit it to be removed, except for the purpose of answering the charge for
which it was issued. Any person who shall violate this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor. Each separate violation of this section shall be considered a
separate offense. (Ord. of 4/2/90)
ARTICLE T
Vehicle Restrictions on Certain Streets
Section 7-1240   Truck tractors or semi-tractors or combinations thereof with a
gross vehicle weight rating greater than five (5) tons.
   (a)   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for
any person to operate a truck tractor or semi-tractor or combination thereof
with a gross vehicle weight rating greater than five (5) tons upon any of the
following streets or parts of streets:
   (1)   Laurel Street -   Between Main Street and the intersection of Laurel
Street and the south margin of Lovelady Road.
   (2)   Eldred Street -   Between Main Street and Laurel Street.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to persons operating school buses,
vehicles driven to or from property along these streets for purposes of loading
or unloading, or vehicles being used to provide services such as fire
protection, garbage pick-up, and street maintenance. (Ord. of 12/8/03; Ord. of
3/1/04)
PART 8
Offenses
Chapter 1.   Disorderly Conduct
Chapter 2.    Animals
Chapter 3.   Abandoned, Nuisance and Junked Motor Vehicles
Chapter 4.    Nuisances Related to Property
Chapter 5.   General Health Regulations
Chapter 6.   Other General Nuisances
Chapter 7.   Fair Housing Code
Chapter 8.   Tree Regulations
Chapter 9.   Parks and Recreational Facilities
Chapter 10.   Malt Beverages and Unfortified Wine
Chapter 11.   Special Events
CHAPTER 1
Disorderly Conduct
Section
8-1001   Disorderly conduct, specifically.
Section
8-1002   Disturbing public meetings or gatherings.
Section
8-1003   Disturbing school decorum.
Section
8-1004   Drunkenness in public.
Section
8-1005   Loitering and disorderly conduct on public property.
Section
8-1006   Obstructing free passage of pedestrians.
Section 8-1001   Disorderly conduct; specifically.
   (a)   Any person who shall do or engage in any of the following shall be
guilty of disorderly conduct:
   (1)   Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward
another, whereby any person is placed in fear of safety of his life, limb or
health.
   (2)   Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward
another, whereby property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed
or damaged.
   (3)   Any person who shall endanger lawful pursuits of another by acts of
violence, angry threats and abusive conduct.
   (4)   Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or
riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of
another.
   (5)   Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for
the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl.
   (6)   Any person who shall be found jostling or roughly crowding or pushing
any person in any public place.
   (7)   Any person who shall collect in bodies or in crowds for unlawful
purposes.
   (8)   Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for
the purpose of or with the intent to engage in gaming.
   (9)   Any person who shall frequent any public place with intent to obtain
money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice or
device.
   (10)   Any person who assembles with another or others for the purpose of
engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device, or trick to obtain any valuable
thing in any place or from any person in the town, or who shall aid or abet
therein.
   (11)   Any person who utters, while in a state of anger, in the presence of
another, any lewd or obscene words or epithets.
   (12)   Any person who frequents any place where gaming or the illegal sale
or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is
practiced, allowed or tolerated.
   (13)   Any person who shall act in a dangerous manner toward others.
   (14)   Any person who shall use “fighting words” directed towards any person
who becomes outraged and thus creates turmoil.
   (15)   Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others
for the purpose of doing bodily harm to another.
   (16)   Any person who shall, by acts of violence, interfere with another’s
pursuit of a lawful occupation.
   (17)   Any person who shall congregate with another or others in or on any
public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and
refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by a peace officer or
other person having authority.
   (b)   Any person convicted of disorderly conduct, as defined in this
section, shall be punished as provided in section
1-1005. (Code 1970, Sec. 12-3)
Section 8-1002   Disturbing public meetings or gatherings.
   It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or wantonly to disturb any
public meeting or gathering. (Code 1970, Sec. 12-4)
Section 8-1003   Disturbing school decorum.
   No person shall engage by conversation, sign or otherwise, the attention of
any pupil to the disturbance of the discipline of any school. (Code 1970, Sec.
12-5)
Section 8-1004   Drunkenness in public.
   If any person shall be found drunk or intoxicated in any public place, he
shall be punished as provided by section
1-1005.
Section 8-1005   Loitering and disorderly conduct on public property.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to congregate with others,
loiter, stand around, lounge, sit upon parked vehicles, or gather, on the town-
owned or operated parking lot, upon any public street or sidewalk or other
public area for the purpose of or which results in the engaging in of loud or
boisterous conduct; abusive, lewd, or obscene language or conduct; interfering
with or impeding the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic; littering;
consuming or using alcoholic beverages; harassing motorists or pedestrians; or
otherwise disturbing the public peace or engaging in disorderly conduct. (Ord.
of 9/14/81)
Section 8-1006   Obstructing free passage of pedestrians.
   (a)   No person, after first being warned by a police officer, or where a
readable “No Loitering” sign or signs are prominently displayed, shall loiter,
stand, sit or lie in or upon any public or quasi-public sidewalk, street, curb,
crosswalk, walkway area, park, mall or that portion of private property used
for public use, so as to hinder or obstruct unreasonably the free passage of
pedestrians thereon; nor shall any person block or obstruct or prevent the free
access to the entrance to any building open to the public.
   (b)   A violation of this section may be enforced by either or both of the
following methods:
   (1)   A civil penalty of $25 may be levied against any person who violates
this section and who has been issued a citation. The citation shall direct the
violator to pay the penalty within 10 days from the date of the issuance of the
citation. If the civil penalty is not paid within 10 days from the date of
issuance of the citation, an additional $25 delinquency charge shall be added
to the penalty. The penalty and delinquency charge may be recovered by the town
in a civil action.
   (2)   The violator may be charged as provided by G.S. 14-4. (Ord. of 6/6/94)
CHAPTER 2
Animals
ARTICLE A
General
Section
8-2001   Title.
Section
8-2002   Authority.
Section
8-2003   Jurisdiction.
Section
8-2004   Purpose and intent.
Section
8-2005   Definitions.
Section
8-2006   Responsibility.
Section
8-2007   Interference.
Section
8-2008   Concealment.
Section
8-2009   Exemptions.
Section
8-2010   reserved.
ARTICLE B
Administration
Section
8-2011   Supervision.
Section
8-2012   Duties.
Section
8-2013   Personnel.
Section
8-2014   Policies.
Section
8-2015 through section 8-2020 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Prohibited Acts and Conditions
Section
8-2021   Cruelty to animals.
Section
8-2022   Nuisances.
Section
8-2023   Animal bites.
Section
8-2024   Beekeeping.
Section
8-2025   Dead animals; burial.
Section
8-2026   Festivals and concerts.
Section
8-2027   Strays and at large.
Section
8-2028   Wild or exotic animals.
Section
8-2029   Animal keeping.
Section
8-2030   Number of dogs and cats allowed.
ARTICLE D
Licenses and Permits
Section
8-2031 through 8-2033 reserved.
Section
8-2034   Rabies.
Section
8-2035 through 8-2040 reserved.
ARTICLE E
Miscellaneous Regulations
Section
8-2041   Dangerous animals.
Section
8-2042   Restraint and confinement.
Section
8-2043   Pens and pastures.
Section
8-2044   Bird sanctuary; protection of bird life.
Section
8-2045   Zoning rules applicable.
Section
8-2046 through 8-2050 reserved.
ARTICLE F
Enforcement
Section
8-2051   Impoundment.
Section
8-2052   Powers.
Section
8-2053   Conflicts.
Section
8-2054   Remedies.
Section
8-2055   Penalties.
ARTICLE A
General
Section 8-2001   Title.
   This chapter shall be known as the Animal Control Ordinance of the Town of
Valdese or simply as the Animal Control Ordinance. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2002   Authority.
   This chapter is adopted under the authority and provisions of the general
ordinance making power set out in G.S. 160A-174 as well as the specific
authority granted in G.S. 160A-182, G.S. 160A-186, G.S. 160A-187 and G.S.
chapter 67. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2003   Jurisdiction.
   These regulations and the requirements of this chapter shall apply and be
enforceable throughout the corporate limits of the Town of Valdese. (Ord. of 6/
4/18)
Section 8-2004   Purpose and intent.
   The purposes of this chapter are to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Valdese and to ensure the humane
treatment of animals by regulating the care and control of animals within the
town.
   It is the town's intent to fairly but effectively and diligently enforce the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2005   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   Animal. Any live creature, wild or domestic, male or female except humans.
Animals include, but are not limited to, dogs, cats, livestock and other
mammals, birds, chickens, reptiles, amphibians and fish.
   Animal control officer. An employee or agent of the town, designated by the
Town Manager or the Director
of Public Works or some other authorized person to administer and enforce the
permitting, inspection and enforcement requirements of this chapter and
applicable state laws.
   Animal shelter. Any facility operated by the town, solely or jointly, or
used by the town under a contractual arrangement, for the temporary care,
confinement and detention of animals or the humane killing or other disposition
of animals when appropriate. The term includes any animal shelter operated by
Burke County or any animal shelter operated by any private or public entity, if
the services of that shelter are used by the town,
   Cat. A domestic feline of either sex.
   Cloven hoofed animal. A cloven hoofed animal, equine or other similar
livestock such as horse, mule, pony, cow, goat or sheep, including miniature or
novelty breeds of such animals. Also called livestock, but it does not include
swine.
   County rabies ordinance. Any ordinance by whatever title adopted by Burke
County for the purpose of controlling rabies.
   Dangerous (Vicious) animal. Any animal that because of its aggressive
nature, breeding, training or characteristic behavior, presents a risk of
serious physical harm or death to human beings or would constitute a danger to
human life, physical well-being or property if not kept under the direct
control of the owner. The term "dangerous animal" is intended to include the
term "dangerous dog" or "potentially dangerous dog" as defined by G.S. 67-4.1
(a)(1), but this definition shall not apply to dogs used by law enforcement
officers in the performance of their duty.
   Dog. A domestic canine of either sex.
   Domestic or domesticated animal. Animals that are customarily kept for the
company, pleasure, or enjoyment within the home or yard such as domestic dogs,
domestic cats, domestic tropical birds, domestic rodents, domestic rabbits, and
domestic fish.
   Exposed to rabies. Any animal or human that is bitten by or exposed to any
animal known or suspected to have been infected with rabies.
   Guard or attack dog. A dog trained to attack on command or to protect
persons or property and who will cease to attack upon command.
   Harboring an animal. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed
or sheltered for seven (7) days or more unless the animal is being boarded for
a fee in a properly licensed kennel.
   Health director. The Director of the Burke County Health Department.
   Impounded or impoundment. Taking an animal into custody by an animal control
officer or any other authorized representative of the Town of Valdese,
including any animal captured in a trap placed by or under the direction of an
animal control officer.
   Inoculation. The vaccination of a dog or cat by a licensed veterinarian or
under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian with rabies vaccine approved
by the United States Bureau of Animal Industry, the North Carolina Department
of Agriculture or the North Carolina State Board of Health.
   Kennel. Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding,
breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling of domestic
animals.
   Livestock. See cloven hoofed animal.
   Muzzle. A device constructed of strong, soft material or of metal, designed
to fasten over the mouth of an animal to prevent the animal from biting any
person or other animal.
   Neutered male. Any male dog or cat that has been rendered sterile by a
surgical procedure.
   Owner. Any person having temporary or permanent custody of an animal,
including an individual who harbors, has a legal or possessory interest in or
actually cares for a particular animal.
   Pasture. An auxiliary fenced area with sufficient grass for grazing.
   Premises. A particular portion of real estate such as a house and lot, a
building or a defined part of a building such as a condominium or an apartment.
   Provocation. Any action designed to goad, enflame, instigate or stimulate an
aggressive response from an animal; except that the action of a child age seven
(7) or under cannot be provocation.
   Running-at-large or at large. An animal that is off the premises of its
owner and is not on a leash or under physical restraint of a person who is
physically capable of restraining the animal.
   Service animal. A dog that has been individually trained to do work or
perform tasks for an individual with a disability. The task(s) performed by the
dog must be directly related to the person's disability.
   Shelter. See animal shelter.
   Spayed. A female dog, cat or animal that has been rendered sterile by
surgical means.
   Stray. Any animal at large without identification of ownership or a readily
ascertainable owner.
   Swine. Any hog, pig, male or female, regardless of age, breed or size
including miniature, novelty or special breeds of any pig or hog.
   Wild or exotic animal. Any animal that would ordinarily be confined to a zoo
or that can normally be found in the wild state including, but not limited to,
monkeys, non-human primates, raccoons, skunks, foxes, lions, leopards,
panthers, tigers, wolves, deer, bear, bobcats, etc. The term "wild animal" does
not include domestic dogs unless crossbred with a wolf, coyote or jackal or
other similar animal or domestic cats, unless crossbred with a wild cat, fish
confined in an aquarium, bird kept indoors in a cage, or an insect. (Ord. of 6/
4/18)
Section 8-2006   Responsibility.
   (a)   Animal owners. Every owner of a dog, cat or other animal shall be
responsible for its acts and the results of its acts.
   (b)   Conditions. Every property owner, tenant or occupant of any premises
shall be fully responsible for the conditions occurring on their property,
including odors, noise or other unsanitary conditions associated with dog lots,
animal pens, pastures or other facilities used to house or confine any animal.
   (c)   Negligence. This chapter is intended to impose a public duty upon the
owner of an animal or animals to prevent those animals from attacking or
causing injury to other people, other animals and other property. Owners have
the duty to promote the health, safety and welfare of other citizens, and a
violation of any duty imposed under this chapter shall be considered as
negligence which may give rise to damages for personal injuries or damage to
personal property in a civil action as permitted by law. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2007   Interference.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or interfere with an animal
control officer or any other person charged with the enforcement of this
chapter in the performance of their official duties. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2008   Concealment.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal any animal for the purpose of
evading the requirements of this chapter, especially the rabies inoculation
require ment. Further, it shall be unlawful for the owner of an animal to
refuse to show proof of a rabies inoculation upon the request of any animal
enforcement officer. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2009   Exemptions.
   (a)   The prohibition in this chapter on the number of animals or the kinds
or species of animals that may be kept or maintained within the town shall not
apply under the following circumstances:
   (1)   Lawfully operated and located pet shops; however, once an animal is
purchased from a pet shop, the keeping or maintaining of the animal shall be
subject to all of the provisions of this chapter unless such animal is
immediately removed from the town;
   (2)   A lawfully operated and located zoological garden (zoo) provided such
zoo is accredited by the appropriate association normally issuing or
establishing the standards for the operation of a zoo;
   (3)   A veterinarian keeping such animals for the purpose of providing
professional medical treatment;
   (4)   A lawfully operated and located scientific research laboratory, a
circus, a wildlife rehabilitator with the proper permits, or an exhibitor
licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture displaying such animals
for educational purpose;
   (5)   A food processing plant provided the animals kept or maintained are
for the purpose of the operation and provided further that the operation is
otherwise lawfully operated;
   (6)   An institution of higher learning that is keeping a limited number of
farm animals (pigs, chickens or goats) as an essential part of an animal
science educational program in accordance with the adopted curriculum of the
State of North Carolina provided such animals are maintained in a fenced pen or
enclosure, and at least one thousand (1,000) feet from the nearest residence
and provided further that such animals are not maintained for commercial or
production purposes.
   (7)   Animals boarded in a kennel; or
   (8)   A service animal under the control of the dog's handler.
   (b)   The exemptions noted above shall apply only when the animals are
maintained in a manner so as to prevent escape and only to the number of
animals and the type or species of animals kept or maintained. Provisions of
this chapter dealing with animal treatment and abuse, nuisances, the kinds and
types of pens, closures and other structures or places where animals are kept,
sanitary conditions and other similar provisions shall continue to apply even
to exempt activities. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2010   Reserved.
ARTICLE B
Administration
Section 8-2011   Supervision.
   This chapter and other ordinances or state laws dealing with dogs, cats and
animals shall be administered under the direction and supervision of the Town
Manager and the Director of Public Works who shall be responsible for the
development and implementation of policies and procedures providing for the
enforcement of this chapter. Specific duties and responsibilities assigned to
the Department of Public Works, or to the Director of Public Works, by this
chapter may be delegated to animal control officers and other personnel. (Ord.
of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2012   Duties.
   In general, the Department of Public Works and the personnel assigned
responsibilities under this chapter shall:
   (a)   Enforce and carry out not only the provisions of this chapter but also
any other ordinance pertaining to animal control matters as well as to all
state laws dealing with animals, specifically including G.S. Chapter 67,
   (b)   Investigate complaints concerning all matters subject to this chapter,
   (c)   Impound dogs or other animals when appropriate,
   (d)   Issue civil citations and initiate other proceedings for the purpose
of securing compliance with this chapter,
   (e)   Assist in preventing the cruelty to animals and protecting animals
from unnecessary neglect or abuse, and
   (f)   Participate in the management and operation of an animal shelter or
other impoundment facility, as directed by the Town Manager or the Town Council
or both. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2013   Personnel.
   The Director of Public Works may appoint animal control officers and assign
such personnel as is necessary to effectively administer this chapter. (Ord. of
6/4/18)
Section 8-2014   Policies.
   The Director of Public Works, with the consent of the Town Manager, may
issue and implement policies necessary or convenient for the orderly
administration of this chapter including requirements concerning uniforms, the
possession and use of weapons, use of vehicles, use of tranquilizer guns, and
the manner of impounding animals. Further, the Director of Public Works, with
the consent of the Town Manager, may also issue and implement policies
concerning the adoption and redemption of animals, the manner and method of
destroying or disposing of animals, methods of investigation, the entry into
premises with or without search warrants and all other matters pertaining to
this chapter. However, all policies and procedures shall be in writing and
shall be consistent with the terms and provisions of this chapter.
   In the event the services of a county animal shelter or an independent
shelter operated by some other private or public entity is used by the town, it
is recognized that the rules and regulations issued by the governing body of
that facility concerning the adoption and redemption of animals, the manner and
method of destroying or disposing of animals and other operational matters may
be controlling and therefore to the extent possible, policies issued by the
Director of Public Works shall be consistent with the policies of that
facility. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Sections 8-2015 through 8-2020 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Prohibited Acts and Conditions
Section 8-2021   Cruelty to animals.
   The abuse of or cruel or inhumane treatment of any animal is prohibited.
Without limiting the type of acts, omissions and neglect that may be considered
as cruel and inhumane treatment, the acts and conditions set forth in this
section shall be unlawful, but other acts or neglect that injures or abuses any
animal shall also be prohibited.
   (a)   State law. Any act, neglect or failure to act that violates any laws
set forth in G.S. 14-360 through G.S. 14-363.3, or any amendments thereto or
any other law enacted by the State of North Carolina or any regulation issued
pursuant to such law that governs cruelty to animals shall be unlawful. It is
intended that all such laws shall be incorporated into and made a part of this
chapter to the same extent as if such laws were specifically included herein,
and any violation of such laws shall likewise be a violation of this chapter.
   (b)   Care. No owner of an animal shall refuse or fail to provide such
animal with sufficient, wholesome and nutritious food, potable water and
veterinarian care when needed to prevent suffering, nor shall such person
unnecessarily expose an animal to hot, stormy, cold or inclement weather and
conditions that are likely to harm the animal.
   (c)   Abandonment. It shall be unlawful for any owner to abandon an animal
within the town.
   (d)   Abuse. No person shall willfully or maliciously strike, beat, abuse or
intentionally run down with a vehicle any animal or otherwise engage in any act
to cause or inflict unnecessary pain, injury, suffering or death to an animal
except that reasonable force may be used to drive away a trespassing animal and
reasonable force (including deadly force) may be used for self- defense from a
vicious, menacing or attacking animal.
   (e)   Poison. No person shall poison any animal or knowingly leave any
poisonous substance of any kind or ground glass or other similar material in
any place with the intent to injure any animal.
   (f)   Exhibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit or to
display pets, animals, birds or fowl for sale or entertainment in any manner
that endangers the safety of the animal or that causes the animal to act in a
manner unnatural for the particular species. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2022   Nuisances.
   (a)   Animal waste. It shall be unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow
the animal to defecate or deposit any excretory matter (waste) in any public
park, public playground, greenway, ball field or on any public street,
sidewalk, public parking area (including islands and landscaped areas) or other
public area unless such owner immediately removes the animal waste (feces or
solid excretory matter) using a plastic bag or other suitable container and
deposits the same in a receptacle suitable for such purpose.
   (b)   Other prohibitions. The keeping or maintain ing of animals on any
property located within the corporate limits of the town in such a manner or
under such circumstances that the animal or its pen or enclosure, or both, is a
nuisance or becomes a menace to the public health and safety is prohibited. In
determining what acts or what conditions may constitute a nuisance, the
standard of "a reasonable man or woman under the same or similar circumstances"
shall be used. Without limiting the acts and conditions that may be or become a
nuisance, the following particular acts, failure to act, neglect or
circumstances shall be construed as being in violation of this section and
therefore prohibited:
   (1)   Any animal that is repeatedly found running at large;
   (2)   Any animal found to be in any section of a public park, ball field or
recreational facility where the presence of animals is prohibited either by
ordinance or by posted rules and regulations (signs) or within any town
sponsored public festival or event when the presence of animals is prohibited
by ordinance or by posted rules or regulations;
   (3)   Any animal in any section of a public park, ball field or public
recreation area unless the animal is controlled by a leash or other physical
restraint by a person who is physically capable of restraining such animal;
   (4)   Any vicious or dangerous animal in any public park, ball field,
recreation area or other public area;
   (5)   Any animal that damages, soils, defiles or defecates on any property
other than that of its owner or other person having its care or custody;
   (6)   Any animal that makes loud or disturbing noises, including, but not
limited to, continued or repeated howling, barking, whining or other utterances
causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance and discomfort to neighbors or to
others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored;
   (7)   Any animal that causes fouling of the air by noxious or offensive
odors causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance or discomfort to neighbors or
others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored;
   (8)   Any animal that is in heat and is not confined so as to prevent
attraction to or contact with other animals;
   (9)   Any animal, whether or not the animal is on the property of the owner,
that without provocation attacks, snaps at, bites or attempts to bite another
person; however, for purposes of applying this section, a child under seven (7)
years of age cannot be guilty of provocation;
   (10)   Any animal that repeatedly chases, snaps at, attacks or barks at
pedestrians, bicyclists or vehicles of any kind on any public street, sidewalk
or other public area;
   (11)   Any animal that bites or attacks other domestic animals;
   (12)   The keeping of any animal in a manner that causes unsanitary
conditions in the pen or enclosure or other surroundings where the animal is
kept or harbored;
   (13)   Any situation that is offensive or dangerous to the public health,
safety and welfare or that interferes with the right of nearby property owners
to the use and enjoyment of their property because the number of animals
maintained at a single residence or place greater than the single residence or
place is capable of maintain ing, or because the facilities at the single
residence or place is inadequate for the number of animals maintained at such
location;
   (14)   Any pen, lot, dog run or enclosure where animals are kept or harbored
that emits foul odors because of animal waste or other similar conditions;
   (15)   Any diseased, injured or suffering animal that is not being properly
treated by a veterinarian or other qualified person for such disease or injury;
   (16)   The keeping of any wild or exotic animal except as specifically
permitted and in strict compliance with the terms and conditions of this
chapter; or
   (17)   Any animal that repeatedly turns over trash cans on either public or
private property. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2023   Animal bites.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner of an animal to allow or permit that
animal to bite another person unless the animal has been subject to provocation
or unless the animal is protecting its premises from a trespasser who has
wrongfully entered the premises (however, for purposes of applying this
section, a child seven (7) years of age or under cannot be guilty of trespass)
or unless the animal is defending its owner from an unlawful attack by the
victim. Likewise, it shall be unlawful for the owner of an animal that has
bitten, attacked or threatened a human or another domestic animal to allow the
animal to remain at large. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2024   Beekeeping.
   It shall be unlawful for any person keeping bees to fail to control the
flight path of the bees on their premises so that, as a result, a flight path
of the bees interferes with the rights of the owners of adjacent property to
the use and enjoyment of their property.
   Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to fail to have on their
premises an adequate supply of water for their bees. The water supply shall be
in the vicinity of the beehives and shall be closer to the beehives than any
water on any adjoining property. The water shall be available year-around.
(Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2025   Dead animals; burial.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or place the carcass of
any dead animal owned by or under the care, custody or control of that person
upon any street, alley or lot or to allow such animal to remain unburied.
Further, no property owner shall permit the carcass of a dead animal to remain
on his or her property without burial for more than twenty-four (24) hours
after the property owner learns of the death of the animal.
   (b)   Dogs, cats and other small animals shall be buried at least eighteen
(18) inches under the surface of the ground and larger animals shall be buried
at least three (3) feet under the surface of the ground. Animals shall not be
buried within public easements or rights-of- way or near power lines and other
underground utilities.
   (c)   The Public Works Department is not responsible for the disposal of any
dead animal. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2026   Festivals and concerts.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner of an animal to allow the animal to enter
into or remain within the boundaries of a town sponsored festival or concert
unless authorized by the Town Manager. The festival or concert boundary shall
include any area that is a part of the festival or concert and shall include
any public street, sidewalk or other publicly owned area within the confines of
such festival or concert, except that this section shall not apply to those
animals that are part of an authorized exhibit or attraction approved by the
promoters of the festival or concert. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2027   Strays and at large.
   (a)   Strays. It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor, feed or keep in
possession by confinement or otherwise any animal that does not belong to that
person except with the consent of the owner or unless such person has within
the next business day notified the Department of Public Works of such stray
animal.
   (b)   At large. It shall be unlawful for an owner of an animal to allow or
permit such animal to run or be at large within the town. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2028   Wild or exotic animals.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, maintain, possess or
have under the person's control any venomous reptile or any wild or exotic
animal as defined in section
8-2005, except that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a
lawfully operated zoo, scientific research laboratory or circus, or to any
veterinarian keeping such animals for the purpose of providing professional
medical treatment, nor shall it apply to wildlife rehabilitators with proper
permits provided that the animals are maintained in quarters constructed to
prevent any escape. Any wild or exotic animal so confined must be kept, housed
and cared for in facilities that meet the regulations issued by the North
Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission, the minimum standards under the Federal
Animal Welfare Act, and all applicable rules issued by the United States
Department of Agriculture.
   (b)   Notwithstanding this section, the following wild or exotic animals may
be kept and maintained subject to the permit requirements stated below:
      Non-human primates weighing less than fifteen (15) pounds at maturity;
      Other mammals weighing less than forty (40) pounds at maturity;
      Birds weighing less than fifteen (15) pounds at maturity; and
      Non-venomous reptiles less than six (6) feet in length.
   (c)   Permits. Every owner of a wild or exotic animal, not otherwise
prohibited by this section, shall be subject to the following requirements:
   (1)   Permits required. No person may keep or possess a wild or exotic
animal in the town without first obtaining all permits required by the federal
or state governments for keeping such animal and obtaining the permits as
required by this subsection.
   (2)   Application. The owner of any wild or exotic animal must first
complete a registration application which shall be supplied by the Town Public
Works Department. The application, once completed, shall contain the following
information:
   a.   Name, address, telephone number and any e-mail address of the
applicant;
   b.   Description of the animal, including species, sex, and expected mature
body weight and length or height;
   c.   Street address of the premises where the animal will be kept;
   d.   Copies of any federal or state permits or licenses required for the
keeping of such animal, and
   e.   Proof of the applicant's ability to respond in damages for any bodily
injury or death of any person, or for damages to property of any person other
than the owner that may result from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of
such animal. Such proof of ability to respond in damages may include a
certificate of insurance, an appropriate surety bond, or other sufficient proof
reasonably satisfactory to the Public Works Director. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2029   Animal keeping.
   (a)   Purpose and Definitions
   (1)   The purpose of this section is to regulate the keeping of a horse,
mule, goat, cattle, fowl and other birds that are not part of a bona fide
farming operation.
   (2)   "Fowl" and "Birds" include the following: Chickens, game hens, geese,
ducks, swans and other birds typically used as food. This definition for the
purpose of animal keeping does not include parrots, parakeets, and other non-
food birds.
   (b)   Prohibitions.
   (1)   Horses, mules, goats, cattle, all other types of livestock, fowl and
other birds shall not be permitted within the town limits, except as provided
in this section.
   (c)   Exceptions
   (1)   Horse.
   a.   The keeping of horses is permitted in the R-12 Residential District
provided the following conditions are met:
   i.   Minimum of three (3) acres of property is available for each horse;
   ii.   The part of the property where the horse is kept shall be completely
enclosed by fence; and
   iii.   Any stable, stall, barn or other structure within the town where a
horse is kept shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from the nearest
street or sidewalk and at least one hundred (100) feet from any nearby dwelling
house or any building used for commercial or other purposes, except that a
dwelling house occupied by the owner of the animal or animals and his or her
family may be located within one hundred (100) feet of any stable, stall, barn
or structure.
   (2)   Chickens.
   a.   The keeping of chickens is permitted in the R-8, R-12, and R-12A
Residential Districts, provided the following conditions are met:
   i.   Maximum number of chickens on the property, 10;
   ii.   No roosters are allowed;
   iii.   Placement of the pen shall be in the rear yard only;
   iv.   No free range (chickens are penned at all times);
   v.   Pens shall be minimum of 100 feet from all adjoining residences;
   vi.   Pens shall be minimum of 50 feet from all property lines; and
   vii.   Comply with all applicable provisions of the Animal Control Ordinance
(ex. cleanliness, odor).
   (3)   Keeping Domestic Pets. In all zones where dwelling units are allowed,
domestic animals are allowed to be kept as household pets as follows: Up to an
aggregate of six domestic animals per dwelling unit is permitted subject to the
restrictions set forth in Section
8-2030 of the Animal Control Ordinance; provided, however, birds (canary,
parakeet, etc.), amphibian/reptile (turtle, lizard, etc.), rodents (rat,
hamster, gerbil, etc.) and tropical fish are excluded from the numerical
limitations. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2030   Number of dogs and cats allowed.
   (a)    The keeping of more than six (6) dogs or cats or any combination
thereof, 16 weeks old or older, is prohibited. The keeping of more than three
(3) but fewer than seven (7) dogs or cats or any combination thereof, 16 weeks
old or older, shall be allowed only upon issuance of a written permit by an
animal control officer. The procedure for obtaining a permit shall be as
follows:
   (1)   The applicant shall first pay a permit fee in the amount of $25.
   (2)   The applicant shall submit an application for a permit that shall
contain the following information and documentation:
   a.   location and size of the lot where the dogs and/or cats will be kept;
   b.   size and nature of the construction of the primary structure or housing
facility where the animals will reside;
   c.   the breeds of the dogs and the breeds of the cats;
   d.   the number of dogs and the number of cats;
   e.   purpose of keeping the dogs and/or cats (i.e., pets, breeding,
training);
   f.   whether the keeping of the dogs and/or cats will be on a temporary (30
days or less) or permanent (excess of 30 days) basis;
   g.   whether the dogs and/or cats will be kept primarily indoors or outside;
   h.   the sex of the dogs and/or cats and whether they are spayed or
neutered;
   i.   the name and address of the owner of the animals, the person in charge
of keeping the animals and the owner of the property where the animals will be
kept.
   (3)   Upon receipt of an application, an animal control officer shall make
an inspection of the subject premises. The animal control officer may solicit
comments from other interested parties, including adjoining property owners.
The animal control officer shall grant a permit only if the animal control
officer makes the following findings:
   a.   Barking, howling or other noise from the dogs or noise from the cats
will neither disrupt the peace and quiet of the neighborhood nor otherwise
interfere with the adjacent property owners' reasonable use and occupancy of
their property and the peaceful enjoyment thereof.
   b.   Any smell, odor or unsanitary condition caused by the dogs or cats will
not unreasonably interfere with the adjacent property owners' use and peaceful
enjoyment of their property.
   c.   There is no reason to believe that the dogs or cats are carriers of any
disease or pose any health problem or exposure to disease for occupants of
adjacent property or to pets maintained on adjacent property.
   d.   The keeping of the dogs and/or cats is not likely to become a nuisance.
   e.   The lots, pens, runs or other structures in which the animals are to be
kept are located in a place that is not unsightly to the neighbors and unlikely
to result in odors or unreasonably loud noises that interfere with the right of
the neighbors to the peaceful use and enjoyment of their property.
   In making the findings required above and in determining whether the keeping
or maintaining of dogs and/or cats will constitute a violation of this chapter
or any other ordinance, the standard of "a reasonable man or woman under the
same or similar circumstances" shall be applied.
   (4)   Each permit shall require the signed authorized consent of the
permittee and any other persons whose consent is required in order to authorize
an animal control officer's inspection of the premises at which the animals are
kept at reasonable times. The permit shall specify the number of dogs or cats
or combination thereof, sixteen (16) weeks old or older, permitted to be kept
on the property. The permit may have additional conditions attached to it to
ensure the continuing compliance with this chapter and the required findings
set out above. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to:
   a.   Requiring dog houses, lots, pens and other similar enclosures for cats
to be set back from the property line for a distance not to exceed fifty (50)
feet to ensure that such enclosures are located in an area least likely to
adversely affect adjacent properties.
   b.   Requiring fences, screening devices or other buffer areas, including
natural vegetative screening (shrubbery and low growing trees), to ensure that
unsightly conditions are not visible from adjacent property or from the nearest
street.
   c.   Requiring that dilapidated and unsightly pens, enclosures and
structures be repaired and maintained and that such structures be built of
materials normally associated with the keeping or maintenance of animals.
   d.   Requiring routine cleaning and appropriate offsite disposal of litter,
excrement and other objectionable material created by the keeping of dogs and
cats.
   Persons issued a permit shall be given a reasonable period of time, not to
exceed ninety (90) days, within which to comply with any special conditions
imposed in the permit, depending on how extensive the repairs and construction
of enclosures will be and the expense of compliance.
   (5)   The permit issued pursuant to this section shall be a one-time permit
which shall remain in full force and effect so long as the applicant and holder
of the permit shall remain in compliance with the requirements of the permit,
this chapter and the Town Code.
   (6)   No permit issued pursuant to this section shall be a defense to any
action brought pursuant to Section
8-2022. The animal control officer may refuse to issue a permit, and after
having issued a permit, may revoke the permit upon finding any of the
following:
   a.   Any material misrepresentation in the application for a permit.
   b.   Any willful violation by the applicant or permittee of this chapter or
of the Animal Welfare Act, G.S. 19A-20 et seq.
   c.   Any violation of the terms and conditions of the permit issued pursuant
to the terms of this chapter.
   d.   Any violation of federal, state or local laws that relate to animals,
zoning, nuisances or the condition of the property.
   (7)   Upon revocation of a permit, the dogs and/or cats in violation of this
section must be removed for the lot within seven (7) days from the date the
permittee is notified of the revocation.
   (8)   Any denial of an application for a permit shall be in writing and
shall specify in detail the reasons for the denial and, if appropriate, how any
deficiencies may be remedied. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Sections 8-2031 through 8-2033 reserved.
ARTICLE D
Licenses and Permits
Section 8-2034.    Rabies.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor, possess or have in their
care, custody or control any dog or cat, or any other animal that is over four
(4) months of age that is required by law to be vaccinated and that has not
been vaccinated against rabies in accordance with the requirements of the
county rabies ordinance. The inoculation tag issued at the time of the
inoculation shall be worn or displayed on the animal at all times or be
immediately available to and promptly displayed by the owner or the person
having the care, custody or control of such animal. Impounded animals or other
animals in the custody or control of the animal shelter or animal enforcement
officers that have not been inoculated or are not wearing the required rabies
tag shall be inoculated as required by law. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Sections 8-2035 through 8-2040 reserved.
ARTICLE E
Miscellaneous Regulations
Section 8-2041   Dangerous animals.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect people, especially
the elderly and the young, from the injury caused by dangerous animals. This
section is intended primarily to apply to dogs that bite or menace people but
under appropriate circumstances can apply to an aggressive cat or any other
animal that exhibits vicious characteristics.
   (b)   Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor, keep
or possess within the town, any animal that has been declared to be dangerous
in accordance with the procedures of this section unless such animal is being
kept in strict compliance with the conditions of release, if any, issued as a
part of the order of the animal control officer declaring the animal to be
dangerous.
   (c)   Construction. This section is intended to establish a procedure for
dealing with particularly dangerous dogs or other animals. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to create a presumption that a dog or other animal
that bites other people is permitted just because it has not been declared to
be a dangerous or a potentially dangerous animal. Instead, this section is
intended to set up special procedures and safeguards for animals that are
especially dangerous.
   (d)   Initiation of proceedings. An animal control officer or any other
adult person may request that an animal be classified as dangerous or as
potentially dangerous as defined in this chapter by submitting a written
complaint on the form issued by the Public Works Director. Upon receipt of the
complaint, the owner shall be notified that a complaint has been filed and that
an investigation into the allegations set forth in the complaint will be
conducted.
   (e)   Summary impoundment. If during the initial investigation the animal
control officer or other person conducting the investigation has credible
evidence to believe that the animal is a dangerous or potentially dangerous
animal and that the animal is not or cannot be adequately confined by the
owner, then the animal control officer may impound such animal pending further
proceedings. It shall be unlawful for any owner to conceal such animal or to
refuse to permit such animal to be impounded pending further proceedings.
   (f)   Initial order. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Director of
Public Works or the person designated to decide such issues shall review the
investigative report and may:
   (1)   Determine that the animal is not dangerous and, if the animal has been
impounded, waive any impoundment fees incurred and release the animal; or
   (2)   Determine that the animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous as
defined herein and enter an order:
   a.   Establishing the terms and conditions under which the animal may be
returned to its owner after all impoundment fees have been paid, or
   b.   Require that the animal be removed from the town, after impoundment
fees have been paid, or
   c.   Require the humane destruction of the animal because of the species or
breed of animal, the number of incidences, the severity of injuries caused,
inappropriate ness of or lack of training of the animal, or the inability to
restrain the animal, the safety of others and the protection of property cannot
be assured.
   (g)   Service. An order, a notice or other document required to be served on
an individual may be served as follows:
   (1)   The document may be served by the animal control officer, the Public
Works Director, a Valdese Police Officer, the Town Manager, of any other person
designated by the Town Manager to serve the document.
   (2)   An individual may be served by doing any of the following:
   a.   delivering a copy of the document to the individual;
   b.   leaving a copy of the document at the individual's dwelling or usual
place of abode with someone of suitable age and discretion who resides there;
   c.   by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested;
   d.   by depositing with a designated delivery service authorized pursuant to
26 USC § 7502(F)(2) a copy of the document, addressed to the individual to be
served, delivering to the addressee, and obtaining a delivery receipt. A
"delivery receipt" includes an electronic or facsimile receipt; or
   e.   by mailing a copy of the document by signature confirmation as provided
by the United States Postal Service, addressed to the individual to be served,
and delivering to the addressee.
   (h)   Hearing. At any time after notification that a complaint has been
filed and that an investigation will be conducted, but not later than five (5)
days after the service of the initial order, an owner may request in writing a
hearing before the Valdese Town Manager. The request for a hearing shall be
filed with the office of the Deputy Town Clerk. The hearing shall then be
scheduled as soon as reasonably possible and notice of the hearing shall be
issued to the person requesting the hearing. The owner shall have the right to
appear and to offer such proof as may be relevant.
   At the hearing, among other things, the following matters may be considered:
   (1)   Investigative report and recommendation from the investigative
officer.
   (2)   Provocation.
   (3)   Severity of attack or injury to a person or domestic animal.
   (4)   Previous aggressive history of the animal.
   (5)   Observable behavior of the animal.
   (6)   Site and circumstances of any incident.
   (7)   Written statements from interested parties.
   (i)   Decision. The Town Manager shall render his or her decision within
five (5) days after the hearing. The decision shall be in writing and may
affirm, vacate or modify any prior orders entered. A copy of the decision shall
be provided to the owner in the same manner provided by paragraph (g) above.
   (j)   Appeal. Within ten (10) days after a copy of the decision is served
upon the owner, the owner may appeal the decision to the Superior Court of
Burke County by filing notice of appeal and petition for review. The appeal
shall be heard "de novo" before a superior court judge.
   An appeal shall not stay the impoundment of any animal pending such appeal
but shall stay any order that an animal be destroyed. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2042   Restraint and confinement.
   (a)   Purpose. Some animals, especially dogs and cats, are dangerous or
become a nuisance or are regularly at large in violation of this chapter
because of the lack of concern by the owner or because the lot, pen or other
enclosure is inadequate. In some instances, the animal simply has a propensity
to escape from confinement. Under those circumstances, it is the purpose of
this section to authorize animal control officers and other individuals charged
with the responsibility of enforcing this chapter to recommend and if necessary
to require that special preventive measures be taken by the owner to securely
restrain or confine such animals. The owner may be required to install special
fencing, provide better housing or take other measures reasonably intended to
prevent such animals from escaping,
   (b)   Compliance required. It shall be unlawful for an owner of an animal to
refuse or otherwise fail to comply with a written order issued in accordance
with the requirements of this section.
   (c)   Investigation. After reasonable inquiry and investigation if it is
determined that any animal is not adequately confined or is likely to escape
from its house, pen, lot, pasture, enclosure or other place of confinement, an
animal control officer may order the owner to comply with specific preventive
measures as further set forth herein.
   Prior to entering an order under this section, the animal control officer
may consider, among other things, the following matters:
   (1)   The propensity of the animal to inflict injury including the animal's
behavior, size and temperament,
   (2)   The likelihood that the conditions pertaining to the particular
animals' confinement is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the citizens
or the peace and tranquility of the immediate surrounding area, especially the
presence of children under age seven (7), and
   (3)   The history of the animal for being aggressive and whether the animal
has been trained for aggressive attacks.
   (d)   Order. If, after considering the factors specified above and any other
relevant information, the animal control officer determines that the
circumstances require special preventive measures, the animal control officer
shall issue an order in writing making the appropriate findings and may require
that one (1) or more of the following preventive measures be implemented by the
owner:
   (1)   Repairs may be required to any fence, pasture, pen or enclosure.
   (2)   The height of any fence may be increased,
   (3)   Installation of anti-climb devices may be required.
   (4)   The fence may be required to be installed into the ground.
   (5)   The installation of a floor or a bottom to the enclosure and/or a top
to the enclosure may be required.
   (6)   Special chains, leashes and/or muzzles may be required.
   (7)   The installation and use of special warning devices may be required.
   (8)   The owner may be required to give immediate notice to the department
of public safety in the event the animal escapes from its enclosure.
   (9)   Use of special markings on the animal tags, an animal collar or a
tattoo may be required to identify the animal for future investigative or
enforcement purposes.
   (10)   The purchase of special liability insurance in an amount not
exceeding one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) at the owner's expense may
be required.
   (e)   Service. An order issued under this section shall be served on the
owner in the manner provided in Section
8-2041(g).
   (f)   Appeal. At any time after service of the order, but not later than
five (5) days after service of the order, the owner may request in writing a
hearing before the Valdese Town Manager. The request for a hearing shall be
filed with the office of the Deputy Town Clerk. The hearing shall then be
scheduled as soon as reasonably possible and notice of the hearing shall be
issued to the person requesting the hearing. The owner shall have the right to
appear, to make any statements, to provide affidavits and offer such other
evidence as may be relevant. An appeal from the decision of the Town Manager
shall be taken to the Superior Court of Burke County by filing notice of appeal
and petition for review within ten (10) days of service of the Town Manager's
order. The appeal shall be heard "de novo" before a superior court judge.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail or refuse to comply with any
order issued under this section. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2043   Pens and pastures.
   Pens, pastures, barns, dog houses, coops and other enclosures for the
confinement or keeping of an animal (collectively "structure") shall be
adequate for the purpose intended, including the humane treatment of the animal
confined. At a minimum, all fences, gates and shelters shall be adequately
maintained and of sufficient height and size to secure the animal and protect
the animal from weather and constructed and maintained in a manner so as to
prevent the escape of the animal.
   Structures for the confinement of an animal shall generally be located in a
manner so that such structures do not become a nuisance to adjacent property
owners because of odor, smell, noise or other similar factors or otherwise
interfere with the right of the occupants of adjacent property to the full
enjoyment of their property. In enforcing the provisions of this section or any
other provision relating to the type of structure or its location, the animal
control officer shall provide the owner with a reasonable period of time not to
exceed three (3) months in which to bring the pen, pasture or other enclosure
into compliance. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2044   Bird sanctuary; protection of bird life.
   (a)   Established. The area included within the corporate limits of the
town, as extended from time to time, and all lands owned or leased by the town
outside the corporate limits are hereby designated as a bird sanctuary.
   (b)   Protected. It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or otherwise kill
any native wild bird within the territory described in paragraph (a) except
when such birds or fowl are found to be congregating in such numbers in a
particular location that they constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or
property and only then if the consent of the department of public safety is
first obtained, or (b) except as otherwise permitted by law. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2045   Zoning rules applicable.
   The keeping of animals within the town shall at all times be in full
compliance with the town zoning ordinance. The breeding and raising of animals
shall be in compliance with the rules and regulations of the zoning district in
which the activity takes place. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Sections 8-2046 through 8-2050 reserved.
ARTICLE F
Enforcement
Section 8-2051   Impoundment.
   (a)   In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, an animal
control officer may seize, impound and humanely confine to an animal shelter or
to a veterinarian hospital any of the following animals:
   (1)   Any dog, cat or other animal that is required to be inoculated and
have a rabies tag that either has not been inoculated or does not display a
rabies tag;
   (2)   Any animal at large;
   (3)   Any animal constituting a public nuisance or considered a danger to
the public;
   (4)   Any animal that is in violation of any quarantine or confinement
order;
   (5)   Any unattended animal that is injured, diseased, obviously ill or
otherwise in need of immediate veterinary care;
   (6)   Any animal that is reasonably believed to have been abused or
neglected;
   (7)   Any animal that is reasonably suspected of having rabies or any other
disease that is communicable;
   (8)   Any animal that is charged with being potentially dangerous or
dangerous where an animal control officer of the Town Manager determines that
there is a threat to public health and safety;
   (9)   Any animal that a court of competent jurisdiction has ordered
impounded or destroyed;
   (10)   Any animal that is reasonably believed to be unattended or abandoned,
as in situations where the owner is deceased, has been arrested or has been
evicted from his residence;
   (11)   Any wild or exotic animal except as may be specifically permitted in
this chapter;
   (12)   Any guard dog, attack dog or dog that has been trained to be
aggressive that has not been registered in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter;
   (13)   Any animal that does not have a permit required by this chapter;
   (14)   The animal of any owner who refuses to comply with a preventive order
issued under the provisions of this chapter; or
   (15)   Any animal that has recently bitten any person.
   (b)   Custody. Any animal impounded hereunder shall be kept and shall remain
in the custody of the animal shelter until:
   (1)   The animal is redeemed in accordance with the provision of this
section;
   (2)   The animal is released pursuant to an order by any appropriate
official or judicial officer;
   (3)   The animal is adopted in accordance with the provisions of this
section; or
   (4)   The animal is humanely destroyed (euthanized) in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
   If not previously notified and if the owner can be reasonably identified,
the owner of an impounded animal shall be notified by any reasonable means that
his or her animal has been seized and that the animal can be claimed or
redeemed in accordance with the terms of this section.
   Animals seized for violations of the provisions of this chapter dealing with
rabies shall be held for observation for ten (10) days. Any other animal seized
pursuant to this chapter shall be held for a minimum of five (5) working days
(days during which the animal control shelter is open for business). In the
event the animal has been impounded pursuant to the terms of an impoundment
order issued under the provisions of this chapter or by order of any court, the
animal shall be retained by the animal shelter for the period set forth in such
order.
   (c)   Redemption. At the end of any required period of impoundment, an owner
may redeem his or her animal upon compliance with the following conditions:
   (1)   The owner shall pay all impoundment fees, boarding fees, veterinarian
fees, inoculation fees and other similar charges.
   (2)   The person redeeming the animal shall provide credible evidence that
he or she is the owner.
   (3)   The person redeeming the animal is, in the opinion of the animal
control officer, qualified to own an animal, is not under eighteen (18) years
of age and does not have a record of abuse and cruelty to animals.
   (4)   The person agrees to abide by the terms and conditions of release set
forth in any order of impoundment.
   (5)   The person complies with the other procedures established by the
animal control officer for the release of animals including an acknowledgment
of ownership, a receipt and proof of identity.
   (d)   Adoption or euthanasia. After the redemption period has expired, all
ownership rights to the impounded animal shall be forfeited. In the discretion
of the Animal Control Officer, such animals may:
   (1)   Continue to be held for a reasonable period of time for adoption in
accordance with the policies and procedures established by the Director of
Public Works including the payment of all required fees;
   (2)   The animal control officer may place the animal with a local humane
society for future adoption; or
   (3)   May cause the animal to be destroyed in a humane manner approved by
the Director of Public Works.
   (e)   Fees. In connection with the impoundment and subsequent release of any
animal, the town may require reimbursement for any inoculation or veterinarian
charges or similar expense incurred and may impose a reasonable boarding fee,
adoption fee, redemption fee or other administrative fee as may be set forth in
the published schedule of fees and charges adopted by the Town Council from
time to time.
   (f)   County shelter. The impoundment, adoption, redemption or euthanasia
procedures of this section are intended to apply to any animal shelter that is
operated by or subject to the control of the town. Those procedures are not
intended to be binding upon any county operated shelter or any other private
shelter operated by any public or private entity. For animals that are
impounded in those shelters, both the owner of the animal and the animals shall
be subject to the rules, regulations and fees concerning impoundment, adoption,
redemption or euthanasia procedures that are issued by the governing body of
that facility. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2052   Powers.
   It is intended that animal control officers and other personnel assigned to
enforce this chapter shall have a broad range of power to carry out the
provisions of this chapter and discretion in the use of an appropriate remedy
for violations. Animal control officers shall have the power to initiate
investigations, not only when complaints are received, but also as a result of
their own knowledge and observation of facts and circumstances.
   Animal control officers may take notice of facts and information in plain
view in automobiles, in the yards surrounding houses and in other areas that
can be readily observed without intrusive investigations, and as a result of
those observations may take appropriate enforcement action including the
impoundment of animals when violations are observed or the issuance of any
other order permitted hereunder.
   With the consent of property owners and individuals apparently in charge of
the premises, animal control officers may investigate the conditions and
circumstances inside of locked fences, outbuildings, houses, apartment units,
condominium units or other buildings and as a result of such investigations may
impound animals or take other appropriate enforcement action.
   In the event circumstances are not plainly observable or in the event access
to enclosed premises is denied, animal control officers may seek the assistance
of police officers and other sworn personnel, may obtain search warrants and
may conduct other lawful searches of such premises. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2053   Conflicts.
   This chapter anticipates that the town will not operate its own animal
control shelter. However, the town reserves the right to use the impoundment
services of a county operated shelter or a shelter operated by some other
public or private entity. In that event, the procedures concerning the
confinement of animals, the adoption or redemption of animals, the humane
destruction of animals and the fees associated with each of those services may
be different and in conflict with this chapter and the policies and procedures
issued pursuant to the authority of this chapter. If the town elects to use the
services of a separate county or private animal shelter, then, and in that
event, the policies, rules and regulations and other conditions issued by that
facility shall be controlling and take precedence over this chapter and any
rules and regulations issued under this chapter. The owner of any animal
impounded or confined to such facility shall likewise be subject to the
policies, rules, regulations and conditions imposed by that shelter and that
facility is hereby granted jurisdiction to hold, adopt, redeem, release or
destroy such animals in the manner prescribed by that facility as if the same
were required under this chapter.
   The Town Council may designate some other board or agency to conduct such
hearings and to review such determinations, the procedural rules and
regulations issued by that designated agency shall be controlling and that
agency is granted the jurisdiction and full authority under this chapter to
discharge all of the powers granted in G.S. Chapter 67 or under this chapter or
under any other state or local law governing animals. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2054   Remedies.
   Consistent with the general law of the State of North Carolina, it is
intended that the town shall have broad powers to enforce this chapter,
including the power to impose criminal fines and penalties as well as civil
penalties for the violation of this chapter. The town may also secure
injunctions or abatement orders, or may pursue any other legal or equitable
remedy. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Section 8-2055   Penalties.
   (a)   Misdemeanor. A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor or
infraction as provided by G.S. 14-4 and is punishable by a maximum fine, term
of imprisonment or infraction penalty, all as imposed and set forth in G.S. 14-
4, which is incorporated herein by reference.
   (b)   Civil citations. In addition to the criminal penalties imposed in
subsection (a) above, a violation of this chapter shall also be a civil offense
and shall subject the offender to a civil penalty. Each day's offense shall be
a separate offense for which a separate civil citation may be issued. Unless
otherwise specifically provided in the schedule of fees and charges adopted
annually by the Town Council, the penalty shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for
the first offense, one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second offense, two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for the third offense and three hundred dollars
($300.00) for the fourth and any subsequent offense. (Ord. of 6/4/18)
CHAPTER 3
Abandoned, Nuisance and Junked Motor Vehicles
Section
8-3001   Administration.
Section
8-3002   Definitions.
Section
8-3003   Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized.
Section
8-3004   Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized.
Section
8-3005   Junked motor vehicle regulated; removal authorized.
Section
8-3006   Declared to be a health or safety hazard.
Section
8-3007   Removal of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles; pre-towing
notice requirements.
Section
8-3008   Exceptions to prior requirement.
Section
8-3009   Removal from private property.
Section
8-3010   Removal of vehicles; post-towing requirements.
Section
8-3011   Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final disposition of
vehicle.
Section
8-3012   Redemption of vehicle during proceedings.
Section
8-3013   Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicle.
Section
8-3014   General penalty.
Section
8-3015   Exceptions.
Section
8-3016   Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle.
Section
8-3017   Protection against criminal or civil liability.
 
ABANDONED, NUISANCE AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES
Section 8-3001   Administration.
   The police department, fire department, and code enforcement officer of the
town shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this
article. The police department shall be responsible for administering the
removal and disposition of vehicles determined to be "abandoned" on the public
streets and highways within the town and on property owned by the town. The
Town Council, with the assistance of the code enforcement officer, town
planner, or fire department, shall be responsible for administering the removal
and disposition of "abandoned," "nuisance" or "junked motor vehicles" located
on private property. The town may, on an annual basis, contract with private
tow truck operators or towing businesses to remove, store, and dispose of
abandoned vehicles, nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles in compliance
with this article and applicable state laws. Nothing in this article shall be
construed to limit the legal authority or powers of the town police department
and fire department in enforcing other laws or in otherwise carrying out their
duties.
(Ord. of 2/5/90; Ord. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-3002   Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, certain words and terms are defined as herein
indicated:
   (a)   Abandoned vehicle. As authorized and defined in G.S. §160A-303, an
abandoned motor vehicle is one that:
   (1)   Is left upon a public street or highway in violation of a law or
ordinance prohibiting parking; or
   (2)   Is left on a public street or highway for longer than seven (7) days;
or
   (3)   Is left on property owned or operated by the town for longer than
twenty-four (24) hours; or
   (4)   Is left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant
or lessee thereof, for longer than two (2) hours.
   (b)   Authorizing official. The supervisory employee of the police
department or the code enforcement officer, respectively, designated to
authorize the removal of vehicles under the provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   Motor vehicle or vehicle. All machines designed or intended to travel
over land or water by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled
vehicle.
   (d)   Junked motor vehicle. As authorized and defined in G.S. §160A-303.2,
the term “junked motor vehicle” means a vehicle that does not display a current
license plate lawfully upon that vehicle and that:
   (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked; or
   (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it originally
was intended to move; or
   (3)   Is more than five (5) years old and appears to be worth less than five
hundred dollars ($500).
   (e)   Nuisance vehicle. A vehicle on public or private property that is
determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard or a public nuisance,
or unlawful, including a vehicle found to be:
   (1)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other insects, rats or
other pests; or
   (2)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over
eight (8) inches in height; or
   (3)   A point of collection of pools or ponds of water; or
   (4)   A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil or other
flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor, visible presence; or
   (5)   One which has areas of confinement which cannot be operated from the
inside, such as trunks, hoods, passenger interior, or other interior sections,
etc.; or
   (6)   So situated or located that there is a danger of it falling or turning
over; or
   (7)   One which is a point of collection of garbage, food waste, animal
waste, or any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind; or
   (8)   One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp
edges of metal or glass; or
   (9)   So offensive to the sight as to damage the community, neighborhood or
area appearance; or
   (10)   Used by children in play activities; or
   (11)   Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and safety hazard
and a public nuisance by the town council. (Ord. of 2/5/90; Ord. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-3003   Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be abandoned as the
term is defined herein.
   (b)   Upon investigation, proper authorizing officials of the town or code
enforcement officer may determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and
order the vehicle removed. (Ord. of 2/5/90; Ord. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-3004   Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a motor vehicle, or the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real
property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to
remain on the property after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle.
   (b)   Upon investigation, the code enforcement officer may determine and
declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a nuisance vehicle as
defined above, and order the vehicle removed. (Ord. of 2/5/90; Ord. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-3005   Junked motor vehicle regulated; removal authorized.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant
of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to leave or
allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the vehicle has been ordered
removed.
   (b)   Subject to the provisions of subsection (c), upon investigation, the
code enforcement officer may order the removal of a junked motor vehicle as
defined in this article after finding in writing that the aesthetic benefits of
removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed on the private property
owner. Such finding shall be based on a balancing of the monetary loss of the
apparent owner against the corresponding gain to the public by promoting or
enhancing community, neighbor hood or area appearance. The following among
other relevant factors may be considered:
   (1)   Protection of property values;
   (2)   Promotion of tourism and other economic development opportunities;
   (3)   Indirect protection of public health and safety;
   (4)   Preservation of the character and integrity of the community; and
   (5)   Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional stability of area
residents.
   (c)   Permitted concealment or enclosure of junked motor vehicle: Any other
junked motor vehicle(s) must be kept in a garage or building structure that
provides a complete enclosure so that the junked motor vehicle(s) cannot be
seen from a public street or abutting property. A garage or building structure
means one which is erected pursuant to the lawful issuance of a zoning permit
and a building permit which has been constructed in accordance with all zoning
and building code regulations. (Ord. of 2/5/90; Ord. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-3006   Declared to be a health or safety hazard.
   Any partially dismantled or wrecked vehicle, vehicle which is incapable of
self-propulsion or being moved in the manner for which it was originally
intended, vehicle left on private property without the consent of the owner,
occupant or lessee thereof, or any junk motor vehicle is declared to be an
attractive nuisance for children, a breeding place for rats and vermin, and a
potential fire hazard. All vehicles abandoned upon privately owned property,
which have been abandoned for as long as 30 days are declared to constitute a
health and safety hazard. (Ord. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-3007   Removal of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles; pre-
towing notice requirements.
   Except as set forth in section
8-3008 below, an abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle which is to be removed
shall be towed only after notice to the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of the vehicle. In the case of a nuisance vehicle or a junked motor
vehicle, if the names and mailing addresses of the registered owner, or person
entitled to the possession of the vehicle, or the owner, lessee, or occupant of
the real property upon which the vehicle is located can be ascertained in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, notice shall be given by first class mail (or
any other method authorized for service by North Carolina Rules of Civil
Procedure). The person who mails the notice(s) shall retain a written record to
show the name(s) and address(es) to whom the notice is mailed, and the date
mailed. If such names and addresses cannot be ascertained or if the vehicle to
be removed is an abandoned motor vehicle, notice shall be given by affixing on
the windshield or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle. The notice shall
state that the vehicle will be removed by the town on a specified date, no
sooner than seven (7) days after the notice is affixed or mailed, unless the
vehicle is moved by the owner or legal possessor prior to that time.
   An order to remove abandoned vehicles on private property, nuisance vehicles
and junked motor vehicles to which notice is required to be given, may be
appealed by the registered owner or person entitled to possession, does not
remove the vehicle, but chooses to appeal, within the time period stated in the
notice by appearing before the BOA. Such appeal shall stay the order of removal
until final determination by the BOA. The appeal shall consider the
determination that the vehicle is abandoned, or in the case of a nuisance
vehicle, or in the case of a junked motor vehicle, that the aesthetic benefits
of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens. In the event no appeal is taken
within the time period stated in the notice to remove, the code enforcement
officer may proceed to remove the vehicle. (Ord. of 2/5/90; Ord. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-3008   Exceptions to prior requirement.
   The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of an abandoned,
nuisance or junked motor vehicle may, as determined by the authorizing official
or code enforcement officer, be omitted in those circumstances where there is a
special need for prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to
otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and welfare. Such findings
shall, in all cases, be entered by the authorizing official in the appropriate
daily records. Circumstances justifying the removal of vehicles without prior
notice include:
   (1)   Vehicles abandoned on the streets within the town. For vehicles left
on the public streets or highways, the Town Council hereby determines that
immediate removal of such vehicles therefrom for safekeeping by or under the
direction of the police department, the department of planning and community
development, or the department of public works, to a storage garage or area may
be warranted when they are:
   a.   Obstructing traffic;
   b.   Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or restricting parking;
   c.   Parked in a no-stopping or standing zone;
   d.   Parked in loading zones;
   e.   Parked in bus zones; or,
   f.   Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions imposed under
code sections.
   (2)   Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles. With respect to abandoned or
nuisance vehicles left on town- owned property, other than the streets and
highways, and on private property, such vehicles may be removed without giving
prior notice; only in those circumstances where the authorizing official or
code enforcement officer finds a special need for prompt action to protect and
maintain the public health, safety and welfare. Therefrom for safekeeping by or
under the direction of the police department, the department of planning and
community development, or the department of public works, to a storage garage
or area. By way of illustration and not of limitation, such circumstances
include vehicles blocking or obstructing ingress or egress to businesses and
residences, vehicles parked in such a location or manner as to pose a traffic
hazard, and vehicles causing damage to public or private property. (Ord. of 2/
5/90; Ord. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-3009   Removal from private property.
   Before any vehicle may be removed by the town from private property as
defined above to be abandoned, junk or nuisance, the owner of the real property
on which any such vehicle is located must be given at least five days' written
notice from the town of the vehicle removal. The owner may request in writing
that the code enforcement officer review the determination that the vehicle to
be removed is in violation of the ordinance. No such vehicle shall be removed
from privately owned premises without the written request of the owner, lessee
or occupant of the premises on which the vehicle is located unless the vehicle
has had the status of an abandoned vehicle on such privately owned premises for
as long as 30 days and has, therefore, become a health and safety hazard in
accordance with the declaration of the Town Council as set out in section
8-3006. When a vehicle is removed from privately owned property at the request
of a person, the person at whose request such vehicle is moved shall indemnify
the town against loss or expense incurred by reason of removal, storage or sale
thereof. (Ord. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-3010   Removal of vehicles; post- towing requirements.
   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which has been ordered
removed may, as directed by the town, be removed to a storage garage or area by
the tow truck operator or towing business contracting to perform such services
for the town. Whenever such a vehicle is removed, the authorizing official
shall immediately notify the last known registered owner of the vehicle, such
notice to include the following:
   (1)   The description of the removed vehicle;
   (2)   The location where the vehicle is stored;
   (3)   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;
   (4)   The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and
   (5)   The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause
hearing on the removal.
   The town shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by telephone;
however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written notice,
including the information set forth in subsections (1) through (5) above, shall
also be mailed to the registered owner's last known address, unless this notice
is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or agent.
   If the vehicle is registered in North Carolina, notice shall be given to the
registered owner within twenty-four (24) hours after vehicle is removed. If the
vehicle is not registered in the state, notice shall be given to the registered
owner within seventy-two (72) hours from the removal of the vehicle.
   Whenever an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle is removed, and such
vehicle has no valid registration or registration plates, the authorizing
official shall make reasonable efforts, including checking the vehicle
identification number, to determine the last known registered owner of the
vehicle and to notify him of the information set forth in subsections (1)
through (5) above.
(Ord. of 2/5/90; Ord. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-3011   Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final
disposition of vehicle.
   After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle or junked motor
vehicle, the owner or any other person entitled to possession is entitled to a
hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause exists for removing
the vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed in writing with the county
magistrate designated in G.S. § 20-219.11(c) to receive such hearing requests,
the magistrate will set the hearing within seventy-two (72) hours of receipt of
the request, and the hearing will be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of G.S. § 20-219.11 as amended.
(Ord. of 2/5/90; Ord. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-3012   Redemption of vehicle during proceedings.
   At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause
hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the
towing fee, including any storage charges, or by posting a bond for double the
amount of such fees and charges to the tow truck operator or towing business
having custody of the removed vehicle. Upon regaining possession of a vehicle,
the owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle shall not allow or
engage in further violations of this article. (Ord. of 2/5/90; Ord. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-3013   Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicle.   
   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which is not claimed by the
owner or other party entitled to possession, will be disposed of by the tow
truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle. Disposition of
such a vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the town and in
accordance with Article 1 of Chapter 44A of the North Carolina General
Statutes, except no probable cause hearing in addition to the hearing provided
for in section
8-3011 is required. (Ord. of 2/5/90; Ord. of 5/6/19)
State Law reference–Disposal of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle, by
tow truck operator or towing business, G.S. Art.1, Ch. 44A.
Section 8-3014   General penalty.
   (a)   Except as set forth in subsection (b), violation of any provision of
this code or any other town ordinance shall be a misdemeanor as provided by
G.S. § 14-4(a).
   (b)   Violation of any provision of this Code shall subject the offender to
a civil penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00), to be recovered by the
town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the
penalty within a period of seventy-two (72) hours after he has been cited for
violation of the ordinance. Citation shall be in writing, signed by the code
enforcement officer and shall be delivered or mailed to the offender either at
the residence or at the place of business or at the place where the violation
occurred. Each day's continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct
offense. Any action to recover such civil penalty may be joined in action for
appropriate equitable or other legal remedy, including injunctions and orders
of abatement and including an action to recover damages owing to the town by
reason of expenses incurred by the town in abating, correcting, limiting and
otherwise dealing with the harmful effects of the offending action. (Ord. of 5/
6/19)
Section 8-3015   Exceptions.
   Nothing in this article shall apply to any vehicle:
   (1)   Regulated under G.S. § 160A-303.2 which is kept or stored at a bona
fide "automobile graveyard" or "junkyard" as defined in G.S. § 136-143, in
accordance with the "Junkyard Control Act," G.S. § 136-141, et seq., or the
removing or disposing of any motor vehicle that is used on a regular basis for
business or personal use; and
   (2)   Regulated under G.S. § 160A-303 which is in an enclosed building or
any vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a lawful
place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the operation of the
enterprise, or to any vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository
maintained in a lawful place and manner by the town. (Ord. of 2/5/90; Ord. of
5/6/19)
Section 8-3016   Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any
storage facility, designated by the town, any vehicle which has been impounded
pursuant to the provisions of this code, unless and until all towing and
impoundment fees which are due, or bond in lieu of such fees, have been paid.
(Ord. of 2/5/90; Ord. of 5/6/19)
   State Law reference–Definition of junkyard, G.S. § 136-143, Junkyard Control
Act, G.S. Junkyard Control Act, G.S. §136-141.
Section 8-3017   Protection against criminal or civil liability.
   No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any
owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned,
nuisance or junked motor vehicle, for disposing of such vehicle as provided in
this chapter. (Ord. of 2/5/90; Ord. of 5/6/19)
CHAPTER 4
Nuisances Related to Property
Section
8-4001   Definitions.
Section
8-4002   Nuisance.
Section
8-4003   Exceptions.
Section
8-4004   Notice.
Section
8-4005   Removal or abatement of nuisances.
Section
8-4006   Chronic violator.
Section
8-4007   Removal or abatement of other conditions.
Section
8-4008   Appeal.
Section
8-4009   Removal by town.
Section
8-4010   Emergency action.
Section
8-4011   Penalties.
Section
8-4012   Right of entry.
Section
8-4013   Cost of abatement declared lien.
Section 8-4001   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates that a
different meaning is intended:
   Agent means the person who manages or has custody of a business building or
the person to whom rent thereon, if any, is paid.
   Apartment or apartment house or tenement house means every house, building,
or portion thereof which is rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied or
is occupied as the house, home or residence of more than two families, living
independently of each other and doing their cooking on the premises, or by more
than one family upon a floor, so living and cooking, but having no common right
in the halls, stairways, yards, water closets or privies.
   Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other
combustible material. "Ashes" shall not include cremated human remains.
   Attached business unit means a structure of two or more business offices
constructed as one unit, such as a dental office, medical office, insurance
office or any other business in which the major activity is providing a service
or is clerical in nature and does not in itself produce a product.
   Brushwood means large, heavy yard trimmings resulting from heavy pruning or
shrub removal with maximum six-inch diameter at large end;
   Building material means lumber, brick, stone, dirt, carpet, plumbing
materials, plaster, concrete, floor coverings, roofing material, gutters and
other materials or substances accumulated as a result of new construction,
repairs, remodeling, or additions to existing structures or accessory
structures or demolition of such.
   Bulk container means a commercially made metal container designed to store
and hold rubbish and solid waste until the same can be collected for disposal,
generally having a capacity of not less than four cubic yards nor more than
eight cubic yards and capable of being serviced and emptied by automated
machinery.
   Bulk service means a customer that stores and disposes of rubbish and solid
waste in a bulk container.
   Business building means any structure, whether public or private, in the
town that is adapted for occupancy for transaction of business, for rendering
of professional service, for amusement, for the display, sale or storage of
goods, wares or merchandise or for the performance of work or labor, including,
but not being limited to, hotels, office buildings, public buildings, stores,
theaters, markets, restaurants, grain elevators, abattoirs, warehouses,
workshops, factories in business areas and all outhouses, sheds, barns and
other structures on premises used for business purposes.
   Collection means the act of removing solid waste from a point of generation
to an approved disposal site. Collection on private property means the act of
removing solid waste from private developments for an additional fee from a
point of generation to an approved disposal site. Collection shall be made at a
mutually established location approved by the property manager and the town
manager or appointed designee for automated collection.
   Commercial establishment means any structure or location, whether public or
private, that is adapted for occupancy for the transaction of business, for the
rendering of professional services, for amusement, for the display, sale or
storage of goods, wares or merchandise, or for the performance of work or
labor, including hotel rooms, rooming houses, office buildings, public
buildings, stores, theaters, markets, restaurants, grain elevators, abattoirs,
warehouses, workshops, factories and all other houses, sheds, barns and other
structures on premises used for business purposes. "Commercial establishment"
shall also include churches, houses of worship or other religious or
eleemosynary institutions, regardless of size.
   Condominium means real estate, portions of which are designated for separate
ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely
by the owners of those portions. Real estate is not a condominium unless the
undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit owners.
   Construction and demolition waste means solid waste incident to maintenance,
remodeling or new construction, including, but not limited to, mineral matter,
wood, sheetrock, shingles and metal, but specifically excluding any substance
which is contaminated by asbestos, lead based paint, or any other substance the
disposal of which is regulated as a toxic or hazardous material.
   Disabled person means any person who by reason of infirmity or other
physical or mental impairment is incapable of complying with the provisions of
this chapter as it relates to the placement of refuse containers curbside.
Included in the definition are children 12 years of age and under.
   Family living unit means, but is not limited to, single- family residences,
single mobile homes, single-family living units in duplexes, apartments, and
other multifamily dwellings, but shall not include hotels or motels;
   Fee means that charge by the town associated with a good or service provided
to or for the benefit of a customer.
   Garbage means all putrescible wastes except sewage and body wastes,
including all meat, vegetables and fruit refuse commonly resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, from or on any premises
within the town limits.
   Graffiti shall mean writings, drawings, inscriptions, figures, or marks of
paint, ink, chalk, dye, or other similar substances on public or private
buildings, sidewalks, streets, structures, or places which such marking are not
authorized or permitted by the property owner or possessor. For the purpose of
this chapter, graffiti shall include drawings, writings, markings, or
inscriptions regardless of the content or the nature of the materials used in
the act.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent temporary, easily
removable chalk or other water soluble markings on public or private sidewalks,
streets or other paved surfaces which are used in connection with typical
children's activities, such as drawings, or bases for stick ball, kickball,
handball, hopscotch or other similar activities. Nothing in this chapter shall
be construed to prohibit temporary, easily removable chalk or other water
soluble markings used in connection with any lawful business or public purpose
or activity.
   Hazardous household waste means any of the following materials, existing in
a home because of their use in that home: pesticides; herbicides; petroleum
products (epoxy resins, coal tar, polishes, thinners, mineral spirits, varnish,
grease, caulking materials); solvents; acids (muriatic, hydrochloric, sulfuric,
phosphoric); poisons (arsenic, lead, chrome and warfarin compounds); alkaline
material (photo developers, sodium hydroxide, bleaches); oil based paints and
stains, but not latex paints; batteries of all kinds, for cars, flashlights,
smoke detectors, hearing aids, toys, watches and similar batteries; antifreeze;
and used motor oil.
   Hazardous material or hazardous waste. The following is an explanation of
hazardous waste as published in the North Carolina Hazardous Waste Management
Law adopted for the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). For the
purposes of this chapter, the definition "hazardous waste" has been condensed.
The terms defined are not inclusive of all items specified by the EPA
regulations. Hazardous waste is defined as
potentially dangerous byproducts of our highly industrialized society which
cannot be handled, treated or disposed of without special precautions. It
includes ignitable, corrosive, reactive and toxic waste such as acetone,
gasoline and industrial alcohol, alkaline cleaners, acids, cyanide and
chlorine, arsenic, pesticide wastes, paint, caustics, infected material, offal,
fecal matter (human and animal), and explosives.
   Health official means the chief health official of the County Health
Department or any health department including county or any person whom he has
authorized to perform any of the powers or duties conferred upon him by this
article.
   Hotels and motels mean places of business whose primary business and the one
in which they are normally and customarily engaged in supplying temporary
living quarters with limited family living facilities for short periods of
time.
   Household sharp medical waste means any type of product capable of
puncturing or lacerating the skin that is designed or used to treat, diagnose,
or prevent a disease or medical condition, including, but not limited to,
scalpels and hypodermic needles.
   Industrial and commercial waste means those wastes, including solids,
semisolids, sludge and liquids generated by an industry, commercial
establishment or other manufacturing enterprise that is not classified as a
hazardous waste or requires special handling such as oils, acids, etc.
   Infectious waste means a solid waste capable of producing an infectious
disease. Examples of waste designated as infectious are: micro-biological
waste, pathological waste, blood products, improperly packaged sharps and all
other waste as defined in the medical waste management regulation under 15A
NCAC 13B.1200 in North Carolina Solid Waste Management rules.
   Liquid waste means any waste material that is determined to contain free
liquid as defined in Method 9095, Paint Filter Liquid Test, as described in
Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste, Physical/Chemical Method, as published
in the Environmental Protection Agency Publication No. SW-846 or any successor
or equivalent publication.
   Litter means any discarded man-made materials including, but not limited to,
solid waste materials, industrial materials, household trash, business trash,
building materials, scrap materials and hazardous waste as such terms are
defined in this chapter and not properly containerized or prepared for
collection and disposal.
   Multifamily residential unit means two or more single- family dwellings
constructed as one unit, such as apartment houses, motels, mobile home parks,
townhouses, patio houses, or condominiums. Duplexes/ triplexes built on public
streets are not considered multifamily residential units.
   Nuisance means any condition or use of property, or any act or omission
affecting the condition or use of property, which directly threatens the safety
of citizens; adversely affects the general health, happiness, security and
welfare of others; or is detrimental to the rights of others to the full use of
their own property and their own comfort and happiness because of decreased
property values and the unattractiveness and livability of neighborhoods.
Further, the Town Council finds and declares that the following specific
conditions are prejudicial to the general health, safety and welfare of the
town and its citizens; lessen the attractiveness and livability of the town;
and, when located on any lot or parcel of land within the town limits, are a
nuisance.
   Occupant means the individual, firm, partnership or corporation that has the
use of, controls or occupies any business building, apartment house or tenement
house, or any portion thereof, whether owner or tenant. In the case of vacant
business buildings, apartment houses or tenement houses, or any vacant portion
of a business building, apartment house or tenement house, the owner, agent or
other person having custody of the building shall have the responsibilities of
an occupant of a building.
   Occupant means the person who has the use of or occupies any business
building or any part thereof, or who has the use or possession, actual or
constructive, of the premises, whether the actual owner or tenant. In the case
of vacant business buildings or any vacant portion of a business building, or
in case of occupancy in whole or in part by the owner and agent of the
building, such owner or agent shall be deemed to be and shall have the
responsibility of an occupant of such building.
   Open place shall constitute any portion or area of a property not enclosed
by walls, this shall include, but not be limited to, carports, patios, porches,
decks, terraces, lean-tos, outbuildings, and the like, which are exposed to the
exterior and/or public view, including, but not limited to, front, side, and/or
rear yards. Tarps, plastic sheeting, canvas sheeting, unfinished building
materials or the like shall not constitute walls.
   Opening means any opening in foundation, sides or walls, ground or first
floor or basement, including chimneys, eaves, grills, windows, ventilators,
walk grates, elevators and any pipes, wires or other installations through
which a rat may enter.
   Owner means the person owning the business building or premises, or agent of
the building or premises, or the person to whom rent is paid; whether an
individual, firm, partnership or corporation. In the case of business buildings
leased or rented with a covenant in the lease or other agreement under which
the lessee is responsible for maintenance and repairs, the lessee shall also be
considered in such cases as the owner for the purpose of this chapter.
   Physical disability means a medical condition, verified by a registered
physician, that makes an individual physically unable to bring the automated
refuse/ automated recycling container to the curbside for collection and where
there is no one else residing in the household capable of taking the containers
to the curbside.
   Premises means business houses, boardinghouses, rooming houses, offices,
theaters, hotels, tourist camps, apartments, restaurants, cafes, bars, eating
houses, hospitals, schools, private residences, mobile home parks, vacant lots
and other places where garbage, trash or rubbish accumulates.
   Private property means all of that property as described and set out in an
owner's deed including, but not limited to, yards, grounds, driveways,
entrances or passageways, parking areas, storage areas, vacant land, bodies of
water and including sidewalks, grass strips, one-half of alleys, curbs or
rights-of-way up to the edge of the pavement of any public street.
   Private street means a street not open to public use, on private property,
and not maintained by any governmental agency.
   Public property means all that property except private property as herein
defined, including but not limited to highways, streets, parks, recreation
areas, sidewalks, grass strips, medians, curbs or rights-of-way up to the edge
of the pavement of any public street or body of water.
   Public street means the entire width between property lines, whatever
nature, when any part thereof is dedicated or open to the use of the public as
a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
   Qualifying customer means a single-family detached home, duplex, or
condominium regardless of the size of complex, or an apartment, tenement house
or townhome which, when combined with all other units located on the premises,
is comprised of not more than six family living units.
   Rat eradication means the removal, killing, destruction and extermination of
rats by systematic use of traps or by poisons and by other methods.
   Rat harborage means any condition which provides shelter or protection for
rats, thus favoring their multiplication and continued existence in, under or
outside of a structure of any kind, including, but not limited to, conditions
on vacant lots, creeks, branches, ditches, rubbish heaps, junkyards and any
other places inside or outside of structures which afford shelter or provide a
place or situation favoring the breeding, multiplication or continued existence
of rats.
   Rat stoppage or rat-proofing means a form of construction to prevent ingress
of rats into business buildings from the exterior or from one building to
another; it consists essentially of the closing, with material impervious to
rat gnawing, of all openings in the exterior walls, ground or first floors,
basements, roofs and foundations, that may be reached by rats from the ground,
by climbing or by burrowing.
   Refuse means all solid wastes, including garbage, rubbish and trash.
   Rollout container means a plastic or fiberglass container, having wheels for
ease of movement and a lid which securely covers the bin designed to keep flies
and other vermin from refuse, which is approximately 95 gallons in size and
designed for the automatic collection of refuse by town machinery.
   Rubbish or trash means matter that is worthless or useless or of no
substantial, practical value or matter that is of value only when it has
decayed or has been recycled. Rubbish is solid waste, exclusive of garbage or
ashes, including, but not limited to, leaves, pine needles, twigs, limbs and
other such parts of trees not useful as timber and shall include the trunks and
limbs of trees, even though useful for timber, when the same have been blown
down or felled, either partially or totally, and which have become dried and
flammable; tin or aluminum cans, bottles, papers, paper boxes or cartons, small
light wood or crafting materials, rags, excelsior, rubber, leather, metals,
wire or wire scraps, glass and crockery, but shall not include salvage
automobiles, buses, or other items which in the judgment of the town is likely
to cause damage to equipment of the town or injury to employees of the town, or
is likely because of the nature, size or weight of the material, to handicap or
overburden the automated equipment.
   Sharps container means a container specifically manufactured for the
disposal of sharp medical waste.
   Single business unit means any single nonresidential unit that generates no
more garbage per week than can be placed or stored in a maximum of one rollout
container with a total capacity of no more than 95 gallons when accumulated
between collections, such as a dental office, medical office, insurance office
or another business in which the major activity is providing a service or is
clerical in nature and does not in itself produce a product.
   Single-family residential unit means any dwelling place occupied by one
family and not defined as a multifamily residential unit.
   Solid waste means useless, unwanted or discarded solid material with
insufficient liquid content to be free flowing, including by way of example and
not by limitation, rubbish, garbage, commercial and industrial waste, scrap
materials, junk, refuse, demolition and construction debris and landscape
refuse, but shall not include sludge from air or water pollution control
facilities, septic tank sludge or agricultural or unacceptable waste.
   Solid waste disposal facility means any land or structure or combination of
land area and structures, including dumps, landfills and transfer stations used
for storing,
transferring, collecting, separating, processing, recycling, recovering,
treating, salvaging, reducing, incinerating or disposing of solid wastes.
   Stationary bulk compactor means any town approved container made of
watertight construction that contains a packing mechanism and an internal or
external power unit, and constructed so that the container can be emptied
mechanically by means of automated equipment for the purpose of collection of
solid waste.
   Town home or town house means an apartment or other family living unit which
is capable of ownership separate and apart from other portions of the structure
to which it is conjoined or of which it may be a part, but of which there is no
ownership interest in the common areas of the facility in the owner of the
individual dwelling unit.
   Unacceptable waste means items which are not appropriate for disposal
through this means and includes, but is not limited to, sewage and its
derivatives, special nuclear or by-product materials within the meaning of the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, and hazardous waste.
   Unit means one single-family residence or an individual apartment, motel
room or suite, mobile home, townhouse, patio house, condominium, cluster home
in a multifamily residence, unless otherwise specified by the town.
   Waste means all useless, unwanted, or discarded materials resulting from
industrial, commercial, agricultural and residential activities.
   White goods mean large household appliances, regardless of actual color,
including, but not limited to, refrigerators, stoves, washers, dryers, etc.
   Yard waste means vegetative matter and other materials generated while
providing normal maintenance to the yard areas adjacent to a single-family
residential unit without earth, soil or other mineral matter attached thereto,
including, but not limited to, leaves, grass, twigs, limbs, hedge trimmings,
plant trimmings, and shrubs. This shall not include plastic or synthetic
fibers, lumber, rocks, gravel, dirt or tree or shrubbery remains except as
specifically authorized herein, or soil contaminated with hazardous waste.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-4002   Nuisance.
   Any condition specifically declared to be a danger to the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare of inhabitants of the town and a public
nuisance by the Town Council or is in violation of any town, county or state
health regulation is considered to be a nuisance, as follows, but not limited
to:
   (1)   Unfit Habitat
   (a)   Whatever renders the air, food or water unwholesome.
   (b)   Whatever building, erection, structure or part of cellar thereof is
overcrowded or not provided with adequate means of ingress and egress or is not
sufficiently supported, ventilated, drained, cleaned or lighted.
   (c)   An occupied or used improvement thereon without utility services
resulting in conditions which are detrimental to the health, safety or welfare
of citizens and the peace and dignity of the town.
   (2)   Unsanitary, stagnant, or inhibited water
   (a)   Any stagnant water, to include all cellars and foundations of houses
whose bottoms contain stagnant or putrid water.
   (b)   Disease vectors. An open place of collection of water where insects
tend to breed; permitting of any stagnant water, filth or any other matter
harmful to health or comfort to remain on the premises of the owner or premises
under control by the owner or person in control within the corporate limits
after twenty-four (24) hours' notice of such condition;
   (c)   All business organizations, such as public motor vehicle garages,
service stations, dry cleaning establishments, and any other businesses or
industrial organizations which shall discharge any petroleum products,
chemicals or other such substances which would or could pollute any creek or
stream within the zoning jurisdiction of the town.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the flow of water in
any stream or drainage way within the town by throwing or placing stumps,
brush, rubbish, litter or other material within or along the banks of any such
stream or natural drainage way.
   (e)   Any improper or inadequate drainage on private property which causes
flooding, interferes with the use of, or endangers in any way the streets,
sidewalks, parks or other town-owned property of any kind; provided, that the
notices required and powers conferred by this chapter by and on the public
official in abating the nuisances defined by this paragraph shall be given and
exercised by the town manager or the director of public works;
   (3)   Rats, snakes, carcass and feral animals:
   (a)   Any building or premises which is constructed or maintained in such a
manner so as to provide food, shelter or protection for rats.
   (b)   Firewood, if stored outdoors, shall be stacked orderly to prevent
wildlife habitat.
   (c)   Hides, dried or green, provided the same may be kept for sale in the
town when thoroughly cured and odorless;
   (4)   Junk:
   (a)   Any furniture originally intended for indoor or interior use, outdoor
furniture in disuse or disrepair,
   (b)   Seating removed from motor vehicles,
   (c)   Storage containers,
   (d)   Automotive parts and/or supplies,
   (e)   Inoperable appliances, exercise equipment.
   (f)   Other metal products of any kind or nature kept within an open place
which have jagged edges of metal or glass, or areas of confinement.
   (g)   Junked motor vehicles on public grounds and private property
(Reference Chapter 3: Abandoned, Nuisance and Junked Motor Vehicles).
   (5)   Plant Overgrowth
   (a)   Weeds, grasses and/or other vegetation on one's residential, business,
or vacant lot which is over 8 inches in height on the average or to permit such
lot to serve as a breeding place for mosquitoes, as a refuge for rats and
snakes, as a collecting place for trash and litter or as a fire hazard.. It
will be the responsibility of the owner to cut and remove all weeds and other
overgrown vegetation as often as necessary so as to comply with the provisions
of this section. This provision shall not apply to lots greater than one acre,
but shall be maintained in accordance with this provision to a depth of 20 feet
from its property lines if and only if the adjacent property is occupied by a
dwelling or other structure located within 50 feet of such property. This
provision will not apply to wooded vacant lots that are more than 75 percent
covered with mature trees, or property that consists of ravines, creek banks,
or severe slopes which may cause the maintenance to be dangerous or unsafe.
Furthermore, this provision will not apply to vacant lots that are larger than
three acres in size (i.e., golf courses, farmland, vineyards, etc.). Natural
means of plant removal is permitted on parcels of land greater than 200 acres;
   (b)   A place of vines, shrubs or other vegetation over eight inches in
height when such vines, shrubs or vegetation are a focal point for any other
nuisance enumerated in this Code; provided, the nuisance herein defined by this
subsection shall be cleared and cut only when it is necessary to abate any
other nuisance described in this section;
   (c)   A place of growth of noxious vegetation, including poison sumac (Rhus
vernix), poison ivy (Rhus radicans) or poison oak (Rhus Toxicodendron), in a
location likely to be accessible to the general public;
   (d)   Any hedge, shrubbery, tree or plant along any street, alley or
sidewalk planted closer than 18 inches or extending closer than 12 inches or
lower than 14.5 feet to such street, alley or sidewalk, or any of the above-
mentioned vegetation that obscures clear vision as located within the protected
sight distance triangle.
   (6)   Trash and waste. The storage of garbage and trash in containers as
prescribed by this chapter and the regular collection thereof by the town upon
payment of fees and charges as provided in this chapter are hereby declared to
be essential to the efficient operation of the town and to the prevention of
disease and protection to the public health. Any accumulation of rubbish or
trash causing or threatening to cause the inhabitation therein of rats, mice,
snakes or vermin of any kind.
   (a)   Scattering of garbage or trash, storage of garbage or trash except in
containers as provided by this chapter, or the accumulation of trash by reason
of nonpayment of fees or charges for its removal is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and a violation of this chapter.
   (b)   Under no circumstances shall trash or garbage be allowed to accumulate
or be stored for a period longer than 30 days.
   (c)   Under no circumstances shall trash or garbage be dumped or stored on
any right of way or in any alley or on any lot without being placed in proper
containers as prescribed herein.
   (d)   No industrial wastes, manure, debris from construction or repair work,
leaves, trees or tree trimmings may be dumped or stored on any within any right
of way or in any alley.
   (e)   No owner or occupant of any premises shall prohibit or prevent weekly
solid waste collection services at the premises.
   (f)   An open place of collection of garbage, food waste, animal waste or
any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind.
   (7)   Public streets maintenance
   (a)   Failure to clean or clear a public street, property, and adjoining
sidewalks of any earth, sand or mud and debris related to a construction,
timbering, or other similar land use project within 12 hours after notification
by the town for major and minor thoroughfares or within 24 hours after such
notification for collector and local streets; however, if it is found by the
town that the situation is causing a clear and present danger or hazard to
traffic or the general public, such cleaning or clearing may be required to
take place as soon after notification as practicable. This provision does not
preempt any applicable federal, state, or county regulations applicable to said
events.
   (b)   Property owners are required to maintain any area of their property
which is located between a public sidewalk and the curb of a paved street in
accordance with the guidelines set forth in this section.
   (8)   Odor
   (a)   Unsightly litter, foul or offensive odors which remain upon or emanate
from a property.
   (b)   Maintaining animals in an unsanitary environment which results in
unsightly or offensive animal waste, litter, or odor which would disturb a
reasonable person.
   (9)   Construction materials: Lumber and building supplies, earth, sand and/
or gravel on construction sites where the work is discontinued for a period of
60 days.
   (10)   Graffiti, It shall be unlawful for any person owning property, acting
as manager or agent for the owner of property, or in possession or control of
property to fail to remove or effectively obscure any graffiti.
   (11)   Animals sanitation:
   (a)   Any person owning, harboring, walking, in possession of or in charge
of a dog, which defecates on public property, public park property, public
right-of-way property or any private property without the permission of the
private property owners, shall remove all feces immediately after it is
deposited by the dog. All feces removed in accordance with this section shall
be placed in a suitable bag or other container that closes and disposed of in a
lawful manner.
   (b)   Any person, while harboring, walking, in possession of or in charge of
a dog on public property, public park property, public right-of-way or any
private property without the permission of the private property owner, shall
have in possession a bag or other container that closes, which is suitable for
removing feces deposited by the dog.
   (c)   The provisions of this Section shall not apply to visually impaired
persons using dogs as guides.
   (12)   Abandoned Manufactured Homes, reference Part 9, Chapter 11.
State Law reference–Similar provisions, G.S. §160A-193.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-4003   Exceptions.
   Exceptions. The provisions contained in subsection
8-4002(4), Junk, and (6), Trash and debris, shall not apply to commercial
property owners, including, but not limited to, junk yard dealers, salvage
companies, yard waste recycling operations, cement, quarry or other mining type
businesses, whose operations include the accumulation, storage, sale, repair,
or maintenance of such materials or objects and who have obtained all
applicable zoning and operating permits and are following all applicable
ordinances contained within the Code of Ordinances and the Zoning Ordinance. In
addition, the provision contained in subsection
8-4002(7)(a) shall not apply to stockpiled rock, stone, gravel, sand, earth, or
other similar materials on sites utilized and maintained by the North Carolina
Department of Transportation or the municipality.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-4004   Notice.
   (a)   Whenever the code enforcement officer or appointed designee has
determined that the conditions on a particular lot or parcel of land are a
nuisance and should be abated or otherwise corrected, the code enforcement
officer or appointed designee shall give notice to the owner, lessee or other
person in possession of the premises in writing setting forth the findings and
describing the appropriate corrective action. The code enforcement officer or
appointed designee may establish a deadline, not to exceed sixty (60) days, for
the abatement of the nuisance.
   (b)   The notice may be served upon the owner, occupant or person in
possession of the premises by at least one (1) of the following methods:
   (1)   By delivering a copy of the notice to the person or by leaving copies
of the notice at the person's residence; or
   (2)   By mailing a copy of the notice by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, addressed to the person to be served and delivered to
the addressee; or
   (3)   By delivering a copy of the notice to any official, employee or agent
of a corporation, partnership or business; or
   (4)   If, after a due and diligent effort, the person cannot be located, by
posting a copy of the written notice in a prominent place upon the real
property.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-4005   Removal or abatement of nuisances.
   Upon investigation and discovery of any of the conditions deemed a nuisance,
the code enforcement officer or appointed designee shall make a written report
of his findings and may order that appropriate corrective action be taken,
including the removal or abatement of such conditions by the person creating
the nuisance or by the owner, occupant or other person in possession of the
premises on which the nuisance is located. Prompt abatement is required within
10 days from the receipt of such written notice.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-4006.   Chronic violator.
   The town may notify a chronic violator of the town's public nuisance
ordinance that, if the violator's property is found to be in violation of the
ordinance, the town shall, without further notice in the calendar year in which
notice is given, take action to remedy the violation, and the expense of the
action shall become a lien upon the property and shall be collected as unpaid
taxes. The notice shall be sent by certified mail. A chronic violator is a
person who owns property whereupon, in the previous calendar year, the town
gave notice of violation at least three times under any provision of the public
nuisance ordinance.
State Law reference–Similar provisions, G.S. §160A-200.1
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-4007   Removal or abatement of other conditions.
   Prior to ordering the removal of conditions which do not threaten the public
safety or pose a general threat to the health, safety and general welfare of
the citizens of the town, the code official or appointed designee shall first
determine that such conditions are visible from adjacent property or from a
nearby street or highway and that the benefits of removing or correcting the
conditions outweigh the burdens imposed upon the private property owner. Such
findings shall be based upon a balancing of the monetary loss of the owner
against the corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing the
community, neighborhood or area appearance, including protection of property
values, indirect protection of public health and safety, preservation of the
character and integrity of the community and the promotion of comfort and
quality of life of area residents.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-4008   Appeal.
   Within the time period stated in the notice to abate, the owner or occupant
of the property where the nuisance exists may appeal the findings of the code
enforcement officer to the Board of Adjustment (BOA) by appearing before the
BOA at the appeal hearing date and time given on said notice. The abatement of
the nuisance will be postponed by the code enforcement officer until the final
determination for the appeal is made by the BOA. The BOA will need to make a 4/
5 finding to overturn the code enforcement officer's ruling. In the event no
appeal is taken within the time period stated to abate, the code enforcement
officer may proceed to abate the nuisance.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-4009   Removal by town.
   If any person, having been ordered to abate a public nuisance pursuant to
this chapter, fails, neglects or refuses to abate or remove the condition
constituting the nuisance within 15 days from receipt of such order, the
designee may cause such condition to be removed or otherwise remedied by having
employees of the town or contracted work go upon such premises and remove or
otherwise abate such nuisance under the supervision of an official or employee
designated by the code enforcement officer. Any person who has been ordered to
abate a public nuisance may, within the time allowed by this chapter, request
the town, in writing, to remove such condition, the cost of which shall be paid
by the person making such request. The town may require such requestor to
deposit some or all of the estimated cost of such removal, prior to doing the
work, or may require the requestor to execute an agreement giving security for
the payment of such costs.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-4010   Emergency action.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of section
8-4009, the code enforcement officer or appointed designee shall have authority
to summarily remove, abate or remedy or cause to be removed, abated or
remedied, any condition that is dangerous or prejudicial to the public health
or public safety.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-4011   Penalties.
   (a)   Any violation of the articles of this chapter shall subject the
offender to a civil penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). Violators
shall be issued a written citation which must be paid within seventy-two (72)
hours of receipt. Such citation shall be served by either first class mail,
personal service or posted at the front door. Any of these methods of service
shall be conclusively presumed to be valid, and no owner or occupant shall
refuse service of the citation.
   (b)   Each day's continuing violation shall be considered a separate and
distinct offense.
   (c)   Notwithstanding subsection (a) above, provisions of this chapter may
be enforced through equitable remedies issued by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (d)   In addition to or in lieu of remedies authorized in subsections (a)
and (c), violations of any articles of this chapter may be prosecuted as a
misdemeanor or otherwise in accordance with G.S. § 160A-175.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-4012   Right of entry.
   The code official or appointed designee is hereby given full power and
authority to enter upon the premises upon which a nuisance is found to exist
under the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of abating the nuisance as
provided in this chapter.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-4013   Cost of abatement declared lien.
   (a)   The actual cost incurred by the town in removing or otherwise
remedying a public nuisance shall be charged to the owner of such lot or parcel
of land, and it shall be the duty of the finance department or public services
department to mail a statement of such charges to the owner or other person in
possession of such premises, with instructions that such charges are due and
payable within 30 days from the receipt thereof.
   (b)   If charges for the removal or abatement of a public nuisance are not
paid within 30 days after the receipt of a statement of charges, such charges
shall become a lien upon the land or premises where the public nuisance existed
and shall be collected as unpaid taxes.
   (c)   The procedure set forth in this chapter shall be in addition to any
other remedies that may exist under law for the abatement of public nuisances,
and this chapter shall not prevent the town from proceeding in a criminal
action against any person violating the provisions of this chapter.
   (d)   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance
are hereby repealed. If any part of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid,
such adjudication shall apply only to such part so adjudged and the remainder
of the ordinance shall be deemed valid and effective.
State Law reference–Authority for abatement of public nuisances, G.S. § 160A-
193.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
CHAPTER 5
General Health Regulations
Section
8-5001   Unlawful to violate county health regulations.
Section
8-5002   Unlawful to interfere with health officer.
Section
8-5003   Right of entry.
Section
8-5004   Planting and protection of trees.
Section
8-5005   Expectorating in buildings.
Section
8-5006   Definitions.
Section
8-5007   Areas where smoking and the use of tobacco products and e-cigarettes
are prohibited.
Section
8-5008   Areas where smoking and use of tobacco products and e-cigarettes are
not prohibited.
Section
8-5009   Implementation requirements.
Section
8-5010   Signage.
Section
8-5011   Enforcement and penalties.
Section
8-5012   Severability; conflict of laws.
Section 8-5001   Unlawful to violate county health regulations.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any
lawfully adopted rule or regulation of the county board of health. The
enforcement of this section shall be under the supervision of the county health
officer.
Section 8-5002   Unlawful to interfere with health officer.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct or delay the health
officer or any of his assistants in the lawful discharge of their duties.
Section 8-5003   Right of entry.
   With appropriate warrant or permission of the owner, the county health
officer or any of his assistants shall have the right to enter any premises at
any reasonable hour for the purpose of making the inspections or
investigations.
Section 8-5004   Planting and protection of trees.
   Citizens may plant trees in front of their lots and around their lots on the
sidewalks under the supervision of the superintendent of public works, provided
they shall not plant any that are detrimental to the town. No trees shall be
planted in the streets or gutters except by public authority. No person shall
cut or damage any trees or shrubs upon the rights of way of the town without
the permission of the superintendent of public works or shall dig up or injure
any tree or shall tack or post any advertisement upon the trees of the town.
Cross Reference: For tree regulations, see sections
8-8001 -
8-8019.
Section 8-5005   Expectorating in buildings.
   No person shall expectorate in or upon any building or premises except in
receptacles provided for that purpose. (Code 1970, Sec. 12-7)
Section 8-5006   Definitions.
   (a)   E-cigarette shall mean any noncombustible product that employs a
heating element, battery, or electronic circuit regardless of shape or size and
that can be used to heat a liquid nicotine solution contained in a vapor
cartridge. The term includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo and electronic pipe. The term does not include any product
regulated by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of
the federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.
   (b)   Smoking shall mean the use or possession of a lighted cigarette,
lighted cigar, lighted pipe, or any other lighted tobacco product.
   (c)   Tobacco product shall mean any product containing, made, or derived
from tobacco that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means,
or any component part of accessory of a tobacco product, including but not
limited to cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, cheroots, stogies, periques,
granulated, plug cut, crump cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco,
snuff, snuff flour, Cavendish, plug and twist tobacco, fine-cut and other
chewing tobacco, shorts, refuse scraps, clippings, cutting and sweepings of
tobacco, and other kinds and forms of tobacco. A tobacco product excludes any
product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence
product, or for other medical purposes, and being marketed and sold solely for
such an approved purpose.
   (d)   Town Building shall mean a building owned or leased by the town and
occupied, managed or controlled by the town including, but not limited to, the
Old Rock School building and the Valdese Community Center.
   (e)   Town grounds shall mean all unenclosed areas owned, leased, or
occupied by the town.
   (f)   Town park or sports facility shall mean a park or a sports facility
owned, leased or operated by the town including, but not limited to, Valdese
Community Center, McGalliard Falls Park, Children's Park, Fletcher Ball Park,
the track and football facility located behind the Old Rock School including
Joe Temple Field and Michael Jeffrey Morse Field House, Valdese Family Splash
Park, and Lakeside Park.
   (g)   Town vehicle shall mean a passenger carrying vehicle owned, leased or
otherwise controlled by the Town and assigned permanently or temporarily to
town employees, agencies, institutions, or facilities for official town
business.
   (h)   Universal "No-Smoking and Use of Tobacco Products Prohibited" Symbol
shall mean a symbol consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning
cigarette and tobacco product enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across
it.
(Ord. of 6/27/11; Res. of 9/8/15; Res. of 2/4/19)
Section 8-5007   Areas where smoking and the use of tobacco products and e-
cigarette are prohibited.
   Smoking and the use of tobacco products and E-cigarette are prohibited in
the following locations:
   (1)   Town buildings;
   (2)   Town grounds;
   (3)   Town vehicles; and
   (4)   Town parks and sports facilities.
(Ord. of 6/27/11; Res. of 9/8/15; Res. of 2/4/19)
Section 8-5008   Areas where smoking and use of tobacco products and e-
cigarettes are not prohibited.
   Smoking and the use of tobacco products and e-cigarettes is not prohibited
in private vehicles while parked within a Town park or sports facility or
anywhere else where smoking and the use of tobacco products and e-cigarettes is
otherwise prohibited by this section.
(Ord. of 6/27/11; Res. of 9/8/15)
Section 8-5009   Implementation requirements.
   (a)   The town shall post signs that meet all the requirements of Section
8-5010.
   (b)   Town employees shall make every effort to insure compliance with this
policy, including contacting law enforcement personnel if necessary.
(Ord. of 6/27/11; Res. 9/8/15)
Section 8-5010   Signage.
   The signage required by Section
8-5009 must:
   (1)   State that smoking, the use of tobacco products and the use of e-
cigarettes are prohibited. Signs may include the Universal No Smoking and Use
of Tobacco Products Prohibited symbol.
   (2)   Be of sufficient size to be clearly legible to a person of normal
vision and be conspicuously posted.
   (3)   Be posted at entrances to Town buildings and in other locations
reasonably calculated to inform the public and employees of the prohibition.
   (4)   Be posted within Town parks and sports facilities in locations and at
intervals reasonably calculated to inform the public and employees of the
prohibition.
(Ord. of 6/27/11; Res. 9/8/15)
Section 8-5011   Enforcement and penalties.
   (a)   Violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a civil penalty of
not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
   (b)   A citation may be issued by a sworn law enforcement officer. A
citation issued under this section has no consequence other than as set forth
in paragraph (a) above and no court costs may be assessed.
   (c)   In addition to any penalty under this section, employees of the Town
who violate this chapter shall be subject to disciplinary action consistent
with the Town's personnel policies.
(Res. of 9/8/15)
Section 8-5012   Severability; conflict of laws.
   If this chapter or any part thereof or the application thereof to any person
or circumstance is held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications
of this chapter that can be given separate effect and to that end the
provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. Whenever a provision
of this chapter conflicts with other ordinances of the Town, this chapter shall
govern.
(Res. of 9/8/15)
CHAPTER 6
Other General Nuisances
Section
8-6001   Unnecessary noises prohibited.
Section
8-6002   Same; noises expressly prohibited.
Section
8-6003   Firearms regulated.
Section
8-6004   Posting bills; other advertising.
Section
8-6005   Fire bombs prohibited.
Section
8-6006   Leaving ice boxes, refrigerators, etc., unattended.
Section
8-6007   Obscenity - displaying obscene pictures, etc.
Section
8-6008   Offensive language - cursing and swearing.
Section
8-6009   Police and fire whistles, etc. - unauthorized use.
Section
8-6010   Playing ball, etc., in street.
Section
8-6011   Property damage - injuring, defacing, etc., signs, poles, buildings.
Section
8-6012   Same; injuring or interfering with property used in water, sewer,
police or fire alarm systems.
Section
8-6013   Prostitution - renting house to be used as house of ill fame.
Section
8-6014   Same; keeping house of assignation; receiving persons for purpose of
prostitution.
Section
8-6015   Same; admitting officers or policemen to houses of ill fame.
Section
8-6016   Same; gatherings of disorderly character.
Section
8-6017   Same; conveying prostitutes in taxicabs.
Section
8-6018   Same; solicitation by prostitutes.
Section
8-6019   Train whistles - when sounding prohibited.
Section
8-6020   Trains blocking crossings.
Section
8-6021   Storage and removal of junk.
Section
8-6022   Fares and admission fees - failure to pay.
Section
8-6023   Gambling.
Section
8-6024   Indecent exposure.
Section
8-6025   Unlawful to deposit debris on property.
Section
8-6026   Reserved.
Section
8-6027   Permitting the posting of signs prohibiting the carrying of concealed
weapons on certain municipal property.
Section
8-6028   Discharging firearms.
Section 8-6001   Unnecessary noises prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to create or assist
in creating, permit, continue, or permit the continuance of any unreasonable
loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in the town. Noise of such character,
intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any
individual is prohibited.
(Code 1970, Sec. 12-14)
Section 8-6002   Same; noises expressly prohibited.
   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disrupting and
unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but said enumeration shall not
be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
   (1)   The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal
if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or if in motion
only as a danger signal after, or as brakes are being applied and deceleration
of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device of
any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.
   (2)   The use of any gong or siren upon any vehicle, other than police, fire
or other emergency vehicle;
   (3)   The use or operation of any piano, manual or automatic, phonograph,
radio, loud speaker, or any other instrument, or sound amplifying devices so
loudly as to disturb persons in the vicinity thereof, or in such a manner as
renders the same a public nuisance; provided, however, that upon application to
the manager or other appropriate official, permits may be granted to
responsible organizations to produce programs in music, speeches or general
entertainment;
   (4)   The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent loud
continued noise shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the
vicinity;
   (5)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of
repair, so loaded or in any such manner as to create loud or unnecessary
grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise;
   (6)   The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler
except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of
danger;
   (7)   The discharge into the open air of the exhausts of any steam engine,
motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom;
   (8)   The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air unless the
noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced;
   (9)   The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair
of any building in a residential or business district other than between the
hours of seven o'clock (7:00) a.m. and six o'clock (6:00) p.m. on weekdays
except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and
then only with a permit from the building inspector, which permit may be
renewed for a period of three (3) days or less while the emergency continues;
   (10)   The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any
school, institution of learning, or court while the same is in ses­ sion or
interferes with the working of such institution, provided conspicuous signs are
displayed on such streets indicating that the same is a school, court or
hospital street;
   (11)   The creation of any excessive noise on Sundays on any street adjacent
to any church, provided, conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets
adjacent to churches indicating that the same is a church street;
   (12)   The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with loading
or unloading any vehicle, of the opening and destruction of bales, boxes,
crates and containers;
   (13)   The sounding of any bell or gong, attached to any building or
premises which disturbs the quiet or repose of persons in the vicinity thereof;
   (14)   The shouting and crying of peddlers, barkers, hawkers, vendors and
other persons which distrubs the quiet or repose of persons in the vicinity
thereof;
   (15)   The use of any drum, loud speaker or other instrument or device for
the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance,
show or sale or display of merchandise;
   (16)   The use of any mechanical loud speakers or amplifiers on trucks or
other moving vehicles for advertising purposes or other purposes except where
specific license is received from the board.
   (17)   The conducting, operating or maintaining of any garage or filling
station in any residential district so as to cause loud or offensive noises to
be emitted therefrom between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) p.m. and seven
o'clock (7:00) a.m.;
   (18)   The firing or discharging of squibs, crackers, gunpowder or other
combustible sustance in the streets or elsewhere for the purpose of making
noise or disturbance except by permit from the town.
Section 8-6003   Firearms regulated.
   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to carry about his person any
deadly weapon, under any of the following circumstances or conditions:
   (1)   While under the influence of intoxicating drink or narcotic drugs;
   (2)   At any public assembly;
   (3)   In any manner calculated to inspire terror; or
   (4)   While taking part in a parade or march the purpose of which is to
inspire terror.
This section shall not apply to members of the armed forces of the United
States, officers of the government of the United States, this state, or any
subdivision thereof charged with the execution of the laws of the United
States, this state or the town, when acting in the discharge of their official
duties.
Cross Reference:Discharging of weapons. Sections 8.6021, 8.6022.
Section 8-6004   Posting bills; other advertising.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to post,
nail, stick, or otherwise affix bills, posters, advertisements, notices or any
other printed or graphic matter upon public property in the town. This section
shall not apply to notices signs, or advertisements required to be posted by
law, signs or plates on residential premises giving the name or address of the
occupant, mail boxes or newspaper tubes, municipal, county, state and federal
traffic signs, historical markers, monuments or signs erected by public
authority, temporary displays as a part of customary holiday decorations, and
signs denoting the location of underground utilities.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to nail,
stick, or otherwise affix bills, posters, advertisements, notices or other
printed or graphic matter upon private property within the town without the
consent of the owner.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the above provisions, it shall be lawful to post or
affix printed or graphic materials upon public property in the town for up to
60 days preceding a national, state, or local election or referendum to be held
in the town, when such materials relate to the candidate or candidates seeking
election or the political issues being voted upon. Provided, however, the chief
of police may require the giving of a bond by those posting such election-
related. materials, the amount of such bond to be commensurate with the cost of
removing the election materials so posted. If the election-related materials
are not removed within 30 days following the scheduled election, the bond shall
be retained by the town to defray the costs of removing such election-related
posters and materials.
   (d)   Notwithstanding the above provisions, it shall be lawful to affix
temporary banners or signs advertising the place and date of fairs, carnivals,
horse shows and similar events to be observed within the town for a period not
to exceed 30 days, and after the giving of a bond which the chief of police may
require, the amount of such bond to be commensurate with the cost of removing
such banners or signs. If the signs or banners are not removed within the 30
day period, the bond may be retained by the town to defray the costs of
removing the banners or signs.
Section 8-6005   Fire bombs prohibited.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings herein ascribed:
   (1)   Molotov Cocktail is defined as any breakable container, or any
container which is designed in such a manner that upon being propelled it will
at impact empty its contents which is filled with an inflammable fluid of
substance, and which is fitted with a fuse or wick.
   (2)   Firebomb is defined as any type of object designed or constructed so
that upon being propelled it will explode or ignite its area of impact.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to manufacture,
possess, transport or use any Molotov Cocktail or other firebomb.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to possess all
the items or materials needed to manufacture Molotov Cock­ tails or other
firebombs, other than on his or their premises. The provisions of this section
shall be cumulative and in addition to any other ordinance or General Statute
of North Carolina on this subject.
Section 8-6006   Leaving ice boxes, refrigerators, etc., unattended.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave ice boxes,
refrigerators, deep freeze units and boxes of similar nature, which have
thereon a latch door, in the open and unattended, without first removing the
door, latch or back of such unit. (Ord. of 19/5/53, Sec. 1)
Section 8-6007    Obscenity - displaying obscene pictures, etc.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to display on any street or in any
store, shop or public place any obscene pictures, marks, words or
representations of any kind. (Code 1970, Sec. Section 8-6013 12-16)
Section 8-6008    Offensive language - cursing and swearing.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, in any public or private place, to
swear or curse loudly enough to be heard by persons on any street or other
public place. (Code 1970, Sec. 12-17)
Section 8-6009    Police and fire whistles, etc. - unauthorized use.
   No person, without special authority from the police department or fire
department, shall carry or use any whistle, bell, hom or siren similar in
appearartce or sound to the whistles, horns or sirens used by the police
department or fire department. (Code 1970, Sec. 12-18)
Section 8-6010    Playing ball, etc., in street.
   No person shall play baseball, town ball, football or other games of a
similar nature on any public street. (Code 1970, Sec. 12-19)
Cross Reference: Authority to establish play streets. Section 7·1039.
Section 8-6011   Property damage - mJunng, defacing, etc., signs, poles,
buildings.
   No person shall willfully or negligently injure, deface, draw, paint, carve
or mutilate in any way whatsoever any sign, post, lamppost, pole, wire,
apparatus, building, residence, wall or fence. (Code 1970, Sec. 12-20)
Section 8-6012   Same; injuring or interfering with property used in water,
sewer, police or fire alarm systems.
   No person shall willfully or negligently injure or interfere with any valve,
valve box, meter, meter box, storm or sanitary sewer manhole cover, storm sewer
catch basin cover, fire hydrant, police or fire alarm box, traffic signal or
any other property used in the town's water, sewer, police or fire alarm
system. (Code 1970, Sec. 12-21)
Section 8-6013   Prostitution, - renting house to be used as house of ill fame.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, as a lessor, to knowingly rent or
lease, in any manner whatsoever, any house to be used as a house of ill fame or
disorderly house. (Code 1970, Sec. 12-22)
Section 8-6014   Same; keeping house of as­ signation; receiving persons for
purpose of prostitution.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a house of assignation or
knowingly to receive a man or woman for the purpose of prostitution. (Code
1970, Sec. 12-23)
Section 8-6015   Same; admitting officers or policemen to houses of ill fame.
   It shall be the obligation of the occupant or owner of any house of ill fame
or disorderly house to open the doors thereof and give entrance to any officer
or policeman, who shall demand admission and at the same time state his
official character, for the purpose of suppressing disorderly conduct therein
or making arrests.
Section 8-6016    Same; gatherings of disorderly character.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a gathering or party of
disorderly character to assemble in his house, to the disturbance of the
neighborhood. (Code 1970, Sec. 12-25)
Section 8-6017 Same; conveying prostitutes in taxicabs.
   It shall be unlawful for any person driving a taxicab to carry or convey any
prostitute on any street or alley for an immoral purpose. (Code 1970, Sec. 12-
26)
Section 8-6018    Same; solicitation by prostitutes.
   It shall be unlawful for any prostitute to solicit for the purpose of
illicit sexual intercourse. (Code 1970, Sec. 12-27)
Section 8-6019    Train whistles- when sounding prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any employee of any railroad company to blow the
whistle on any engine within the town, except to give signals necessary to the
running of such trains. (Code 1970, Sec. 12-30)
Section 8-6020    Trains blocking crossings.
   No railroad company shall obstruct any crossing within the town by allowing
its cars or engines to remain on such crossing for more than five (5) minutes.
(Code 1970, Sec. 17-5)
Section 8-6021    Storage and removal of junk.
   (a)   No junk or any vehicle, including automobiles and trucks, shall be
burned in or on any premises occupied as a junkyard.
   (b)   The maintenance of wrecked or unusable automobiles and other junk
items as described herein shall be allowed by auto wrecking yards, salvage
yards or junkyards; provided that such business is a properly licensed
business, and provided also that all open storage of such items must be
completely screened from public view by topography, by pregrown planted
screens, or by a fence maintained in good repair, which shall not be used as a
signboard or signboards or used for advertising purposes.
(Ord. of 10-9-78; Res. of 5/ 6/19)
Section 8-6022   Fares and admission fees­failure to pay.
No person, except persons entitled to free transportation, shall ride upon any
bus, taxicab or other public conveyance without paying therefor the fare
prescribed or allowed by law, or attend any show or other amusement without
paying the prescribed fee. (Code 1970, Sec. 12-8)
Section 8-6023    Gambling.
   If any person play at any game of chance at which any money, property or
other thing of value is bet, whether the same be in stake or not, both those
who play and those who bet thereon shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Code
1970, Sec. 12-9)
Section 8-6024    Indecent exposure.
   Any person who in any place willfully exposes his person, or private parts
thereof, in the presence of one or more persons of the opposite sex whose
person, or the private parts thereof, are similarly exposed, or who aids or
abets in any such act, or who procures another so as to expose his person, or
the private parts thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who
shall willfully make any indecent public exposure of the private parts of his
person in any public place, street or highway shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Code 1970, Sec. 12-10)
Section 8-6025   Unlawful to deposit debris on property.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit upon any
street or sidewalk, or upon any private property, except with written
permission of the owner or occupant of such private property, any rocks,
bricks, lumber, sawdust, bottles, jars, broken glass or any paper bags, cups m
paper of any kind, or any trash, leaves, dirt or rubbish of any kind that may
be offensive or unsightly or that may be dangerous to traffic.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fill any land or dump upon any
vacant lot within the town, garbage, dead animals, decaying vegetable or animal
matter or any offensive material, nor shall any such material be buried within
the town, but shall be disposed of as directed by the town manager. (Ord. of 9/
7/65, Sec. 1)
Section 8-6026    Reserved.
Editorial Note: This section was rescinded by Resolution of 8/2/10. For current
provisions regulating the consumption and possession of malt beverages and
unfortified wine, see Section 8-10001 et seq.
Section 8-6027   Permitting the posting of signs prohibiting the carrying of
concealed weapons on certain municipal property.
   (a)   Posting of signs required. The Town Manager of the Town ofValdese is
hereby authorized and instructed to post conspicuous signage at appropriate
locations on or within each park and each building or portion of a building
owned, leased as lessee, operated, occupied, managed or controlled by the Town
of Valdese, as well as the appurtenant premises to such buildings, indicating
that carrying a concealed handgun is prohibited therein.
   (b)   Location of signs. Signs on buildings shall be visibly posted on the
exterior of each entrance by which the general public can access the building.
The Town Manager shall exercise discretion in determining the number and
appropriate location of signs to be placed on or within appurtenant premises
and parks.
   (c)   Severability; conflict of laws. If this section or application thereof
to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect
other provisions or applications of the ordinance which can be given separate
effect and to that end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be
severable. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter
are hereby repealed. (Ord. of 1/2/96)
Section 8-6028   Discharging firearms.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire any pistol, rifle, gun or
other firearm within the corporate limits of the town.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to police officers or other law
enforcement officers while discharging their official duties.
(Res. of 2/2/09)
Section 8-6019   Train whistles - when sounding prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any employee of any railroad company to blow the
whistle on any engine within the town, except to give signals necessary to the
running of such trains. (Code 1970, Sec. 12-30)
Section 8-6020   Trains blocking crossings.
   No railroad company shall obstruct any crossing within the town by allowing
its cars or engines to remain on such crossing for more than five (5) minutes.
(Code 1970, Sec. 17-5)
Section 8-6021   Storage and removal of junk.
   (a)   No junk or any vehicle, including automobiles and trucks, shall be
burned in or on any premises occupied as a junkyard.
   (b)   The maintenance of wrecked or unusable automobiles and other junk
items as described herein shall be allowed by auto wrecking yards, salvage
yards or junkyards; provided that such business is a properly licensed
business, and provided also that all open storage of such items must be
completely screened from public view by topography, by pregrown planted
screens, or by a fence maintained in good repair, which shall not be used as a
signboard or signboards or used for advertising purposes.
(Ord. of 10-9-78; Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-6022   Fares and admission fees - failure to pay.
   No person, except persons entitled to free transportation, shall ride upon
any bus, taxicab or other public conveyance without paying therefor the fare
prescribed or allowed by law, or attend any show or other amusement without
paying the prescribed fee. (Code 1970, Sec. 12-8)
Section 8-6023   Gambling.
   If any person play at any game of chance at which any money, property or
other thing of value is bet, whether the same be in stake or not, both those
who play and those who bet thereon shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Code
1970, Sec. 12-9)
Section 8-6024   Indecent exposure.
   Any person who in any place willfully exposes his person, or private parts
thereof, in the presence of one or more persons of the opposite sex whose
person, or the private parts thereof, are similarly exposed, or who aids or
abets in any such act, or who procures another so as to expose his person, or
the private parts thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who
shall willfully make any indecent public exposure of the private parts of his
person in any public place, street or highway shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Code 1970, Sec. 12-10)
Section 8-6025   Unlawful to deposit debris on property.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit upon any
street or sidewalk, or upon any private property, except with written
permission of the owner or occupant of such private property, any rocks,
bricks, lumber, sawdust, bottles, jars, broken glass or any paper bags, cups or
paper of any kind, or any trash, leaves, dirt or rubbish of any kind that may
be offensive or unsightly or that may be dangerous to traffic.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fill any land or dump upon any
vacant lot within the town, garbage, dead animals, decaying vegetable or animal
matter or any offensive material, nor shall any such material be buried within
the town, but shall be disposed of as directed by the town manager. (Ord. of 9/
7/65, Sec. 1)
Section 8-6026   Reserved.
Editorial Note: This section was rescinded by Resolution of 8/2/10. For current
provisions regulating the consumption and possession of malt beverages and
unfortified wine, see Section 8-10001 et seq.
Section 8-6027   Permitting the posting of signs prohibiting the carrying of
concealed weapons on certain municipal property.
   (a)   Posting of signs required. The Town Manager of the Town of Valdese is
hereby authorized and instructed to post conspicuous signage at appropriate
locations on or within each park and each building or portion of a building
owned, leased as lessee, operated, occupied, managed or controlled by the Town
of Valdese, as well as the appurtenant premises to such buildings, indicating
that carrying a concealed handgun is prohibited therein.
   (b)   Location of signs. Signs on buildings shall be visibly posted on the
exterior of each entrance by which the general public can access the building.
The Town Manager shall exercise discretion in determining the number and
appropriate location of signs to be placed on or within appurtenant premises
and parks.
   (c)   Severability; conflict of laws. If this section or application thereof
to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect
other provisions or applications of the ordinance which can be given separate
effect and to that end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be
severable. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter
are hereby repealed. (Ord. of 1/2/96)
Section 8-6028   Discharging firearms.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire any pistol, rifle, gun or
other firearm within the corporate limits of the town.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to police officers or other law
enforcement officers while discharging their official duties.
(Res. of 2/2/09)
CHAPTER 7
Fair Housing Code
Section
8-7001   Declaration of policy.
Section
8-7002   Application of chapter.
Section
8-7003   Prohibited practices enumerated; exceptions.
Section
8-7004   Alleged grievances.
Section
8-7005   Interpretation and conflict.
Section
8-7006   Penalty.
Section 8-7001 Declaration of policy.
   The policy of the town is to assure equal housing accommodations for sale or
for rent. (Ord. of 8/4/80)
Section 8-7002 Application of chapter.
   The provisions of this chapter relative to discrimination in housing shall
apply to the sale or rental of a house to a person or persons in a single
dwelling unit and to the rental or lease of a portion of a dwelling housing
con­ taining accommodations for a family, except when the remainder of the
dwelling is occupied by the owner or member of his immediate family. (Ord. of
8/4/ 80)
Section 8-7003 Prohibited practices enumerated; exceptions.
   (a)   No owner of real property shall discriminate against any other person
because of the religion, race, color or national origin, or ancestry of the
friends or associates of such other person in regard to the sale or rental of,
or dealings concerning, real property located within the town. Any such
discrimination shall be considered an unlawful housing practice.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall require an owner to offer property to
the public at large before selling or renting it nor shall this section be
deemed to prohibit owners from giving preference to prospective tenants or
buyers for any reason other than religion, race, color or national origin.
   (c)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to bar any religious or
demoninational institu­ tion or organization or any organization operated for
charitable or educational purposes, which is operated, supervised or controlled
by or in connection with a religious organization of the same religion or
denomination, or from making such selection as is calculated by the
organization to promote the religious principles for which it has been
established or maintained. (Ord. of 8/4/ 80)
Section 8-7004   Alleged grievances.
   (a)   Any person who contends that the pro­ visions of this chapter have
been violated may file a written complaint under oath with the town zoning
administrator. Within a reasonable time after the complaint has been filed, the
zoning administrator shall make a determination of the merits and
reasonableness of the complaint, and shall attempt to adjust the grievance
between the parties. The administrator will report all findings to the town
council.
   (b)   The town council will, upon enactment of this chapter, serve as the
fair housing board. The town council .shall adopt rules governing fair housing
proceedings, and shall set aside time during regularly-scheduled council meet­
ings for the hearing and ruling of fair housing complaints.
   (c)   If the complaint or grievance is not resolved by the parties through
the administrator, either party to the alleged complaint or the administrator,
may appeal to the fair housing board. The appeal shall be taken within a
reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board. Upon an appeal being
properly filed, the zoning administrator shall forthwith trans­ mit to the
board all paper constituting the record of the matter. (Ord. of 8/4/80)
Section 8-7005   Interpretation and conflict.
   (a)   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, the
purpose and spirit for which it is offered shall be of primary concern.
   (b)   It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with, abrogate, annul
or circumvent the 1968 Civil Rights Act or other laws with regard to fair
housing practices. The filing of a complaint under this section will not
preclude the claim from being pursued in any other court or jurisdiction. It is
intended to offer a reasonable person, acting in good faith, an opportunity to
resolve their differences in an atmosphere of a non-adversary proceeding. (Ord.
of 8/4/80)
Section 8-7006   Penalty.
   For individuals or agencies deemed to be in violation of this chapter, a
fine of up to $30 per week will be assessed against the party or parties,
intending $30 for each week the violation continues. These funds will be
payable to the general fund of the town until the issue is resolved to the
satisfaction of the fair housing board. (Ord. of 8/4/80)
CHAPTER 8
Tree Regulations
Section
8-8001   Definitions.
Section
8-8002   Creation and establishment of Town Tree Board.
Section
8-8003   Compensation to members of Board.
Section
8-8004   Duties and responsibilities of Board.
Section
8-8005   Operation of Board
Section
8-8006   Street tree species to be planted.
Section
8-8007   Spacing.
Section
8-8008   Distance from curb and sidewalk.
Section
8-8009   Distance from street corners and fireplugs.
Section
8-8010   Distance from utilities.
Section
8-8011   Public tree care.
Section
8-8012   Tree topping.
Section
8-8013   Pruning, corner clearance.
Section
8-8014   Dead or diseased tree removal on private property.
Section
8-8015   Removal of stumps.
Section
8-8016   Interference with Town Tree Board.
Section
8-8017   Arborist license and bond.
Section
8-8018   Review by Town Council.
Section
8-8019   Penalty.
Cross References:  Planting and protection of trees, see section
8-5004. Arbor-beautification committee, see section
2-7040 through
2-7047.
Section 8-8001   Definitions.
   (a)   “Street trees” are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes, and all
other woody vegetation on land lying within rights-of-way for all streets,
avenues, or ways within the town.
   (b)   “Park trees” are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes, and all
other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas
owned by the town, or to which the public has free access as a park. (Ord. of
11/3/86, Sec. 1)
Section 8-8002   Creation and establishment of Town Tree Board.
   There is hereby created and established a Town Tree Board, which shall
consist of members of the Town Arbor-Beautification Committee, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with approval of the Town Council. (Ord. of 11/3/86,
Sec. 2)
Section 8-8003   Compensation to members of Board.
   Members of the Town Tree Board shall serve without compensation .(Ord. of
11/3/86, Sec. 3)
Section 8-8004   Duties and responsibilities of Board.
   It shall be the responsibility of the Town Tree Board to study, investigate,
counsel, and develop or update annually, and administer a written plan for the
care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, or disposition of
trees and shrubs in parks, along streets, and in other public areas. This plan
will be presented annually to the Town Council and upon its acceptance and
approval shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan for the
town. The Board, when requested by the Town Council, shall consider,
investigate, make finding, report, and recommend upon any special matter of
question coming within the scope of its work. (Ord. of 11/3/86, Sec. 4)
Section 8-8005   Operation of Board.
   The Town Tree Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and
regulations, and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members
shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. (Ord. of 11/3/86, Sec. 5)
Section 8-8006   Street tree species to be planted.
   The following list constitutes the official street tree species for the
town. No species other than those included in this list may be planted as
street trees without written permission of the Town Tree Board.
  SMALL TREES
Apricot
Crabapple (flowering species)
Goldenrain
Hawthorn
Bradford pear
Redbud
Soapberry
Peach, flowering
Plum, purple leaf
Sarvisberry
Lilac, Japanese
Dogwood
Rhododendron
MEDIUM TREES
Ash, Green
Hackberry
Honey Locust, thornless
Linden or Basswood
Mulberry
Oak, English
Oak, Red
Oak, Pin
Pagoda
Birch, River
Osage, Orange (male thornless)
Persimmon
Poplar, White
Sassafras
Hemlock
Spruce, Blue
LARGE TREES
Coffee Tree (Kentucky)
Maple, Silver
Maple, Sugar
Oak, Bur
Sycamore
Cottonwood
Spruce, Norway
Spruce, White
(Ord. of 11/3/86, Sec. 6) Penalty , see Section
8-8019
Section 8-8007   Spacing.
   The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species
size classes listed in Section
8-8006. No trees may be planted closer together than the following: small
trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; large trees, 50 feet; except in special
plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect. (Ord. of 11/3/86, Sec.
7) Penalty, see Section
8-8019
Section 8-8008   Distance from curb and sidewalk.
   The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will
be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in Section
8-8006. No trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the
following: small trees, 2 feet; medium trees, 3 feet; large trees, 4 feet;
except in special plantings on Main Street which are approved by the Town Tree
Board. (Ord. of 11/3/86, Sec. 8) Penalty, see Section
8-8019
Section 8-8009   Distance from street corners and fireplugs.
   No street trees shall be planted closer than 35 feet to any street corner,
measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street
tree shall be planted closer than 10 feet to any fireplug. (Ord. of 11/3/86,
Sec. 9) Penalty, see Section
8-8019
Section 8-8010   Distance from utilities.
   No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in Section
8-8006 may be planted under or within 10 lateral feet of any overhead utility
wire, or over or within 5 lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer
line, transmission line, or other utility. (Ord. of 11/3/86, Sec. 10) Penalty,
see Section
8-8019
Section 8-8011   Public tree care.
   (a)   The town shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, and remove
trees, plants, and shrubs within the rights-of-way of all streets, alleys,
avenues, and lanes, and within squares and public grounds, as may be necessary
to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of
public grounds.
   (b)   The Town Tree Board may remove, or cause or order to be removed, any
tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its
nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or
other public improvements, or which is affected with any injurious fungus,
insect, or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street
trees by adjacent property owners, providing that the selection and location of
trees is in accordance with Sections
8-8006 through
8-8011. (Ord. of 11/3/86, Sec. 11)
Section 8-8012   Tree topping.
   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city
department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property.
“Topping” is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than
three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree as to remove
the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or
other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where
other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted from this section at
the determination of the Town Tree Board. (Ord. of 11/3/86, Sec. 12) Penalty,
see Section
8-8019
Section 8-8013   Pruning, corner clearance.
   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right- of-way within the
town shall prune the branches so that the branches shall not obstruct the light
from any street lamp, or obstruct the view of any street intersection, and so
that there shall be a clear space of not less than eight feet above the surface
of the street or sidewalk. Owners shall remove all dead, diseased, or dangerous
trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of
the public. The town shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street
from a street light, or interferes with visibility of any traffic control
device or sign. (Ord. of 11/3/86, Sec. 13) Penalty, see Section
8-8019
Section 8-8014   Dead or diseased tree removal on private property.
   The town shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased
trees on private property within the town, when such trees constitute a hazard
to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential
threat to other trees within the town. The Town Tree Board will notify in
writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by the owners at their
own expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice. In the event of
failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the town shall have the
authority to remove those trees and charge the cost of removal on the owners’
property tax notices. Nothing, however, in this section shall be construed to
create an obligation by the town to inspect trees on private property. (Ord. of
11/3/86, Sec. 14)
Section 8-8015   Removal of stumps.
   All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of
the ground. (Ord. of 11/3/86, Sec. 15)
Section 8-8016   Interference with Town Tree Board.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere with the
Town Tree Board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street
trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this chapter.
(Ord. of 11/3/86, Sec. 16) Penalty, see Section
8-8019
Section 8-8017   Arborist license and bond.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or
occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees within the
town without first applying for and procuring a license. However, no license
shall be required of any public service company or town employee doing such
work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. Before any license shall
be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability
insurance in the minimum amounts of $50,000 for bodily injury and $100,000
property damage indemnifying the town or any person injured or damage resulting
from the pursuit of those endeavors as herein described. (Ord. of 11/3/86, Sec.
17) Penalty, see Section
8-8019
Section 8-8018   Review by Town Council.
   The Town Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts, and
decisions of the Town Tree Board. Any person may appeal, within 30 days, from
any ruling or order of the Town Tree Board to the Town Council, who may hear
the matter and make final decision. (Ord. of 11/3/86, Sec. 18)
Section 8-8019   Penalty.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be, upon conviction
or a plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed $50. (Ord. of 11/3/86,
Sec. 19)
CHAPTER 9
Parks and Recreational Facilities
Section
8-9001   Definitions.
Section
8-9002   Trespass.
Section
8-9003   Behavior.
Section
8-9004   Merchandising, advertising and signs.
Section
8-9005   Sanitation.
Section
8-9006   Traffic.
Section
8-9007   Firearms, air rifles and toy arms.
Section
8-9008   Animals running at large; horseback riding.
Section
8-9009   Enforcement.
Section 8-9001   Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   (1)   Director. The director of parks and recreation for the town or
authorized agents.
   (2)   Town recreational facility. A park, playground, athletic facility or
any recreational area of any type whatsoever which is owned, leased or
otherwise in the possession of the town. (Ord. of 6/24/92)
Section 8-9002   Trespass.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to enter or remain upon a town recreation
facility during the hours that such facility is closed to the public.
   (b)   Any section or part of any town recreation facility may be declared
closed to the public by the director at any time and for any interval of time,
either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and
either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the director shall find
reasonably necessary. (Ord. of 6/24/92)
Section 8-9003   Behavior.
   No person in a town recreational facility shall:
   (a)   Possess or consume any malt beverage, unfortified wine, fortified wine
or spirituous liquor as defined in Chapter 18B of the North Carolina General
Statutes.
   (b)   Possess, use or consume any illegal drugs; or be under the influence
of any illegal drugs while at a town recreation facility.
   (c)   Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas as may be
designated for the building of fires; or throw or otherwise scatter lighted
matches, burned cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other flammable material
within any town recreation area.
   (d)   Enter an area posted as “closed to the public,” nor shall any person
use or abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices.
   (e)   Lie or sleep in a prone position on seats, tables or benches.
   (f)   Disturb or interfere with the activities of any other person or
persons occupying an area of a town recreation facility with the intent to
disrupt the activities of the other person or persons. (Ord. of 6/24/92)
Section 8-9004   Merchandising, advertising and signs.
   No person in a town recreation facility shall:
   (a)   Expose, offer for sale or advertise any article or service except
regularly licensed concessionaires acting by and under the authority and
regulation of the director.
   (b)   Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement
or inscription whatever; except as authorized by the director. (Ord. of 6/24/
92)
Section 8-9005   Sanitation.
   No person in a town recreation facility shall:
   (a)   Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the
waters of any swimming pool, wading pool, stream or other body of water in or
adjacent to any town recreation facility any substance, matter, or thing,
liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of such waters.
   (b)   Dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes,
cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse, or other trash anywhere on the
grounds of the town recreation facility, except such matter that may be placed
in proper receptacles where provided. Where receptacles are not provided, all
such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the facility by the person
responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere. (Ord. of 6/
24/92)
Section 8-9006   Traffic.
   No person in a town recreation facility shall:
   (a)   Fail to comply with all applicable provisions of motor vehicle traffic
laws of the state and ordinances of the town applicable to equipment and
operation of vehicles.
   (b)   Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed,
direction, caution, stopping or parking, and all others posted for proper
control and safeguarding of life and property.
   (c)   Drive any vehicle on any area except paved roads and parking areas of
the recreation facility; or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically
designated as temporary parking areas by the director.
   (d)   Leave a vehicle parked and unattended upon the grounds of a town
recreation facility during the hours that the recreation facility is closed to
the public.
   (e)   Operate a go-cart, minibike, four-wheeler or similar vehicle at any
location within any town recreation facility except that regularly licensed
vehicles and operators may have access to roadways within the town recreation
facilities to the same extent as public streets, subject to the traffic rules
of this chapter. (Ord. of 6/24/92)
Section 8-9007   Firearms, air rifles and toy arms.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, except law enforcement officers when
acting in the discharge of their official duties, to possess or discharge,
shoot, fire, or explode or cause to be discharged, fired or exploded any deadly
weapon, air rifle or toy pistol, toy rifle or other toy arms so designed and
capable of forcibly hurling a projectile or missile within any town recreation
facility. (Ord. of 6/24/92)
Section 8-9008   Animals running at large; horseback riding.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or the person in possession to permit any
dogs or other animals to run at large within any town recreation facility or to
ride horses within the same except upon designated and marked bridle paths.
(Ord. of 6/24/92)
Section 8-9009   Enforcement.
   When there is a violation of any provision of this chapter, the town, in its
discretion, may take one or more of the following courses of action:
   (1)   A civil penalty of $25 may be levied against any person who violates
this chapter and who has been issued a citation. The citation shall direct the
violator to pay the penalty within 15 days from the date of the issuance of the
citation. If the violator does not pay the penalty within 15 days of its
issuance, a delinquency charge of $25 will be added. The penalty and
delinquency charge may be recovered by the town in a civil action.
   (2)   The violator may be charged as provided by G.S. 14-4.
   (3)   The town may apply to the appropriate court for an injunction or other
allowable civil penalty. (Ord. of 6/24/92)
CHAPTER 10
Malt Beverages and Unfortified Wine
Section
8-10001   Definitions.
Section
8-10002   Consumption on the public streets and on municipal property
prohibited.
Section
8-10003   Possession of open containers on the public streets and on municipal
property prohibited.
Section
8-10004   Possession during special events prohibited.
Section
8-10005   Penalty.
Section
8-10006   Severability; conflict of laws.
Section
8-10007   Effective date.
Section 8-10001   Definitions.
   In addition to the common meanings of words, the following definitions shall
be applicable herein:
   (a)   Malt beverage shall mean beer, lager, malt liquor, ale, porter, and
any other brewed or fermented beverage except unfortified or fortified wine as
defined in G.S. 18B-101, containing at least one-half of one percent (0.5%),
and not more than fifteen percent (15%), alcohol by volume. (G.S. 18B-101(9))
   (b)   Open container shall mean a container whose seal has been broken or a
container other than the manufacturer’s unopened original container. (G.S. 18B-
300(c))
   (c)   Public street shall mean any highway, road, street, avenue, boulevard,
alley, bridge, or other way within and/or under the control of the town and
open to public use, including the sidewalks of any such street.
   (d)   Unfortified wine shall mean any wine of sixteen percent (16%) or less
alcohol by volume made by fermentation from grapes, fruits, berries, rice or
honey; or by the addition of pure cane, beet or dextrose sugar; or by the
addition of pure brandy from the same type of grape, fruit, berry, rice or
honey that is contained in the base wine and produced in accordance with the
regulations of the United States.
(Ord. of 6/7/10)
Section 8-10002   Consumption on the public streets and on municipal property
prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not an occupant of a motor
vehicle to consume malt beverages and/or unfortified wine on the public
streets. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person to consume malt
beverages and/or unfortified wine on any property, whether located inside or
outside the corporate limits, owned, occupied or controlled by the town
including, but not limited to, public buildings and the grounds appurtenant
thereto, municipal parking lots, public parks, playgrounds, recreational areas,
tennis courts, and other athletic fields.
(Ord. of 6/7/10)
Section 8-10003   Possession of open containers on the public streets and on
municipal property prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not an occupant of a motor
vehicle to possess any open container of malt beverage and/or unfortified wine
on the public streets. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person to
possess any open container of malt beverage and/or unfortified wine on any
property, whether located inside or outside the corporate limits, owned,
occupied, or controlled by the town including, but not limited to, public
buildings and the grounds appurtenant thereto, municipal parking lots, public
parks, playgrounds, recreational area, tennis courts, and other athletic
fields.
(Ord. of 6/7/10)
Section 8-10004   Possession during special events prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess malt beverages and/or
unfortified wine on public streets, alleys, or parking lots which are
temporarily closed to regular traffic for special events, unless the town
council adopts a resolution making other provisions for the possession of malt
beverages and/or unfortified wine at the special event.
(Ord. of 6/7/10)
Section 8-10005   Penalty.
   Violation of this ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable in
accordance with N.C.G.S. 14-4.
(Ord. of 6/7/10)
Section 8-10006   Severability; conflict of laws.
   If this chapter or application thereof to any person or circumstance is held
invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of
the chapter which can be given separate effect and to that end the provisions
of this chapter are declared to be severable. All ordinances or parts of
ordinances in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed.
(Ord. of 6/7/10)
Section 8-10007   Effective date.
   This ordinance shall be effective upon adoption.
(Ord. of 6/7/10)
CHAPTER 11
Special Events
Section
8-11001   Purpose.
Section
8-11002   Definitions.
Section
8-11003   Permit.
Section
8-11004   Requirements and conditions.
Section
8-11005   Revocation or denial of permit.
Section 8-11001   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to enable the town to better control events
that take place on public property and certain events that take place within
the Downtown District, which will help secure the public safety, health, and
general welfare of town citizens.
(Ord. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-11002   Definitions.
   The following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
   (a)   Applicant is the person applying for a special event permit.
   (b)   Downtown District is the area running West to East from Eldred Street
to Morganton Street, and North to South from Bobo Avenue to Massel Avenue.
   (c)   Event insurance is a comprehensive general liability insurance policy
with limits of at least $1,000,000. The event insurance policy shall be issued
by a company licensed to do business in the State of North Carolina and shall
name the Town of Valdese as an additional insured. The event insurance policy
shall cover all activities carried out at the special event.
   (d)   Private property is property owned by a non- governmental agency.
   (e)   Public property is property owned or controlled by the town or another
governmental unit, including public streets, sidewalks, parking lots, parking
spaces, parks, and land surrounding town or other government facilities.
   (f)   Recurring event is an event held on private property in the Downtown
District that occurs more than once in a calendar year. A recurring event takes
place in the same area, has substantially the same number of attendees, does
not require alcohol permitting, and does not involve public property. Special
event permits for a recurring event must be obtained annually prior to the
first event.
   (g)   Special event is a planned, outdoor event that is open to the public,
that involves the gathering of persons for a common purpose, design or goal,
and that (1) takes place on public property or causes or requires a complete or
partial closure of public property; (2) takes place within the Downtown
District and the event is reasonably expected to restrict or interfere with the
right of merchants or private individuals to have access to parking areas,
offices, stores, residences, or other places because of the anticipated
attendance, noise level, or other factors related to the event; or (3) involves
the use of mechanical rides, inflatables such as bounce houses, temporary
stages, or other structures or devices that have the potential to cause injury
if not properly constructed or erected or not properly maintained.
(Ord. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-11003   Permit.
   (a)   Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or
assist in conducting a special event without first obtaining the permit
required by this article and maintaining that permit at all times during the
special event.
   (b)   Exceptions. A permit shall not be required for the following events:
   (1)   Funerals.
   (2)   Merchant sidewalk sales.
   (3)   The carrying out of government functions.
   (4)   Events sponsored or substantially controlled by the town.
   (5)   Events authorized by the Valdese Recreation Department or Community
Affairs Department.
   (c)   Application. An application for a special event permit shall be
completed in writing on an application form provided by the town. All required
information shall be truthfully and accurately provided. The application shall
be submitted to the Town of Valdese Community Affairs Department, together with
the permit fee.
   The application will not be considered without all required supporting
documents including, but not limited to, an emergency action plan, a map of the
event area, proof of event insurance if required, letters of permission for
private property use, and a properly executed release and indemnity agreement.
   (d)   Determination and issuance. In issuing any permit applied for under
this article, the town official designated for such purpose may request the
review of the application by other departments of the town and the official
shall conduct such additional investigation as may be necessary to determine
whether the permit should be issued. To allow sufficient time for review,
applications for a permit must be submitted at least 60 days prior to the
special event.
   (1)   Form of permit. Upon approval, a written permit will be given to the
applicant, which will be signed by the appropriate town employee or official.
   (2)   Term. Permits shall be issued for a single event only unless the
special event qualifies as a recurring event.
   (3)   Transferability. The permit shall not be transferable or assignable.
   (4)   Personal liability. The application shall be submitted by and the
permit issued only in the name of the applicant. The applicant shall personally
be responsible for the information set out in the application and for
compliance with this article and with the terms and conditions of the permit.
   If the applicant represents an organization, the application shall name the
organization; however, the applicant shall remain personally responsible for
the accuracy of the information provided in the application and for compliance
with this article and with the permit.
   (5)   Frequency. To lessen the impact caused by closing public property, no
permit shall be issued that allows a public property to be closed longer than a
total of 8 hours or for more than 1 day in a calendar month.
   (6)   Notification. The town will reply with approval or denial of the
special event within 30 days. If the special event requires a permit for
alcohol or street closure, the approval of the application will be contingent
upon final approval by the Valdese Town Council and all other agencies
involved.
(Ord. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-11004   Requirements and conditions.
   All special events shall be conducted in full compliance with the following
requirements and conditions.
   (a)   Permits. All permits required for the special event shall be obtained
and submitted to the Town of Valdese including, but not limited to, an Alcohol
Beverage Control Commission permit.
   (b)   Public safety. The applicant shall contract with and coordinate with
the town public safety department for traffic control, crowd control, security,
and emergency services.
   (c)   Access. A reasonable means of access shall be provided for businesses
and residences located near the special event and for town fire and other
protective services.
   (d)   Compliance. The applicant shall not permit the event to become a
nuisance, and the applicant shall cause the special event participants to
comply with all applicable town ordinances, including the noise ordinance. The
applicant shall also cause the special event to be held in compliance with all
other laws including fire safety codes and ADA access rules. All mechanical
amusement rides and inflatable devices must be inspected by the NC Department
of Labor, and the inspection results must be submitted to the Valdese Fire
Marshal prior to operation of the rides or devices.
   (e)   Indemnity. In consideration of the town granting a special event
permit, the applicant shall indemnify and hold harmless the town, its officers,
agents, and employees against all loss, expense or liability of any kind,
including attorney fees, caused by or in any way resulting from the acts of any
person attending the special event or in any way resulting from the activities
carried on during the special event or from the use of the public property.
   (f)   Event insurance. Event insurance shall be required for a special event
that involves the use of public property, including a street or sidewalk
closure; the consumption or sale of alcohol; the use of mechanical or other
amusement rides or devices; 5K, 10K, or other runs or walks; or any other
potentially hazardous event as determined by the Valdese Fire Department.
   (g)   Alcohol. The sale, distribution, possession, and consumption of beer,
wine, and other alcohol beverages shall be in full compliance with all state
and local laws governing such matters. The consumption of alcohol on public
property must be approved by Valdese Town Council, and the applicant shall be
required to have the applicable permit from the NC ABC Board.
   (h)   Strict liability. The applicant shall assume strict liability for all
damage caused to public property as a result of the special event.
(Ord. of 5/6/19)
Section 8-11005   Revocation or denial of permit.
   The application for any permit may be denied and any permit issued may be
revoked if:
   (1)   The application contains false or misleading information or does not
set forth all of the information requested;
   (2)   The special event is conducted in such manner as to create a public
nuisance or to constitute a hazard to the public health, safety or welfare;
   (3)   The applicant fails to obtain and maintain all permits and licenses
required for the special event;
   (4)   The applicant violates or is attempting to violate any of the terms
and conditions of this article; or
   (5)   The requested special event conflicts with a previously scheduled
special event or with an event or activity sponsored by the town.
(Ord. of 5/6/19)
PART 9
Planning and Regulation of Development
Chapter 1.   Building and Housing Regulations
Chapter 2.   Subdivision Regulations
Chapter 3.   Zoning
CHAPTER 1
Building and Housing Regulations
ARTICLE A
Codes Adopted
Section
9-1001   North Carolina State Building Code adopted; where copy filed.
Section
9-1002   North Carolina Uniform Residential Building code adopted; where copies
filed.
Section
9-1003   Plumbing code adopted.
Section
9-1004   National Electrical Code adopted.
Section
9-1005   Heating, ventilating, air-conditioning code adopted.
Section
9-1006 through section 9-1020 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Administrative Provisions
Section
9-1021   Organization of department.
Section
9-1022   Duties generally.
Section
9-1023   Additional enforcement duties-Dwellings unfit for human habitation.
Section
9-1024   Same - Zoning.
Section
9-1025   Powers of inspectors.
Section
9-1026   Conflicts of interest.
Section
9-1027   Reports and records.
Section
9-1028   Inspection of work in progress - required generally.
Section
9-1029   Calls for inspection.
Section
9-1030   Same; survey of street lines.
Section
9-1031   Certificate of occupancy.
Section
9-1032   Oversight not to legalize violation.
Section
9-1033 through section 9-1040 reserved.
ARTICLE C
General Provisions
Section
9-1041   Scope of article.
Section
9-1042   Registration of contractors; required.
Section
9-1043   Same; bond.
Section
9-1044   Permits; required.
Section
9-1045   Same; contents of application.
Section
9-1046   Same; plans and specifications.
Section
9-1047   Same; limitations.
Section
9-1048   Same; issuance.
Section
9-1049   Same; revocation.
Section
9-1050   Time limitations on validity of permit.
Section
9-1051   Changes in work after permit issued.
Section
9-1052   Schedule of permit fees.
Section
9-1053 through section 9-1060 reserved.
ARTICLE D
Minimum Housing Standards
Division 1.
Section
9-1061   Definitions.
Section
9-1062   Findings; purpose.
Section
9-1063   Conflicts.
Section
9-1064   Scope.
Section
9-1065   Alternative remedies.
Section
9-1066   Right of access.
Section
9-1067   Methods of service of complaints and orders.
Section
9-1068   Compliance.
Section
9-1069   Space use.
Section
9-1070   Light and ventilation.
Section
9-1071   Exits.
Section
9-1072   Plumbing.
Section
9-1073   Heating.
Section
9-1074   Electricity.
Section
9-1075   Structural requirements.
Section
9-1076   Property maintenance.
Section
9-1077   Rooming/boarding houses.
Section
9-1078   Inspections; duty of owner and occupants.
Section
9-1079   Refusal to permit entry for inspection.
Division 2. Administration and Enforcement
Section
9-1080   Method of serving complaints, orders.
Section
9-1081   Dwellings in violation; preventive action or proceeding.
Section
9-1082   Petition for temporary injunction.
Section
9-1083   Enforcement by code official/code enforcement officer; assistance from
town agencies, departments.
Section
9-1084   Powers of code official/code enforcement officer.
Section
9-1085   Issue of complaint; hearing; determination of unfit dwelling;
abatement procedure.
Section
9-1086   Appeals from orders of code official/code enforcement officer.
Section
9-1087   Petition to superior court.
Section
9-1088   Unauthorized removal of posted complaint, notice or order.
Section
9-1089   Renting unfit dwelling after notice.
Section
9-1090   Certificate of occupancy.
Section
9-1091   Changes in work after permit issued.
Section
9-1092   Violations; penalty.
ARTICLE E
Minimum Standards for Non-Residential Buildings
Section
9-1093   Exercise of police powers; authority.
Section
9-1094   Definition of abandoned and/or unsafe structure.
Section
9-1095   Procedure for enforcement.
Section
9-1096   Appeal; finality of order if not appealed.
Section
9-1097   Securing, closing and demolition by the town.
Section
9-1098   Actions by Town Council.
Section
9-1099   Failure to comply with order.
Section
9-1100   Lien on property.
Section
9-1101   Other unlawful actions.
Section
9-1102   Alternative remedies.
Section
9-1103   Conflicts with other provisions.
Section
9-1104   Unsafe buildings condemned.
Section
9-1105   Appeals in general.
Section
9-1106   Changes in work after permit issued.
Section
9-1107   Report of owner's failure to comply with code official's/code
enforcement officer's order.
ARTICLE F
Abandoned Manufactured Homes
Section
9-1108   Intent.
Section
9-1109   Abandoned, nuisance and junked mobile homes unlawful.
Section
9-1110   Notice requirements for abandoned manufactured homes.
Section
9-1111   Removal of abandoned manufactured homes.
Section
9-1112   Protection against criminal or civil liability.
Section
9-1113   Appeals.
Sections 9-1114 through 9-1121. Reserved.
ARTICLE A
Codes Adopted
Section 9-1001   North Carolina State Building Code adopted; where copy filed.
   The minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe and stable
design, methods of construction and usage of materials in buildings and
structures hereafter erected, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, converted to
other uses or demolished, and the equipment, maintenance, use and occupancy of
all buildings and structures in the town, to which the North Carolina State
Building Code applies, shall be regulated in accordance with the terms of the
North Carolina State Building Code, 1967 edition, which is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as fully as though set forth at length herein;
provided, that a copy of such North Carolina State Building Code shall be
placed and remain on file in the office of the town clerk and in the office of
the building inspector. (Code 1970, Sec. 5-1)
Section 9-1002   North Carolina Uniform Residential Building Code adopted;
where copies filed.
   Whereas the North Carolina State Building Code excludes one and two-family
dwellings and certain other buildings from the provisions thereof, there is
hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as fully as though set
forth at length herein, all provisions of the North Carolina Uniform
Residential Building Code, 1968 edition, regulating the construction of one-
family and two-family dwellings within the town. A copy of the North Carolina
Residential Building Code hereby adopted is on file in the office of the town
clerk and in the office of the building inspector. (Code 1970. Sec. 5-2)
Section 9-1003   Plumbing code adopted.
   There is hereby adopted by reference by the council for the purpose of
prescribing rules and regulations governing plumbing work in the town,
including plumbing work in one-family and two-family dwellings, the provisions
of the North Carolina State Building Code, Article XX, Plumbing, 1963 edition,
and the same are here­ by incorporated herein and made a part of this chapter
as fully as though set out at length here­ in. Not less than three (3) copies
of the plumb­ ing code are on file in the town clerk's office.
Section 9-1004   National Electrical Code adopted.
   There is hereby adopted by reference by the board for the purpose of
regulating all electrical construction and materials and appliances used in
connection with electrical work and the operation of all electrical apparatus
within the town, including that in one-family and two-family dwellings, that
certain code known and designated as the National Electrical Code, 1965
edition, as recommended by the National Fire Protection Association. Three (3)
copies of the National Electrical Code are on file in the town clerk's office.
(Code 1970, Sec. 7-1)
Section 9-1005   Heating, ventilating, air-conditioning code adopted.
   There is hereby adopted by reference by the council for the purpose of
regulating heating, ventilating and air conditioning, that certain code known
as the North Carolins State Building Code, Volume III, Heating.
Section 9-1006 through section 9-1020 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Administrative Provisions
Section 9-1021   Organization of department.
   The inspection department shall consist of a building inspector and such
other personnel as required, who will be responsible for heating and air-
conditioning, electrical inspection and such other inspections as may be
necessary. The manager may in his discretion designate a person as the
department head or to assist the building inspector.
Section 9-1022   Duties generally.
   The building inspector shall enforce all of the provisions of this article
and make all inspections necessary to determine whether or not the provisions
of this article are being met.
Section 9-1023   Additional enforcement du­ ties - Dwellings unfit for hu­ man
habitation.
   The building inspector shall enforce any ordinances or codes adopted by the
governing body relating to the repair, closing and demolition of dwellings
unfit for human habitation, pursuant to section 160A-441 et seq. of the General
Statutes of North Carolina.
Section 9-1024   Same - Zoning.
   (a)   If the building inspector is charged with enforcing the zoning
ordinance of this code, then no permit for alteration, repair or construction
of any building shall be issued unless the plans and specifications show that
the building and its proposed use will be in compliance with applicable
provisions of the zoning ordinance.
   (b)   If the building inspector is not charged with enforcing the zoning
ordinance, then no permit for alteration, repair or construction of any
building shall be issued unless a zoning permit has first been issued by the
appropriate official charged with enforcing the zoning ordinance.
State Law Reference:For state law as to building inspection generally, see
G.S., 160A-441 et seq. Organization of inspection department. G.S. 160A-441.
Duties of inspection department. G. S. 160A-412.
Section 9-1025   Powers of inspectors.
   (a)   Authority. Inspectors are hereby authorized, empowered, and directed
to enforce all the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   Right-of-entry. Inspectors shall have the right-of-entry on any
premises within the jurisdiction of the regulatory codes herein adopted at
reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection or enforcement of the
requirements of this chapter, upon presentation of proper credentials.
   (c)   Stop orders. Whenever any building or part thereof is being
demolished, constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired in a hazardous
manner, or in violation of any provision of this chapter or any other town
ordinance, or in violation of any provision of any regulatory code herein
adopted, or in violation of the terms of the permit issued therefor, or in such
manner as to endanger life or property, the appropriate inspector may order
such work to be stopped immediately. Such order shall be in writing to the
owner of the property or his agent or to the person doing the work and shall
state the reasons therefor and the conditions under which the work may be
resumed.
Section 9-1026   Conflicts of interest.
   No officer or employee of the inspection department shall be financially
interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the
construction, alteration or maintenance of a building or any part thereof or in
the making of plans or specifications therefor, unless he is the owner of such
building. No officer or employee of the inspection department shall engage in
any work which is inconsistent with his duties or with the interest of the
town.
Section 9-1027   Reports and records.
   The inspection department and each inspector shall keep complete, permanent
and accurate records in convenient form of all applications received, permits
issued, inspections and reinspections made and all other work and ac­ tivities
of the department. Periodic reports shall be submitted to the manager and to
other agencies as required.
Section 9-1028   Inspection of work in progress - required generally.
   (a)   The inspection department shall inspect all buildings and work therein
for which a permit of any kind has been issued as often as necessary in order
to determine whether the work complies with this article.
   (b)   When deemed necessary by the appropriate inspector, materials and
assemblies may be inspected at the point of manufacture or fabrication, or
inspections may be made by approved and recognized inspection organi­ zations;
provided, that no approval shall be based upon reports of such organizations
unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such
organization.
   (c)   All holders of permits, or their agents, shall notify the inspection
department and the appropriate inspector at each of the following stages of
construction so that approval may be given before work is continued:
   (1)   Foundation inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated and the
necessary rein­ forcement and forms are in place, and before concrete is
placed. Drilled footings, piles and similar types of foundations shall be
inspected as installed.
   (2)   Framing inspection. To be made after all structural framing is in
place and all roughing­in of plumbing and electrical and heating has been
installed, after all fire blocking, chimneys, bracing and vents are installed,
but before any of the structure is enclosed or covered. Poured in place
concrete structural elements shall be inspected before each pour of any
structural member.
   (3)   Fireproofing inspection. To be made after all areas required to be
protected by fireproofing are lathed, but before the plastering or other
fireproofing is applied.
   (4)   Final inspection. To be made after building or structure has all doors
hung, fixtures set, and ready for occupancy, but before the building is
occupied.
State Law Reference: For similar state law on conflict of interest, see G. S.
160A415. Records, see G. S. 160A433. Inspection of work in progress, see G. S.
160A420.
Section 9-1029   Calls for inspection.
   (a)   Request for inspections may be made to the office of the inspection
department or to the appropriate inspector. The inspection department shall
make inspections as soon as practicable after request is made therefor,
provided such work is ready for inspection at the time the request is made.
   (b)   Reinspections may be made at the convenience of the inspector. No work
shall be inspected until it is in proper and completed condition ready for
inspection. All work which has been concealed before the inspection and
approval shall be uncovered at the request of the inspector and placed in
condition for proper inspection. Approval or rejection of the work shall be
furnished by the appropriate inspector in the form of a notice posted on the
building or given to the permit holder or his agent. Failure to call for
inspections or proceeding without approval at each stage of construction shall
be deemed a violation of this article.
Section 9-1030   Same; survey of street lines.
   Street or alley lines. Where the applicant for a permit proposes to erect
any building or structure on the line of any street, alley, or other public
place, he shall secure a survey of the line of such street, alley, or other
public place, adjacent to the property upon which such building or structure is
to be erected before proceeding with construction of such building or
structure. It shall be the duty of the building inspector to see that the
building does not encroach upon such street, alley, or other public place.
Section 9-1031   Certificate of occupancy.
   No new building or part thereof, no addition or enlargement of any existing
building, and no existing building after being altered or moved shall be
occupied, and no change of occupancy shall be made in any existing building or
part thereof until issued a certificate of occupancy therefor. A temporary
certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion or portions of a building
which may safely be occupied prior to final completion and occupancy of the
entire building. Application for a certificate of occupancy may be made by the
owner or his agent after all final inspections have been made for new
buildings, or, in the case of ex1stfng buildings, after supplying the
information and data necessary to determine compliance with this chapter, the
appropriate regulatory codes and any zoning ordinance for the occupancy
intended. The inspection department shall issue a certificate of occupancy
when, after examination and inspection, it is found that the building in all
respects conforms to the provisions of this chapter, the regulatory codes, and
any zoning ordinance for the occupancy intended.
Section 9-1032   Oversight not to legalize violation.
   No oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of any inspector or other
official or employee of the inspection department shall be deemed to legalize
the violation of any provi­ sion of this chapter or any provisions of any
regulatory code herein adopted.
Section 9-1033 through section 9-1040 reserved.
ARTICLE C
General Provisions
Section 9-1041   Scope of article.
   (a)   The provisions of this article and of the regulatory codes herein
adopted shall apply to the following:
   (1)   The location, design, materials, equipment, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, maintenance, moving, demolition, removal,
use and occupancy of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected
or attached to such building or structure.
   (2)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of
plumbing systems consisting of house sewers, building drains, waste and vent
systems, hot and cold water supply systems and all fixtures and appurtenances
thereof.
   (3)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of
mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and
refrigeration systems, fuel burning equipment and appurtenances thereof.
   (4)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of
electrical systems and appurtenances thereof.
   (b)   The adoption of this article and the codes herein adopted by reference
shall constitute a resolution within the meaning of section 143-138 (b) of the
General Statutes of North Carolina making the regulatory codes herein adopted
applicable to dwellings and out buildings used in connection therewith and to
apartment buildings used exclusively as the residence of not more than two (2)
families.
Section 9-1042   Registration of contractors; required.
   Every person carrying on the business of building contractor, plumbing
contractor, heating and air-conditioning contractor or electrical contractor
within the town shall register at the office of the inspection department,
giving his name and place of business.
Section 9-1043   Same; bond.
   The building inspector may at his discretion request a good and sufficient
bond in the sum of $1000, to be approved by the town attorney, conditioned upon
the faithful performance of a contractor in doing any work which he con­ tracts
to do and indemnifying the town against loss in any manner whatsoever for any
unskillful or negligent work or conduct in the performance of the duties
imposed by the provisions of this article, for any damage to any utility lines,
streets or sidewalks in the town, for the use of defective or improper material
in such work, for any damage which may accrue to any person by reason of
default of the contract or for the pay­ ment of any inspection or other fees
required by this article.
Section 9-1044   Permits; required.
   (a)   Building permit. No person shall commence or proceed with the
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, removal or demolition of any
building or any part thereof, without a written permit therefor from the
building inspector; provided, that no building permit shall be required for
work the total cost of which does not exceed $100 and which does not involve
any change of the structural parts or the stairways, elevators, fire escapes or
other means of egress from the building.
   In cases of removal or demolition of a building or structure, a good and
sufficient bond in the sum of $500 may be required to be posted by the property
owner or by his contractor at the time of application for a permit to insure
complete removal or demolition, including all rubble and debris. Failure on the
part of the property owner or his contractor to completely demolish, remove and
clear the premises after 30 days' notice by the building inspector, shall be
cause for forfeiture of such bond.
   (b)   Plumbing permit. No person shall commence or proceed with the
installation, extension, or general repair of any plumbing system without a
written permit therefor from the plumbing inspector; provided, that no permit
shall be required for minor repairs or replacements on the house side of a trap
to an installed system of plumbing if such repairs or replacements do not
disrupt an original water supply or the waste or ventilating systems.
   (c)   Heating and air-conditioning permit. No person shall commence or
proceed with the installation, extension, alteration or general repair of any
heating or cooling equipment system without a written permit from the heating
and air-conditioning inspector; provided, that no permit shall be required for
minor repairs or minor burner services or filter replacements of warm air
furnaces or cooling system.
   (d)   Electrical permit. No person shall commence or proceed with the
installation, extension, alteration or gene:tal repair of any electrical
wiring, devices, appliances or equipment without a written permit therefor from
the electrical inspector; provided, that no permit shall be required for minor
repair work such as the replacement of lamps or the connection of portable
devices to suitable receptacles which have been permanently installed. No
permit shall be required for the installation, alteration or repair of the
electrical wiring, devices, appliances and equipment installed by or for an
electrical public utility corporation for the use of such corporation in the
generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electrical energy or for
the use of such corporation in the operation of signals or the transmission of
intelligence.
State Law Reference: For state law as to construction, plumbing, etc., see G.
S. 160A417.
Section 9-1045   Same; contents of application.
   Written application shall be made for all permits required by this article
on forms provided by the inspection department at least five (5) days prior to
construction. Such application shall be made by the owner of the building
affected or by his authorized agent or representative, and, in addition to such
other information as may be required by the appropriate inspector, shall show
the following:
   (1)   Name, residence and business address of the owner.
   (2)   Name, residence and business address of the authorized representative
or agent, if any.
   (3)   Name and address of the contractor, if any, together with evidence
that he has obtained a certificate from the appropriate state licensing board
for such contractors, if such is required for the work involved in the permit
for which application is made.
Section 9-1046   Same; plans and specifications.
   (a)   Detailed plans and specifications shall accompany each application for
a permit when the estimated total cost of the building is in excess of the
amount provided by state law, and for any other building where plans and
specifications are deemed necessary by the appropriate inspector in order for
him to determine whether the proposed work complies with the appropriate
regulatory codes.
   (b)   Plans shall be drawn to scale with sufficient clarity to indicate the
nature and extent of the work proposed, and the plans and specifications
together shall contain information suffi­ cient to indicate that the work
proposed will conform to the provisions of this article.
   (c)   Where plans and specifications are required, a copy of the same shall
be kept at the work until all authorized operations have been completed and
approved by the appropriate inspector.
Section 9-1047   Same; limitations.
   (a)   No building permit shall be issued for any building the estimated
total cost of which is more than $30,000 unless the work is to be per­ formed
by a licensed general contractor.
   (b)   No building permit shall be issued for any building, other than a one
or two (2) family dwelling, the estimated total cost of which is more than
$30,000 unless the plans bear the state seal of a registered architect or a
registered engineer.
   (c)   Where any provision of the state law or of this code or other
ordinance requires that work be done by a licensed specialty contractor of any
kind, no permit for such work shall be issued unless it is to be performed by
such contractor.
   (d)   Where detailed plans and specifications are required under this
article, no building permit shall be issued unless such plans and
specifications have been provided.
Section 9-1048   Same; issuance.
   When proper application for a permit has been made and the appropriate
inspector is satisfied that the application and the proposed work comply with
the provisions of this chapter, he shall issue such permit upon payment of the
proper fees as provided in section
9-2012.
Section 9-1049   Same; revocation.
   The appropriate inspector may revoke and require the return of any permit by
notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason for such revocation.
Permits shall be revoked for any material departure from the approved
application plans or specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with
proper orders of the inspector; for refusal or failure to comply with
requirements of this article, or for false statements or misrepresentations
made in securing such permit.
Section 9-1050   Time limitations on validity of permit.
   All permits issued under this article shall expire by limitation six (6)
months after the date of issuance if the work authorized by the permit has not
been commenced. If after commencement the work is discontinued for a period of
12 months, the permit therefor shall immediately expire. No work authorized by
any permit which has expired shall thereafter be performed until a new permit
therefor has been secured.
Section 9-1051   Changes in work after permit issued.
   After a permit has been issued, no changes or deviations from the terms of
the application and permit or changes or deviations from the plans or
specifications involving any work under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall
be made until specific written approval of such changes or deviations has been
obtained from the appropriate inspector.
Section 9-1052   Schedule of permit fees.
   Fees for permits shall be based upon the total estimated cost of the
proposed work, including all sub-contracts if any, but in no case shall the
total estimated cost be less than the market value of similar completed work in
the town as determined by the appropriate inspector. Permit fees shall be as
set out in the schedule in the town clerk's office.
Section 9-1053 through section 9-1060 reserved.
ARTICLE D
Minimum Housing Standards
State Law reference–Municipal housing standards authorized, G.S. 160A-441 et
seq.
Division 1.
Section 9-1061   Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling
unit," "rooming house," "rooming unit" and "premises" are used in this article,
they shall be construed as though followed by the words "or any part thereof."
   Accessory building or outhouse means a building or structure the use of
which is incidental to that of the main building or structure and which is
located on the same lot or a contiguous lot.
   Alter or alteration means any change or modification in construction or
occupancy.
   Basement means a portion of a building located completely underground or
partly underground, having direct access to light and air from windows located
above the level of the adjoining ground.
   Building means any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. The term "building" shall
be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof."
   Cellar means a portion of a building located partly or wholly underground
having an inadequate access to light and air from windows located partly or
wholly below the level of the adjoining ground.
   Code Official/Code Enforcement Officer means the official, or code
enforcement officer, or other person charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article or duly authorized representative.
   Dwelling means any building, structure, manufactured home or mobile home, or
part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used,
and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually
enjoyed therewith, except that it does not include any temporary dwelling or
any manufactured home or mobile home, which is used solely for a seasonal
vacation purpose. "Manufactured home" or "mobile home" means a structure as
defined in G.S. 143-145(7).
   Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
   Exit means a clear and unobstructed way of departure from the interior of a
building or structure to the exterior at street or grade level.
   Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved
by the code enforcement officer.
   Floor area means the total area of all habitable space in a building or
structure.
   Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms,
water closet compartments and laundries.
   Infestation means the presence, within or around a dwelling of any insects,
rodents or other pests.
   Multiple dwelling means any building or portion thereof which is designed,
built, rent, leased, let or hired out to be occupied or which is occupied as
the home or residence of more than two (2) families living independently of
each other and doing their own cooking in the building, and shall include flats
and apartments.
   Occupant means any person living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having
actual possession of, a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
   Openable area means that part of a window, porch or door which is available
for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
   Operator means any person who has the charge, care or control of a building
or part thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
   Owner means any person who, alone or jointly, or severally with others:
   (1)   Has title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or
   (2)   Has the charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as
owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, administrator, trustee or guardian
of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner
shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article, and of rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he is the owner.
   Parties in interest means all individuals, associations and corporations who
have interest of record in a dwelling, and any who are in possession thereof.
   Plumbing means and includes all of the following supplied facilities and
equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, mechanical garbage
disposal units (mechanical sink grinder), waste pipes, water closets, sinks,
installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes
washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents and any other similar supply
fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
   Premises means a lot, plat or parcel of land, including the buildings or
structures thereon.
   Public authority means any housing authority, or any official in charge of
any department or branch of the government of the town, the county or the state
relating to health, fire or building regulations, or to other activities
concerning housing in the town.
   Removal means the demolition and removal of the entire building, leaving the
premises free and clear of any debris; any excavation properly filled in and
with no holes or pockets which retain water.
   Rooming/boarding house means any dwelling or that part of any dwelling
containing one (1) or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or
operator to two (2) or more persons, who are not husband and wife, son or
daughter, mother or father or sister or brother of the owner or operator.
   Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking
or eating.
   Rubbish means combustible or noncombustible waste materials except garbage,
including but not limited to, the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke
and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass crockery and dust, and discarded appliances.
   Story means that part of a building between one (1) floor and the floor or
roof next above.
   Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building
of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts
joined together in some definite manner. The term "structure" shall be
construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof."
   Substandard means any condition existing in any housing or structure which
does not meet the standards of fitness of this article.
   Supplied means paid for, furnished or provided by, or under the contract of,
the owner or operator.
   Temporary housing means any tent, trailer or other structure used for human
shelter which is designed to be transportable (i.e. motor home) and which is
not attached to the ground, to another structure or to any utilities system on
the same premises legally for more than sixty (60) consecutive days.
   Unfit for human habitation means that conditions exist in a dwelling which
violate or do not comply with one (1) or more of the minimum standards of
fitness established by this article.
   Ventilation means the insufflation and the exsufflation of air by natural
means to and from housing.
   Ventilation, mechanical means ventilation by power- driven devices.
   Ventilation, natural means ventilation by opening to outer air through
windows, sky-lights, doors, louvers or stacks with or without wind-driven
devices.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1062   Findings; purpose.
   The Town Council finds and declares that there now exists in the town and
its one-mile jurisdiction and may reasonably be expected to exist in the
future, housing which is unfit for human habitation because of dilapidation;
defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; lack of
ventilation, adequate lighting or sanitary facilities; or because of conditions
rendering such housing unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the
health, safety or morals, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents
of the town and its area of jurisdiction; and that a public necessity exists to
exercise police powers of the town pursuant to G.S. Ch. 160A, art. 19, and
other applicable laws, as now or hereafter amended, to cause the repair and
rehabilitation, closing or demolishing of such housing in the manner provided
in this article; and pursuant to the exercise for the police power, the Town
Council finds as fact and so declares that the ensuing sections of this article
are necessary to the implementa tion of its purposes hereinabove declared in
this section and that, specifically, but without limitation, the minimum
standards of fitness for dwellings and dwelling units as enacted in this
article are reasonable and necessary for this community and are all reasonable
and necessary criteria for determining whether dwellings and dwelling units in
this town are fit for human habitation.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
State Law reference–Similar provisions, G.S. 160A-441.
Section 9-1063   Conflicts.
   The provisions of this article shall not be construed to conflict with any
other applicable laws, codes or ordinances pertaining to housing, but are
supplemental thereto and where the provisions of this article are similar to
provisions of other applicable codes or ordinances, the more stringent
provisions shall apply.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1064   Scope.
   (a)   Every building used in whole or in part as a dwelling unit or as two
(2) or more dwelling units, or as a rooming house or boardinghouse, shall
conform to the requirements of this article irrespective of the primary use of
such building, and irrespective of when such building may have been
constructed, altered or repaired.
   (b)   This article establishes minimum standards for occupancy and does not
replace or modify standards otherwise established for construction, replacement
or repair of buildings except such as are contrary to the provisions of this
article.
   (c)   In addition to the exercise of police power authorized in this article
with respect to dwellings, the town shall cause to be repaired, closed or
demolished any abandoned structure which the Council finds to be a health or
safety hazard as a result of the attraction of insects or rodents, conditions
creating a fire hazard, dangerous condition constituting a threat to children
or frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in the absence of sanitary
facilities. The repair, closing or demolition of such structures shall be
pursuant to the same provisions and procedures as are prescribed in this
article for the repair, closing or demolition of dwelling found to be unfit for
human habitation.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1065   Alternative remedies.
   Neither this article nor any of its provisions shall be construed to impair
or limit in any way the power of the town to define and declare nuisances and
to cause their abatement by summary action, or otherwise, or to enforce this
article by criminal process or otherwise, and the enforcement of any remedy
provided in this article shall not prevent the enforcement of any other remedy
or remedies provided in this Code or in other ordinances or laws.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
State Law reference–Similar provisions, G.S. 160A-450.
Section 9-1066   Right of access.
   (a)   For the purpose of making inspections, the code enforcement officer is
hereby authorized to enter, examine, and survey at all reasonable times all
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises. The owner or occupant of
every dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit, or the person in charge
thereof, shall give the official free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit,
or rooming unit and its premises at all reasonable times for the purposes of
such inspection, examination, and survey.
   (b)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner
thereof, or agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling
unit, and its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such
repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the
provisions of this article or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
State Law reference–Power to inspect, G.S. 160A-412, 160A-424, 160A-448.
Section 9-1067   Methods of service of complaints and orders.
   Complaints or orders issued by the official shall be served upon persons
either personally or by registered or certified mail, but if the whereabouts of
such persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the official, he
shall make an affidavit to that effect, and the serving of such complaint or
order upon such person may be made by publishing the same once each week for
two successive weeks in a newspaper, printed and published in the town. Where
service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or
order.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1068   Compliance.
   Every dwelling and dwelling unit used as a human habitation or held out for
use as a human habitation shall comply with all of the requirements of this
article. No person shall occupy as a human habitation any dwelling or dwelling
unit which does not comply with all of the requirements of this article.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1069   Space use.
   The minimum standards for space use are as follows:
   (1)   A principal area shall not have less than one hundred fifty (150)
square feet.
   (2)   A kitchen-dining room combination, if any, shall have not less than
one hundred (100) square feet.
   (3)   A first bedroom, if any, shall have not less than one hundred (100)
square feet.
   (4)   A second bedroom, if any, shall have not less than seventy (70) square
feet.
   (5)   Each habitable room shall have at least seventy (70) square feet.
   (6)   At least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space in
habitable rooms shall be provided for the first occupant in each dwelling unit;
at least one hundred (100) square feet of additional floor space shall be
provided for each of the next three (3) occupants; and at least seventy-five
(75) square feet of additional floor space shall be provided for each
additional occupant over the number of four (4) (children one (1) year of age
and under shall not be counted).
   (7)   At least seventy (70) square feet of bedroom floor space shall be
provided for the first occupant; at least twenty (20) square feet of additional
bedroom floor space shall be provided for the second occupant; and at least
thirty (30) square feet of additional bedroom floor space shall be provided for
each occupant over the number of two (2) (children one (1) year of age and
under shall not be counted).
   (8)   Those habitable rooms which must be included to meet the foregoing
minimum space standards shall be at least seven (7) feet wide in any part with
at least one-half of the floor area having a ceiling height of at least seven
(7) feet. That portion of any room where the ceiling height is less than five
(5) feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area.
   (9)   No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit
unless:
   (a)   The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and
surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness.
   (b)   The total of window area in each room is equal to at least the window
area sizes prescribed in the following section for habitable rooms.
   (c)   The total of functionally opening window area in each room is equal to
at least the room area prescribed in the following section for habitable rooms,
except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation
approved by the director of inspections.
   (10)   Toilet and bathing facilities shall be structurally enclosed and
shall be located so as not to require passage through an openable area.
   (11)   Bathroom walls, toilet room walls and bedroom walls shall have no
holes or excessive cracks.
   (12)   Access shall be provided to all rooms within a dwelling unit without
passing through a public space or another dwelling unit.
   (13)   Doors shall be provided at all doorways leading to bedrooms, toilet
rooms, bathrooms and at all rooms adjoining a public space.
   (14)   Each living unit shall have a specific kitchen space, which contains
a sink with counter workspace and has hot and cold running water and adequate
space for storing cooking utensils.
   (15)   Electric, water and sewer must be in working order.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1070   Light and ventilation.
   The minimum standards for light and ventilation are as follows:
   (1)   Every habitable room shall have at least one (1) window or skylight
facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area measured between
stops for every habitable room shall be eight (8) percent of the floor area of
such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of any
such room and such light obstruction structures are located less than five (5)
feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the
room, they shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total
window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight- type window in
the top of such room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at
least fifteen (15) percent of the total floor area of such room.
   (2)   Every room in a dwelling unit and means of egress shall be
sufficiently illuminated so as to provide safe and satisfactory uses.
   (3)   Year-round mechanically ventilating systems may be substituted for
windows, as required herein, but must be approved by the code enforcement
officer, in rooms other than rooms used for sleeping purposes.
   (4)   All outside windows and doors used for ventilation shall be screened.
   (5)   All windows and doors shall be made weather tight.
   (6)   Windows and doors shall have no broken glass and shall have adequate
operable locks and hardware.
   (7)   Openable window area in each toilet room shall be at least two (2)
square feet, unless served by mechanical ventilation.
   (8)   Natural ventilation of spaces such as attics and enclosed non-basement
space shall be provided by openings of sufficient size to overcome dampness and
to minimize the effect of conditions conducive to decay and deterioration of
the structure, and to prevent excessive heat in attics.
   (9)   Utility spaces containing heat-producing, air-conditioning and other
equipment shall be ventilated according to manufacturer's requirements.
   (10)   Mechanical ventilation shall be of sufficient size to eliminate
dampness and odors of the area it is serving.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1071   Exits.
   (a)   Two (2) main exits, each at least thirty (30) inches wide and six (6)
feet eight (8) inches high, easily accessible to the occupants of each housing
unit, shall be provided, unless a single exit is permitted as an exception by
provisions of the state building code, as from time to time amended. All exit
doors shall be easily operable.
   (b)   Platforms, steps and/or handrails shall be provided to serve exits and
maintained in a safe condition.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1072   Plumbing.
   The minimum plumbing standards are as follows:
   (1)   The plumbing systems shall be connected to the town sanitary sewer
system, where available; otherwise, the plumbing system shall be connected onto
an approved septic tank.
   (2)   All plumbing fixtures shall meet the standards of the town plumbing
code and shall be maintained in a state of good repair and in good working
order.
   (3)   There shall be provided a hot water heater (minimum thirty-gallon
capacity) furnishing hot water to each tub or shower, lavatory and kitchen
sink.
   (4)   Installed water supply inside the building shall be provided for each
housing unit.
   (5)   Installed water closet, tub or shower, lavatory and sink shall be
provided for each dwelling unit.
   (6)   Separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
   (7)   Toilet and bathing facilities shall be structurally protected from the
weather.
   (8)   All water piping shall be protected from freezing by proper
installation in protected space.
   (9)   At least one (1) main vent of a minimum diameter of two (2) inches
shall be properly installed for each building.
   (10)   Sewer and water lines shall be properly supported with no broken or
leaking lines.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1073   Heating.
   The minimum heating standards are as follows:
   (1)   Reserved.
   (2)   Every dwelling unit shall have heating facilities which are properly
installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition and are capable of
safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms and bathrooms in every
dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of at least sixty-eight (68)
degrees Fahrenheit at a distance three (3) feet above floor level, under
ordinary minimum winter conditions.
   (3)   All gas-heating and oil-heating equipment installed on the premises
shall be of a type approved by Underwriters' Laboratories or by the American
Gas Association and shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of the
state building code.
   (4)   Liquid fuel stored on the premises shall be stored in accordance with
the provisions of the National Fire Prevention Association standards.
   (5)   Chimneys and fireplaces shall have no loose bricks.
   (6)   Flues shall have no holes.
   (7)   There shall be no hanging masonry chimneys.
   (8)   Thimbles shall be grouted in tight.
   (9)   Thimbles shall be installed high enough for stovepipe to rise one-
fourth inch per foot minimum.
   (10)   Hearths shall be at least twenty (20) inches deep and seven (7)
inches beyond each side of the fireplace opening.
   (11)   No combustible materials shall be within seven (7) inches beyond each
side of the fireplace opening.
   (12)   If the fireplace opening is closed because of hazardous conditions,
the closure shall be of masonry or other approved material as determined by the
code enforcement officer.
   (13)   Any stove shall be within six (6) feet of the thimble serving it.
   (14)   Stovepipes and vents shall comply with volume 3 of the state building
code.
   (15)   No unvented combustible space heaters shall be used.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
State law reference–G.S. 136-443.1
Section 9-1074   Electricity.
   The minimum electrical standards are as follows:
   (1)   Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall be wired for electric lights
and convenience receptacles, which shall be connected in such manner as
determined by the National Electric Code, as adopted by the town.
   (2)   No receptacles, ceiling fixtures or other fixtures shall be broken or
hanging loose.
   (3)   All toggle switches and fixtures shall be safely operable.
   (4)   At least two (2) duplex convenience outlets, as remote from each other
as practicable, shall be provided per habitable room.
   (5)   At least one (1) light outlet in each bathroom, hall, kitchen and
porch, and over exterior steps to the second floor shall be provided.
   (6)   There shall be no bare wires, open joints or spliced cables.
   (7)   Flexible cords shall not be used as a substitute for the fixed wiring
of a structure, nor shall flexible cords be run through holes in walls,
ceilings or floors, through doorways, windows, or similar openings, or be
attached to building surfaces or concealed behind building walls, ceilings or
floors.
   (8)   No branch circuits shall be overloaded.
   (9)   A minimum of three (3) branch circuits, plus separate circuits for
each fixed appliance, shall be provided in each dwelling unit.
   (10)   There shall be provided service equipment and a lighting panel of
adequate capacity and size (minimum of sixty-ampere capacity) to accommodate
the existing or the required number of branch circuits, and the equipment shall
be properly grounded.
   (11)   Outlets in kitchens and bathrooms shall be ground-fault interrupter
device protected.
   (12)   All residences shall have a smoke detector on each livable floor. The
property owner shall be responsible for installing a fresh battery with change
in tenants; the tenant shall be responsible for maintaining the unit and shall
not commit any act that shall render the unit inactive.
   (13)   All rental dwelling units having a fossil fuel burning heater or
appliance or fireplace shall provide a minimum of one operable carbon monoxide
detector per unit per level. A carbon monoxide detector is also required for an
attached garage. The landlord shall install, replace or repair the carbon
monoxide monitor(s) unless the landlord and tenant have a written agreement to
the contrary.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1075   Structural requirements.
   The minimum structural standards shall be as follows:
   (1)   Foundation:
   a.   A foundation shall support the building at all points and shall be free
of holes and cracks which admit rodents, water or dampness to the interior of
the building or which lessen the capability of the foundation to support the
building.
   b.   The foundation shall be on firm, reasonably dry ground, and there shall
be no water standing or running under the building.
   c.   Footings shall be sound and have adequate bearing capacity.
   d.   Piers shall be sound.
   e.   No wood stiff knees or other improper piers shall be allowed.
   f.   All structures shall be underpinned or enclosed in an approved manner,
such as aluminum, galvanized, asbestos or masonry.
   (2)   Floors:
   a.   No rotted or termite-damaged sills shall be allowed.
   b.   No broken, overloaded or sagging sills shall be allowed.
   c.   Sills shall be reasonably level.
   d.   Sills shall be properly and sufficiently supported.
   e.   Sills shall clear the ground by at least eighteen (18) inches.
   f.   No rotted or termite-damaged joists shall be allowed.
   g.   No broken or sagging joists shall be allowed.
   h.   Flooring shall be weather tight without holes or cracks which permit
air to excessively penetrate rooms.
   i.   Flooring shall be reasonably smooth, not rotten or worn through.
   j.   No loose flooring shall be allowed.
   k.   Floors shall be reasonably level.
   (3)   Walls, exterior:
   a.   Every exterior wall shall be protected with paint or other protective
covering to prevent the entrance or penetration of moisture or the weather.
   b.   No studs which are rotted or termite-damaged shall be allowed.
   c.   No broken or cracked structural members shall be allowed.
   d.   No loose siding shall be allowed.
   e.   Walls used as partitions shall not lean or buckle.
   f.   No deteriorated siding or covering shall be allowed.
   (4)   Walls, interior:
   a.   The interior finish shall be free of holes and cracks, which permit air
to excessively penetrate rooms.
   b.   No loose plaster, loose boards or other loose wall materials shall be
allowed.
   c.   There shall be no cardboard, newspaper or other highly combustible
material allowed as a wall finish.
   d.   No studs shall be rotted or termite-damaged.
   e.   No broken or cracked studs or other broken or cracked structural
members shall be allowed.
   (5)   Ceilings:
   a.   No joists shall be rotted, broken or sagging or have improperly
supported ends.
   b.   There shall be allowed no holes or cracks, which permit air to
excessively penetrate rooms.
   c.   No loose plaster, loose boards, loose sheetrock or other loose ceiling
finish shall be allowed.
   d.   There shall be allowed as ceiling finishes no cardboard or other highly
combustible material.
   (6)   Roofs:
   a.   Rafters shall not be rotted, broken or sagging or have improperly
supported ends.
   b.   No rafters seriously fire-damaged shall be allowed.
   c.   Attics shall be properly vented.
   d.   No rotted, loose, or sagging sheathing shall be allowed.
   e.   No loose roof covering shall be allowed nor shall there be allowed any
holes or leaks, which could cause damage to the structure or rooms.
   f.   Walls and chimneys shall have proper flashing.
   (7)   Stairs and steps:
   a.   Stairs and steps shall be free of holes, grooves and cracks large
enough to constitute accident hazards.
   b.   Stairwells and flights of stairs more than four (4) risers or having
risers more than thirty (30) inches high shall have rails not less than two (2)
feet six (6) inches measured vertically from the nose of the treads to the top
of the rail.
   c.   Every rail shall be firmly fastened and maintained in good condition.
   d.   No flight of stairs settled more than one (1) inch out of its intended
position or pulled away from supporting or adjacent structures shall be
allowed.
   e.   No rotting, sagging or deteriorated supports shall be allowed.
   (8)   Porches and appurtenances:
   a.   Every outside and inside porch and any appurtenance thereto shall be
safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be
kept in sound condition and good repair.
   b.   Protective railings shall be required on any unenclosed structure over
three (3) feet from the ground level.
   (9)   Accessory structures: All accessory buildings and structures,
including detached garages, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good
repair or shall be raised to grade level and the debris therefrom removed from
the premises.
   (10)   Supplied facilities: Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or
utility which is required under this article shall be so constructed or
installed that it will function safely and effectively and shall be maintained
in satisfactory working condition.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1076   Property maintenance.
   The minimum property maintenance standards are as follows:
   (1)   Buildings and structures:
   a.   Exterior wood surfaces not inherently resistant to deterioration shall
be treated with a protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative,
with sufficient frequency to prevent deterioration.
   b.   Floors, walls, ceilings and fixtures shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition.
   (2)   Public areas: Every owner of a structure containing two (2) or more
dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary
condition the shared or public areas of the structure and premises thereof.
   (3)   Rubbish and garbage: Every person who occupies and controls a dwelling
unit shall dispose of all rubbish and garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by
placing it in proper storage facilities.
   (4)   Premises:
   a.   Fences and other minor structures shall be maintained in safe and
substantial condition.
   b.   Yards and courts shall be kept clean and free of physical hazards,
rubbish, trash and garbage.
   c.   No heavy undergrowth or accumulations of plant growth which are noxious
or detrimental to health shall be allowed.
   d.   Every premises shall be provided with all- weather vehicular access to
and from the premises at all times by an abutting public or private street.
   e.   Walks and steps, constructed so as to provide safety, reasonable
durability and economy of maintenance, should be provided for convenient all-
weather access to the structure.
   f.   Access to the rear yard from each dwelling unit shall be required. Such
access is not, however, acceptable where it is dependent upon passage through
another dwelling unit. Each building shall be provided with access to the rear
yard. This access for a detached dwelling shall be directly from a street.
   g.    Any nonresidential use of the premises shall be subordinate to its
residential use and character.
   (5)   Infestation:
   a.   Premises, buildings and structures shall, by generally accepted methods
of extermination, be maintained free of vermination and rodent harborage and
infestation.
   b.   Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for
ventilation and every other opening to a basement or cellar, which might
provide an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with screens installed or with
such other approved devices as will effectively prevent entrance by rodents.
   c.   Every head-of-household occupant of a structure containing a single
dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects,
rodents or other pests therein or on the premises; and every head- of-household
occupant of a dwelling unit in a structure containing more than one (1)
dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever the dwelling
unit is the only one infested. Whenever infestation is caused by failure of the
owner to maintain a structure in a rodent proof or reasonably insect proof
condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever
infestation exists in two (2) or more of the dwelling units in any structure or
in the shared or public parts of any structure containing two (2) or more
dwelling units, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
   (6)   Cleanliness: Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep
in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and
premises thereof which he occupies and controls.
   (7)   Supplied plumbing fixtures: Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall
keep all supplied plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition
and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use
and operation of same.
   (8)   Care of facilities, equipment and structure: No occupant shall
willfully destroy, deface or impair any of the facilities or equipment of any
part of the structure of a dwelling or dwelling unit.
   (9)   Lead Paint per North Carolina G.S. 130A-131.7 All property owners
shall comply with lead paint provisions and abatement. Property owner assumes
all costs of abatement and repairs. All homes constructed before the year 1978
will be subject to lead paint testing.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1077   Rooming/Boarding houses.
   All of the provisions of this article and all of the minimum standards and
requirements of this article shall be applicable to rooming houses, and to
every person who operates a rooming house, or who occupies or lets to another
for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except as provided in the
following subsections:
   (1)   At least one (1) flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or
shower, properly connected to a water and sewer system and in good working
condition, shall be supplied for each four (4) rooms within a rooming house
whenever such facilities are shared. All such facilities shall be located on
the floor they serve within the dwelling so as to be reasonably accessible from
a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities.
   (2)   Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot
water at all times.
   (3)   Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one (1) person shall
contain at least seventy (50) square feet of floor space and every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one (1) person shall contain at
least fifty (70) square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
   (4)   Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress
leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws of the
governed area or of the state.
   (5)   The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the
sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings, and for maintenance of
a sanitary condition in every part of the rooming house. He shall be further
responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises when the entire
structure or building is leased or occupied by the operator.
   (6)   No person shall operate a rooming house unless he holds a valid
rooming house license and keeps same posted on the premises.
   (7)   The Town Council on a quarterly basis shall inspect rooming houses,
according to G.S. 160A-424.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1078   Inspections; duty of owner and occupants.
   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof,
or agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit, and
its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or
alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this
article or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this
article.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1079   Refusal to permit entry for inspection.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in possession of premises on
which housing is located in the town to refuse, after being presented with a
warrant, as issued in accordance with state law, to permit the code enforcement
officer or duly appointed agents to enter upon the premises for the purpose of
making examinations as authorized by this article. Violation of this section
shall subject the offender to a civil penalty.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
State law reference–Similar provisions, G.S. 15-27.2
Division 2.
Administration and Enforcement
Section 9-1080   Method of serving complaints, orders.
   Complaints or orders issued by the code enforcement officer or designee
under this article shall be served upon persons either personally or by
registered or certified mail. When service is made by registered or certified
mail, a copy of the complaint or order may also be sent by regular mail.
Service shall be deemed sufficient if the registered or certified mail is
unclaimed or refused, but the regular mail is not returned by the post office
within ten (10) days after the mailing. If regular mail is used, a notice of
the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises
affected. If the identities of any owners or the whereabouts of persons are
unknown and cannot be ascertained by the public official in the exercise of
reasonable diligence, or, if the owners are known but have refused to accept
service by registered or certified mail, and the public official makes an
affidavit to that effect, then the serving of the complaint or order upon the
owners or other persons may be made by publication in a newspaper having
general circulation in the town at least once no later than the time at which
personal service would be required under the provisions of the part. When
service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the premises thereby affected.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
State law reference–Similar provisions, G.S. 160A-445.
Section 9-1081   Dwellings in violation; preventive action or proceeding.
   If any dwelling is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted,
maintained or used in violation of this article or any valid order or decision
of the official made pursuant to this article, the official may institute any
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration or use, to restrain, correct or abate
the violation, to prevent the occupancy of the dwelling or to prevent any
illegal act, conduct or use in or about the premises of the dwelling.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
State law reference–Similar provisions, G.S. 160A-446(g).
Section 9-1082   Petition for temporary injunction.
   Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the official may petition the
superior court for an injunction restraining the official from carrying out the
order or decision and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary
injunction restraining the official pending a final disposition of the case.
The petition shall be filed within thirty (30) days after issuance of the order
or rendering of the decision. Hearings shall be had by the court on a petition
within twenty (20) days, and shall be given preference over other matters on
the court calendar. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and
shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require. It shall
not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary
injunction.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
State law reference–Similar provisions, G.S. 160A-446(f).
Section 9-1083   Enforcement by code official/ code enforcement officer;
assistance from town agencies, departments.
   (a)   The code enforcement officer shall be responsible for the enforcement
of this article.
   (b)   The code enforcement officer shall have authority to request the
advice and assistance of the town planning board, the housing authority, the
fire department, the health department, and any other public authority may be
deemed appropriate, in determining those areas of the town in which substandard
housing may be prevalent, and designate and schedule such areas for
comprehensive inspection under this article. This procedure shall be in
addition to regular, town wide inspections under this article.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1084   Powers of code official/code enforcement officer.
   The code enforcement officer is authorized to exercise any powers necessary
or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this
article, including the following powers in addition to others granted:
   (1)   To investigate the dwelling conditions in the town in order to
determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation;
   (2)   To administer oaths; affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
   (3)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations in a
manner that will do the least possible inconvenience to the persons in
possession;
   (4)   To appoint and fix the duties of officials, agents and employees
necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinances;
   (5)   To delegate any of the functions and powers under the ordinance to
other officials and other agents.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
State law reference–Similar provisions, G.S. 160A-448.
Section 9-1085   Issue of complaint; hearing; determination of unfit dwelling;
abatement procedure.
   (a)   Whenever a petition is filed with the code enforcement officer by a
public authority or by at least five (5) residents of the town charging that
any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, or whenever it
appears to the official that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human
habitation, the code enforcement officer shall, if the preliminary
investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served
upon the owner of and parties in interest in such dwelling or dwelling unit a
complaint stating the charges and containing a notice that a hearing will be
held before the official, at a place within the county, not less than ten (10)
nor more than thirty (30) days after the serving of the complaint. The owner or
any party in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint
and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time
fixed in the complaint. Notice of such hearing shall also be given to at least
one (1) of the persons signing a petition relating to such dwelling. Any person
desiring to do so may attend such hearing and give evidence relevant to the
matter being heard. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity
shall not be controlling in hearings before the official.
   (b)   If after such notice and hearing the official determines that the
dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation, the code
enforcement officer shall state in writing the findings of fact in support of
such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owners an
order as follows:
   (1)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling can be made
at a cost not to exceed fifty (50) percent of the value of the dwelling,
requiring the owner, within the time specified, to repair, alter or improve the
dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation or to vacate and close
the dwelling as a human habitation;
   (2)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling cannot be
made at a cost not to exceed (50) percent of the value of the dwelling,
requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to remove or
demolish such dwelling.
   (3)   If a house has been closed and/or boarded, for a period of one year or
longer, after being closed following proceedings under the substandard housing
regulations and Town Council determines that the owner has abandoned the intent
and purpose to render it fit for human habitation and that continuation of the
dwelling in its vacated and closed status would be inimical to the health,
safety, morals and welfare of the community in that the dwelling would continue
to deteriorate, would create a fire and safety hazard, would be a threat to
children and vagrants, would cause or contribute to blight and deterioration of
property values in the area, then in such circumstances, the Town Council may,
after the expiration of such one year period, enact an ordinance and serve such
ordinance on the owner, setting forth the following:
   a.   If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it fit
for human habitation can be made at a cost not exceeding fifty (50) percent of
the then current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require that the
owner either repair or demolish and remove the dwelling within ninety (90)
days; or,
   b.   If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it fit
for human habitation cannot be made at a cost not exceeding fifty (50) percent
of the then current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require the
owner to demolish and remove the dwelling within ninety (90) days.
   (c)   The official is authorized to fix the reasonable value of any housing
and to estimate the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements for the
purposes of this section.
   (d)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve
or to vacate and close the dwelling, the official may cause such to be
repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed, and may cause to be
posted on the main entrance of any dwelling so closed a placard with the
following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or
occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful."
Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   (e)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
dwelling, the official may cause such dwelling to be removed or demolished;
provided, however, that the powers of the official set forth in subsection (d)
and this subsection shall not be exercised until the Town Council has, by
ordinance, ordered the official to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this
article with respect to the particular property or properties, which the
official has found to be unfit for human habitation and which shall be
described in the ordinance. No such ordinance shall be adopted to require
demolition of a dwelling until the owner has first been given a reasonable
opportunity to bring it into conformity with the housing code. Such ordinance
shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds of the county and
shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index.
   (f)   The amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements,
or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the official, shall be a
lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred, which lien
shall be filed, have the same priority, and be collected as the lien for
special assessment provided in G.S. Ch. 160A, art. 10. If the dwelling is
removed or demolished by the official, he shall sell the materials of such
dwelling, any personal property, fixtures or appurtenances found in or attached
to the dwelling, and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of
the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the
superior court by the official, shall be secured in such manner as may be
directed by the court, and shall be disbursed by the court to the persons found
to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the court.
   (g)   If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a dwelling,
the public official may file a civil action in the name of the town to remove
such occupant. The action to vacate the dwelling shall be in the nature of
summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint naming as
parties-defendant any person occupying such dwelling. The clerk of superior
court shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before a
magistrate at a certain time, date and place not to exceed ten (10) days from
the issuance of the summons to answer the complaint. The summons and complaint
shall be served as provided in G.S. 42-29. The summons shall be returned
according to its tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been duly
served, and if at the hearing the public official produces a certified copy of
an ordinance adopted by the governing body pursuant to subdivision (e),
authorizing the official to proceed to vacate the occupied dwelling, the
magistrate shall enter judgment ordering that the premises be vacated and that
all persons be removed. The judgment ordering that the dwelling be vacated
shall be enforced in the same manner as the judgment for summary ejectment
entered under G.S. 42-30. An appeal from any judgment entered hereunder by the
magistrate may be taken as provided in G.S. 7A-228, and the execution of such
judgment may be stayed as provided in G.S. 7A-227. An action to remove an
occupant of a dwelling who is a tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of
a summary ejectment proceeding pursuant to this paragraph unless such occupant
was served with notice at least thirty (30) days before the filing of the
summary ejectment proceeding that the governing body has ordered the public
official to proceed to exercise duties under paragraphs (d) and (e) of this
section to vacate and close or remove and demolish the dwelling.
   (h)   Any violation of this section shall additionally subject the offender
to a civil penalty to be recovered by the town pursuant to section
9-1097.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
State law reference–Abatement procedures, G.S. 160A-443.
Section 9-1086   Appeals from orders of code official/code enforcement officer.
   (a)   An appeal from any decision or order of the code enforcement officer
may be taken by any person who is the subject of the decision or order. Any
appeal from the official shall be taken within ten days from the rendering of
the decision or notice of the order, and shall be taken by filing a notice of
appeal with the planning department which shall specify the grounds upon which
the appeal is based. Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the official
shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all papers constituting the
record upon which the decision appealed from was made. When an appeal is from a
decision of the code enforcement officer refusing to allow the person aggrieved
thereby to do any act, the decision shall remain in force until modified or
reversed. When any appeal is from a decision of the code enforcement officer
requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall have the effect
of suspending the requirement until the hearing of the board of adjustment,
unless the official certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of
appeal is filed with him, that by reason of the facts stated in the
certificate, a copy of which shall be furnished the appellant, a suspension of
the requirement would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case
the requirement shall not be suspended except by a restraining order, which may
be granted for due cause shown upon not less than one day's written notice to
the code enforcement officer, by the board of adjustment, or by a court of
record upon petition made pursuant to G.S. 160A-446(f) and the provisions of
this article.
   (b)   The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
all appeals, shall give due notice to all the parties, and render its decision
within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or
attorney. The board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the
decision or order appealed from, and may make such decision and order as in its
opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have all the
powers of the official, but the concurring vote of four members of the board
shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the official.
The board shall have power also in passing upon appeals, in any case where
there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of the ordinance, to adapt the application of
the ordinance to the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of the
ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial
justice done.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
State law reference–Similar provisions, G.S. 160A-446(c), (d), (e).
Section 9-1087   Petition to superior court.
   Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the official or a decision
rendered by the board shall have the right, within 30 days after issuance of
the order or rendering of the decision, to petition the superior court for a
temporary injunction restraining the official pending a final disposition of
the cause.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
State law reference–Similar provisions, G.S.160A-446(f).
Section 9-1088   Unauthorized removal of posted complaint, notice or order.
   No person without the written consent of the town manager or appointed agent
shall remove or permit the removal of any complaint, notice or order posted in
accordance with the provisions of this article. Any person violating or failing
to comply with the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1089   Renting unfit dwelling after notice.
   When the official finds that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation within
the meaning of this article and has notified the owner to such effect and the
time limit set by the official for the repair, alteration, improvement,
removal, demolition or vacating and closing the same has expired, no person
shall receive rentals or offer for rent or occupancy such dwelling or dwelling
unit as a human habitation until such time as the order of the official is
obeyed or reversed by a court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with the
law. Each day such offense continues shall be deemed a separate offense. Any
violation of this section shall subject the offender to a civil penalty.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1090   Certificate of occupancy.
   (a)   The town shall not provide, nor permit another to provide, either
public or private utility services such as water, gas, electricity, sewer,
etc., to any dwelling unit becoming vacant until such dwelling unit has been
inspected, brought into compliance with this article and a valid certificate of
occupancy, as required, has been issued. This requirement shall not preclude
the temporary use of such utility services for alteration. The building
official shall be responsible for making the determination as to when such
temporary services may be necessary.
   (b)   No certificate of occupancy may be issued for any single-family or
multi-family residential building on which construction is begun on or after
January 1, 1978, until it has been certified as being in compliance by the
energy and insulation official with the minimum insulation standards for
residential construction, as prescribed in the state building code.
   For structures built prior to 1978 and no insulation exists, the attic shall
be insulated to an R-30 value. If insulation exists in a structure built before
1978, it must have an R-19 value.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy, or allow another to
occupy, or offer for rent, a dwelling or dwelling unit until a valid
certificate of occupancy has been issued.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1091   Changes in work after permit issued.
   After a permit has been issued, no changes or deviations from the terms of
the application and permit or changes or deviations from the plans or
specifications involving any work under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall
be made until specific written approval of such changes or deviations has been
obtained from the appropriate official.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1092   Violations; penalty.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit to fail,
neglect or refuse to repair, alter or improve the same, or to vacate and close
and remove or demolish the same, upon order of the official duly made and
served as provided in this article, within the time specified in the order.
Each day that any such failure, neglect or refusal to comply with such order
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. It shall be
unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit, with respect to which
an order has been issued pursuant to this division, to occupy or permit the
occupancy of the same after the time prescribed in the order for its repair,
alteration or improvement, or its vacation and closing, or removal or
demolition. Each day that such occupancy continues after the prescribed time
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
ARTICLE E
Minimum Standards for Non-Residential Buildings
Section 9-1093   Exercise of police powers; authority.
   The Town Council hereby finds and declares that there exists within the town
limits and its environs unsafe structures which are a health or safety hazard
as a result of the attraction of insects or rodents, conditions creating a fire
hazard, dangerous conditions constituting a threat to children or frequent use
by vagrants as living quarters in the absence of sanitary facilities. In order
to alleviate these unsafe and dangerous conditions for the health, safety, and
welfare of the citizens and its environs, a public necessity exists to exercise
the police powers conferred upon the town for the repair, closing or demolition
of such structures.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1094   Definition of abandoned and/or unsafe structure.
   An abandoned and/or unsafe structure is defined as a nonresidential building
or structure which has not been occupied by authorized persons for at least six
(6) months and which persistently or repeatedly becomes unprotected or
unsecured, or which has been occupied by unauthorized persons, or which
presents a danger of structural collapse, fire, disease, or a threat to
children.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1095   Procedure for enforcement.
   (a)   Duty of code official/code enforcement officer. It shall be the duty
of the code official or code enforcement officer to examine non-residential
structures located in the town and its environs where conditions described in
section
9-1094 exist for the purpose of locating and taking action with respect to such
structures as appear to be a health or safety hazard. In exercising this power,
department members shall have the right to enter on any premises within the
jurisdiction of the department at all reasonable hours for purposes of
inspection or other enforcement action, upon presentation of proper
credentials.
   (b)   Notice of complaint. If the inspection discloses health or safety
hazards as described in this article, the official shall affix a notice of
unsafe character in a conspicuous place on the exterior wall of the structure
giving notice of its unsafe or dangerous conditions and cause to be served upon
the owner of and parties in interest to the structure a complaint stating the
charges and containing a notice. If the owner of a building or structure that
has been condemned as unsafe pursuant to G.S. 160A-426 shall fail to take
prompt corrective measures, the official shall give him written notice, by
certified or registered mail to the last known address or by personal service,
that the building or structure is in a condition that appears to meet one or
more of the following conditions:
   (1)   Constitutes a fire and safety hazard;
   (2)   Is dangerous to life, health, or other property;
   (3)   Is likely to cause or contribute to blight, disease, vagrancy or
danger to children; or
   (4)   Has a tendency to attract person/s intent on criminal activities or
other activities which would constitute a public nuisance.
   A hearing will be held before the official at a designated place therein
fixed, not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days after serving of
said complaint. If the name or whereabouts of the owner cannot, after due
diligence, be discovered, the notice shall be considered properly and
adequately served if a copy thereof is posted on the outside of the building or
structure in question at least ten days prior to the hearing and a notice of
the hearing is published in a newspaper having general circulation in the town
at least once, not later than one week prior to the hearing.
   No oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of any official or employee
of the town shall be deemed to legalize the violation of any provision of this
chapter or any provision of any regulatory code adopted in this chapter.
   (c)   Hearing. The owner or any party in interest shall have the right to
file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise, and give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. Any person desiring to
do so may attend the hearing and give evidence relevant to the matter being
heard. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be
controlling in hearings before the official.
   (d)   Procedure after hearing. After such hearing, if the official finds
that a structure constitutes a health or safety hazard, the code enforcement
officer shall state in writing the findings of fact in support of such
determination. In such case, the official shall issue and cause to be served
upon the owner thereof an order directing and requiring the owner to repair,
close, vacate or demolish the structure as necessary to correct the health or
safety hazard within a specified period of time.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1096   Appeal; finality of order if not appealed.
   Any owner who has received an order under G.S. 160A-429 may appeal from the
order to the Board of Adjustment by giving notice of appeal in writing to the
official and to the town clerk within ten days following issuance of the order.
In the absence of an appeal, the order of the official shall be final. The
Board of Adjustment shall hear and render a decision in an appeal within a
reasonable time. The Board of Adjustment may affirm, modify and affirm, or
revoke the order.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1097   Securing, closing and demolition by the town.
   If the owner fails to comply with an order of the official to repair, secure
and close, vacate or demolish, the official shall take one (1) or more of the
following actions as necessary:
   (a)   Secure the issuance of a warrant charging such owner with violation of
this article;
   (b)   Secure and close said structure;
   (c)   Cause such structure to be repaired, altered or improved; or
   (d)   Cause such structure to be demolished.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
State law reference–Similar provisions, G.S. 15-27.2
Section 9-1098   Actions by Town Council.
   (a)   The powers of the official as set forth in section 4-103(c) and (d)
shall not be exercised until the Town Council has by ordinance ordered the
official to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this article with respect to
the particular property or properties, which the official has found to be a
health or safety hazard and which shall be described in the ordinance. Such
ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds of the
county and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor
index.
   (b)   The amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements,
or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the official, shall be a
lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred, which lien
shall be filed, have the same priority, and be collected as the lien for
special assessment provided in G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 10. If the structure is
removed or demolished by the official, he shall sell the materials of such
structure, any personal property, fixtures or appurtenances found in or
attached to the structure, and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against
the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be
deposited in the superior court by the official, shall be secured in such
manner as may be directed by the court, and shall be disbursed by the court to
the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the court.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1099   Failure to comply with order.
   If the owner of a building or structure fails to comply with an order issued
pursuant to G.S. 160A-429 from which no appeal has been taken, or fails to
comply with an order of the Town Council following an appeal, he shall be
guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, additionally subject the offender to civil
penalty to be recovered by the town pursuant article G.S. 14-4. Every day such
person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any final order or
direction of the code enforcement officer or Town Council made by virtue and in
pursuance of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1100   Lien on property.
   The amount of the cost of such repair, alterations, improvements, vacating
and closing, or demolition ordered by the Town Council or by the official shall
be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred; said
lien shall be filed, have the same priority and be collected or foreclosed upon
in the same manner as is provided for assessments pursuant to G.S. Ch. 160A,
Art. 10.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1101   Other unlawful actions.
   (a)   No person shall remove or permit the removal of any complaint, notice
or order posted in accordance with the provisions of section 4-103 of this
article.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building upon whom a notice,
complaint or order has been served, to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or
otherwise dispose of said building unless one of the following actions have
been taken:
   (1)   Compliance with the provisions of the notice, complaint or order; or
   (2)   Furnish a copy of any notice, complaint or order to the transferee,
lessee, or mortgagee, and give written notice to the official of said action.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1102   Alternative remedies.
   Neither this article nor any of its provisions shall be construed to impair
or limit in any way the power of the town to define and declare nuisance and to
cause their abatement by summary action or otherwise, or the enforcement of any
other remedy or remedies provided or in other ordinances of laws.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1103   Conflicts with other provisions.
   In the event any provision, standard or requirement of this article is found
to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the town,
the provision which establishes the higher standard or more stringent
requirement for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the
residents of the town and environs shall prevail.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1104   Unsafe buildings condemned.
   An official may declare a nonresidential building or structure within a
community development target area designated by the Town Council, or within a
development zone authorized by G.S. 105-129.3.A or G.S. 160A-503(10) to be
unsafe if it meets both of the following conditions:
   (1)   It appears to the official to be vacant or abandoned; and
   (2)   It appears to the official to be in such dilapidated condition as to
cause or contribute to blight, disease, vagrancy, fire or safety hazard, to be
a danger to children, or tend to attract persons intent on criminal activities
or other activities which would constitute a public nuisance.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1105   Appeals in general.
   Unless otherwise provided by law, appeals from any order, decision or
determination by a member of a local inspection department pertaining to the
state building code or other state building laws shall be taken to the
commissioner of insurance or appointed designee or other official specified in
G.S. 143-139, by filing a written notice with him and with the inspection
department within a period of ten days after the order, decision or
determination. Further appeals may be taken to the state building code council
or the courts as provided by law.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1106   Changes in work after permit issued.
   After a permit has been issued, no changes or deviations from the terms of
the application and permit or changes or deviations from the plans or
specifications involving any work under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall
be made until specific written approval of such changes or deviations has been
obtained from the appropriate official.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1107   Report of owner's failure to comply with code official's/ code
enforcement officer's order.
   If the owner does not appeal from the final order or direction of the code
enforcement officer requiring that the building or structure be demolished and
removed or the taking of such other steps as may be required to abate the
nuisance and remove the hazards, and fails or refuses to comply with such order
and direction, it shall be the duty of the official to file a written report
thereof with the town manager, who shall cause such report to be placed on the
agenda for action by the Town Council at its next ensuing regular meeting or at
some subsequent meeting to which the Town Council may continue the same. The
code enforcement officer shall mail a copy of such report by certified or
registered mail to the owners last known address or have a copy of such report
delivered to such owner. Such report shall specify the date of the meeting of
the Town Council for which the matter will be docketed for action.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
ARTICLE F
Abandoned Manufactured Homes
Section 9-1108   Intent.
   (a)   The intent of this article is to protect the public health and
environment through the deconstruction of abandoned manufactured homes to
reduce blight and unattractive nuisances.
   (b)   It is a policy of the town to promote the removal of reusable or
recyclable materials to reduce the impact of such solid wastes and production
of said materials on the environment.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1109   Abandoned, nuisance and junked mobile homes unlawful.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a manufactured home and for the owner, lessee or occupant of the
real property upon which the manufactured home is located to leave, allow, or
suffer the manufactured home to remain on the property after it has been
declared an abandoned manufactured home or a public nuisance.
   (b)   A manufactured home shall be deemed to be an abandoned manufactured
home for the purposes of this article in the following circumstances: any
manufactured home that is either vacant or in need of extensive repair; and an
unreasonable danger to public health, safety, welfare or the environment.
   (c)   A manufactured home shall be considered abandoned when it has not been
occupied for at least 120 days and meets any of the following criteria:
   (1)   Provides a location for loitering, vagrancy, unauthorized entry or
other criminal activity;
   (2)   Has been boarded up for at least 30 days;
   (3)   Has taxes in arrears for a period of time exceeding 365 days;
   (4)   Has all utilities disconnected or not in use.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1110   Notice requirements for abandoned manufactured homes.
   The town shall notify the responsible party and the land owner for each
identified abandoned manufactured home in writing and shall be sent to the
person in the form of certified mail.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1111   Removal of abandoned manufactured homes.
   (a)   The owner or responsible party shall be given 60 days from receipt of
the written notice to dispose of the abandoned manufactured home in a legal
manner.
   (b)   If the owner or responsible party fails to comply with this order, the
town shall take any action it deems reasonably necessary to dispose of the
abandoned manufactured home, including entering the property where the
abandoned manufactured home is located and arranging to have the home
deconstructed and disposed of in a manner consistent with the town's garbage
collection and disposal provisions.
   (c)   The property owner does not remove said abandoned manufactured home a
lien will be placed against the real property, if not paid within 30 days, and
shall be collected as unpaid taxes.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1112   Protection against criminal or civil liability.
   No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any
owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned,
nuisance or junked manufactured home, for disposing of such manufactured home
as provided in this article.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Section 9-1113   Appeals.
   (a)   Within the 60-day period mentioned in section
9-1111, the owner of the property where the nuisance exists may appeal the
findings of the enforcement official to the Board of Adjustment by giving
written notice of appeal to the enforcement official, the appeal to stay the
abatement of the nuisances by the enforcement official until a final
determination by the Board of Adjustment. In the event no appeal is taken, the
enforcement official may proceed to abate the nuisance.
   (b)   The Board of Adjustment, in the event an appeal is taken as provided
in division (a) above, may, after hearing all interested persons and reviewing
the findings of the enforcement official, reverse the finding made pursuant to
section
9-1111, but if the Board of Adjustment shall determine that the findings of the
enforcement official pursuant to section
9-1111 are correct and proper, it shall declare the condition existing on the
property to be a danger and hazard to the health, safety, morals, and general
welfare of the inhabitants of the town and public nuisance, and direct the
enforcement official to cause the conditions to be abated.
(Res. of 5/6/19)
Sections 9-1114 through 9-1121 Reserved.
CHAPTER 2
Subdivision Regulations
ARTICLE A
Subdivision Ordinance for Valdese, North Carolina
Section
9-2001   Title.
Section
9-2002   Authority and enactment clause.
Section
9-2003   Jurisdiction.
Section
9-2004   Purpose.
Section
9-2005   No service or permits until final plat approved.
Section
9-2005.1   Prerequisite to plat recordation.
Section
9-2006   Penalties for violation.
Section
9-2007   Severability.
Section
9-2008   Variances.
Section
9-2009   Registration of plats.
Section
9-2010   Amendments.
Section
9-2011   Abrogation.
Section
9-2012   Thoroughfare plans.
Section
9-2013   School sites on land use plan.
Section
9-2014   Zoning and other plans.
Section
9-2015 through section 9-2019 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Definitions
Section
9-2020   Definitions.
Section
9-2021   Reserved.
Section
9-2022   Reserved.
Section
9-2023   Word interpretation.
ARTICLE C
Procedure for review and approval of subdivision plats
Section
9-2030   Approval prerequisite to plat recordation.
Section
9-2030.01   Plat required.
Section
9-2031   Minor subdivision approval process.
Section
9-2031.01   Procedure for review of minor subdivisions.
Section
9-2031.02   Review procedure.
Section
9-2031.03   Approval of sketch plat by Subdivision Administrator.
Section
9-2031.04   Dispute of findings.
Section
9-2031.05   Dispositions of copies.
Section
9-2031.06   Final plat approval for minor subdivisions.
Section
9-2031.07   Certifications to be depicted on final plat.
Section
9-2032   Major subdivision approval process.
Section
9-2032.01   Sketch plan for major subdivisions.
Section
9-2033   Preliminary plat - submission and review.
Section
9-2033.01   Information to be contained or depicted on the preliminary and
final plats.
Section
9-2034   Final plat approval process.
Section
9-2034.01   Improvements installation.
Section
9-2034.02   Town participation and costs.
Section
9-2034.03   Performance guarantee.
Section
9-2034.04   Defects guarantee.
Section
9-2034.05   Final plat review.
Section
9-2035   The final plat.
Section
9-2035.01   Plat submitted.
Section
9-2035.02   Size of plat and scale.
Section
9-2035.03   Plat prepared.
Section
9-2035.04   Certifications required.
Section
9-2035.05   Contents required.
Section
9-2036   Review Procedure.
Section
9-2036.01   Planning Board review.
Section
9-2036.02   Town Council review.
Section
9-2036.03   Disposition of copies.
Section
9-2036.04   Recording the final plat.
Section
9-2036.05   Resubdivision procedures.
Section
9-2036.06   Recombination of land.
Section
9-2037 through section 9-2039 reserved.
ARTICLE D
Installation of permanent reference points and improvements
Section
9-2040   Permanent reference points.
Section
9-2040.01   Public sites and open space.
Section
9-2040.02   Accesses to parks, schools, etc.
Section
9-2040.03   Restrictions on land subject to flooding.
Section
9-2041   Design and standards and required improvements.
Section
9-2042 through section 9-2049 reserved.
ARTICLE E
Required improvements, dedication, reservation and minimum standards of design
Section
9-2050   General requirements.
Section
9-2050.01   Conformity to existing maps or plans.
Section
9-2050.02   Continuation of existing roads.
Section
9-2050.03   Access to adjacent properties.
Section
9-2050.04   Private streets.
Section
9-2050.05   Subdivision street disclosure statement.
Section
9-2050.06   Large tracts and parcels.
Section
9-2050.07   Lots.
Section
9-2050.07.1   Flag lots.
Section
9-2050.08   Reserved.
Section
9-2050.09   Contour map.
Section
9-2050.10   Street names.
Section
9-2051   Design standards.
Section
9-2051.01   Public streets.
Section
9-2051.02   Blocks.
Section
9-2052   Lot designs.
Section
9-2052.01   Lots.
Section
9-2052.02   Arrangement.
Section
9-2052.03   Lake frontage lots.
Section
9-2052.04   Area.
Section
9-2052.05   Width.
Section
9-2052.06   Depth.
Section
9-2052.07   Orientation of lot lines.
Section
9-2052.08   Building setback lines.
Section
9-2052.09   Easements.
Section
9-2052.10   Reserved.
Section
9-2052.11   Storm water drainage.
Section
9-2052.12   Water and sewer utilities.
Section
9-2052.13   Pedestrian walkways.
Section
9-2053   Cluster development and planned unit development.
Section
9-2054   Hillside subdivisions.
Section
9-2054.01   Street design.
Section
9-2054.01.01   Widths.
Section
9-2054.01.02   Cul-de-sacs.
Section
9-2054.01.03   Grading.
Section
9-2054.01.04   Street grades.
Section
9-2054.02   Street improvements for hillside subdivisions.
Section
9-2054.02.01   Pavement.
Section
9-2054.03   Hillside lot.
ARTICLE A
Subdivision Ordinance for Valdese, North Carolina
Section 9-2001   Title.
   This chapter shall be known and may be sited as the “The Subdivision
Ordinance for the town of Valdese, North Carolina”. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2002   Authority and enactment clause.
   The Town Council of the town, pursuant to the authority conferred by Chapter
160A-371 through Section 160A-376 of the General Statutes of the State of North
Carolina, does hereby ordain and enact into law these Articles and Sections.
(Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2003   Jurisdiction.
   On and after the date of adoption, these regulations shall govern each and
every subdivision of land submitted for review within the town (hereinafter
referred to as the “town”). (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2004   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures and standards for the
development and subdivision of land within the town. It is further designed to
provide for the orderly growth and development of the town; for the
coordination of streets and highways within proposed subdivisions with existing
or planned streets and highways and with other public facilities; for the
dedication or reservation of recreation areas serving residents of the
immediate neighborhood within the subdivision and of right-of-way or easements
for streets and utility purposes; and for the distribution of population and
traffic in a manner that will avoid congestion and overcrowding and will create
conditions essential to public health, safety, and the general welfare. This
chapter is designed to further facilitate adequate water, sewerage, parks,
schools, and playgrounds, and also to facilitate the further re-subdivision of
larger tracts into smaller tracts of land. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2005   No service or permits until final plat approved.
   No street shall be accepted and maintained by the town nor shall any street
lighting, water, or sewer be extended to nor connect with any subdivision of
land nor shall any permit be issued by an administrative agent or department of
the town for the construction of any building or other improvement requiring a
permit upon any land concerning which a plat is required to be approved, unless
and until the requirements set forth in this chapter have been complied with.
(Ord. of 11/3/08)
9-2005.1   Prerequisite to plat recordation.
   After the effective date of this chapter, each major subdivision plat of
land within the town’s jurisdiction shall be approved by the Town Council
following a recommendation from the Planning Board prior to plat recordation.
Minor subdivisions, as defined in the chapter, shall be approved by the
Subdivision Administrator prior to plat recordation. Nothing herein compels the
approval of any proposed subdivision by the Town Council or the Subdivision
Administrator except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2006   Penalties for violation.
   After the effective date of this chapter, any person who, being the owner or
agent of the owner of any land located within the jurisdiction of this chapter,
thereafter subdivides such land in violation of the chapter or transfers or
sells land by reference to, exhibition of, or any other use of a plat showing a
subdivision of the land before the plat has been properly approved under such
chapter and recorded in the office of the Burke County register of deeds, shall
be subject to the penalties listed below. The description by metes and bounds
in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling
or transferring land shall not exempt the transaction from this penalty. The
town, through its attorney or other official designated by the Council, may
enjoin illegal subdivision, transfer, or sale of land by injunction.
   (a)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two
hundred dollars ($200) or by imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days.
   (b)   A violation of this chapter shall be a civil offense and shall subject
the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50) per day
that the violation continues. Any person violating this chapter shall be issued
a written citation. The penalty shall be paid to the tax collector at the
Valdese Town Hall within seventy-two (72) hours from the time of issuance of
the written citation.
   (c)   Each day’s continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct
offense.
   (d)   The provisions of this chapter may be enforced through equitable
remedies issued by a court of competent jurisdiction including injunction and
order of abatement.
   (e)   This chapter may be enforced by any one, all, or a combination of the
remedies authorized herein.
(Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2007   Severability.
   Should any section or provision of this chapter be decided by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any part thereof other
than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2008   Variances.
   The Board of Adjustment may authorize a variance from these regulations
when, in its opinion, undue hardship is likely to result from strict
compliance. In granting any variance, the Board shall make the findings
required below, taking into account the nature of the proposed subdivision, the
existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work
in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision
upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless
the Board finds all the following:
   (1)   That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting said
property such that strict application of the provisions of this chapter would
deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land; and
   (2)   That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the petitioner; and
   (3)   That the circumstances giving rise to the need for the variance are
peculiar to the parcel and are not generally characteristic of other parcels in
the town’s jurisdiction, and
   (4)   That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety and welfare or injurious to other property in the
vicinity in which said property is situated. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2009   Registration of plats.
   Registration of all plats shall be in accordance with G.S. 47-30. (Ord. of
11/3/08)
Section 9-2010   Amendments.
   (1)   The Town Council may from time to time amend the terms of this
chapter, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been
proposed by or shall have been submitted to the Planning Board for review and
recommendation. The planning Board shall have thirty (30) days from the
submittal date of the proposed amendment within which to submit its report. If
the Board fails to submit a report within the specific time, it shall be deemed
to have recommended approval of the amendment.
   (2)   No amendment shall be adopted by the Town Council until it has held a
public hearing on the amendment. Notice of the public hearing shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town area at least once
a week for two (2) consecutive calendar weeks prior to the hearing. The initial
notice shall appear not more than twenty-five (25) or less than ten (10) days
prior to the hearing date. In computing the ten (10) to twenty-five (25) day
period, the date of the first publication shall be counted, but the date of the
hearing shall not be counted. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2011   Abrogation.
   It is not intended that this chapter repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or
interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions,
agreements, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued
pursuant to law. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2012   Thoroughfare plans.
   Where a proposed subdivision includes any part of a thoroughfare which has
been designated as such upon an officially adopted thoroughfare plan of the
town, such part of such thoroughfare shall be platted by the subdivider in the
location shown on the plan and at the width specified in this chapter. (Ord. of
11/3/08)
Section 9-2013   School sites on land use plan.
   North Carolina General Statute 160A-372 provides for the reservation of
school sites in accordance with a comprehensive land use plan approved by the
Town Council. In order for this authorization to become effective, before
approving such plans, Town Council and the Burke County Board of Education
shall jointly determine the specific location and size of any school sites to
be reserved, which information shall appear in the comprehensive land use plan.
Whenever a subdivision is submitted for approval which includes part or all of
a school site to be reserved under the plan, the Town shall immediately notify
the Board of Education and the Board of Education shall promptly decide whether
it still wishes the site to be reserved. If the Board of Education does not
wish to reserve the site, it shall so notify the Town of Valdese and no site
shall be reserved. If the Board of Education does wish to reserve the site, the
subdivision shall not be approved without such reservation. The Board of
Education shall then have eighteen (18) months beginning on the date of final
approval of the subdivision within which to acquire the site by purchase or by
initiating condemnation proceedings. If the Board of Education has not
purchased or begun proceedings to condemn the site within eighteen (18) months,
the subdivider may treat the land as freed of the reservation.
(Ord. 11/3/08)
Section 9-2014   Zoning and other plans.
   Proposed subdivisions must comply in all respects with the requirements of
the zoning chapter in effect in the area to be subdivided and with the
requirements of any other adopted plans. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2015 through section 9-2019 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Definitions
Section 9-2020   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, certain words or terms used herein shall be
defined as follows:
   (a)   Access corridors. A strip of land lying between the side lot boundary
lines of lake or river front lots offering access to lots at least one lot
depth away from the water’s edge.
   (b)   Buffer. A buffer as required by certain sections of these regulations
shall be one of, or equal to one of the following:
   (1)   A six (6)-foot high wood basket-weave type fence.
   (2)   A six (6)-foot high solid picket type fence with the pickets being
placed facing the adjoining property.
   (3)   A six (6)-foot high chain link type fence with panel inserts.
   (4)   A six (6)-foot high open type fence with evergreen vegetation planted
facing the adjoining property and completely blocking the view from one area to
another.
   (5)   A six (6)-foot high solid masonry wall.
   (6)   Other and/or additional screening as required by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer.
   (c)   Building. Any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure,
shelter, or protection of persons, animals, or property of any kind.
   (d)   Building setback line. A line establishing the minimum allowable
distance between the nearest portion of any building, excluding the outermost
five feet (5') of any uncovered porches, steps, gutters, and similar fixtures,
and related front, rear, or side property, or a right-of-way line if the right-
of-way is closer to the building.
   (e)   Clerk of Superior Court. Clerk of Superior Court of Burke County,
North Carolina.
   (f)   Council or Town Council. The Town Council of Valdese, North Carolina.
   (g)   Dedication. A gift, by the owner, of his property to another party
without any consideration being given for the transfer. Since a transfer of
property is involved, the dedication is made by written instrument and is
completed with an acceptance.
   (h)   Double frontage lot. A continuous (through) lot which is accessible
from both streets upon which it fronts.
   (i)   Easement. A right to use the land of another for a special purpose
such as a right of ingress and egress, or a right to maintain a utility line
across the land of another.
   (j)   Expedited review. Review process whereby the town may require only a
final plat for the recordation for a division of a tract or parcel of land in
single ownership if all of the following criteria are met:
   (1)   The tract or parcel of land to be divided is not exempted as a ten-
acre exemption.
   (2)   No part of the tract or parcel to be divided has been divided in ten
years prior to the division.
   (3)   The entire tract or parcel of land must be greater than five acres.
   (4)   The division of the tract or parcel of land must not result in more
than three lots.
   (5)   The resulting lots must meet lot dimension requirements of any
applicable land use, if any
   (6)   The use of any lot shall be in conformity with applicable zoning
requirements, if any.
   (7)   The resulting lots must have a permanent means of ingress and egress
designated on a recorded plat. The subdivision must ensure access for the newly
created lots.
   (8)   The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with Section
9-2035 (The Final Plat) of the town subdivision regulations and must be
approved the local government's review officer.
   (k)   Flag lot. A lot so shaped and designed that the main building site
area is set back from the street on which it fronts and has an access strip
connecting the main building site with frontage street.
   (l)   Hillside subdivision.  Land proposed to be subdivided which has a
slope of sixteen per cent (16%) or greater. That is, an average difference in
elevation of at least sixteen (16) feet in a horizontal distance of one hundred
(100) feet. The average shall be obtained from at least fifteen (15)
measurements, each twenty (20) feet from the next.
   (m)   Lot. A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a main
building or group of buildings and accessory buildings, together with such
yards, open spaces, and lot areas as are required by the zoning ordinance, and
having not less than the minimum required frontage upon a street, either shown
on a plat of record, or considered as a unit of property and described by metes
and bounds.
   (n)   Lot front. A portion of the lot adjacent to the street. In the case of
lots whOctober 30, 2017ich abut a stream, lake, or pond, the lot front is
considered to be the part of the lot which abuts the water.
   (o)    Minor subdivision. A subdivision of land that meets the following
criteria:
   (1)   Involving not more than five (5) lots fronting on an existing approved
street; and
   (2)   Not involving any new street or prospectively requiring any new street
for access to interior property; and
   (3)   Not requiring extension of public sewage or water lines or creation of
new drainage easements through lots to serve property at the rear; and
   (4)   Not adversely affecting the development of the remainder of the parcel
or of adjoining property; and
   (5)   Creating no new or residual parcels not conforming to the requirements
of these regulations.
   (6)   All included land must be under ownership of one sponsor.
   (p)   Official maps or plans. Any maps or plans endorsed by the Town Council
as a guide to the development of Valdese.
   (q)   Ordinance. The Subdivision Ordinance for Valdese, North Carolina.
   (r)   Pedestrian walkways. Any paved or unpaved public or private route
intended for pedestrian use, including a pedestrian path or esplanade,
regardless of use by other transportation modes.
   (s)   Planned unit development. The planned unit development is a permitted
use designed to provide for developments incorporating a single type or a
variety of related uses which are planned and developed as a unit. Such
development may consist of individual lots or common building sites. Common
land must be an element of the plan related to affecting the long-term value of
the entire development.
   (t)   Planning Board.  The Planning Board of the Town of Valdese, North
Carolina.
   (u)   Plat. A map or plan of a parcel of land, which is to be or has been
subdivided.
   (v)   Plat, final. A map of certain described land prepared in accordance
with this chapter as an instrument for recording with the Burke County Register
of Deeds.
   (w)   Private streets. Any right-of-way or area set aside to provide
vehicular access which has not been accepted for maintenance or intended to be
accepted for maintenance by the town or the State of North Carolina, and which
is not maintained by the town or the State of North Carolina. An entity other
than the town, such as property owners, homeowners association, community
group, property management company, or similar type of organizations, shall be
responsible for upkeep and maintenance.
   (x)   Recreation area or park. An area of land or combination of land and
water resources that is developed for active and/or passive recreation that may
include manmade features that accommodate such activities.
   (y)   Reservation. A reservation of land does not involve any transfer of
property rights. It simply constitutes an obligation to keep property free from
development for a stated period of time.
   (z)   Single-tier lot. A lot which backs upon a limited access highway, a
railroad, a physical barrier, or another type of land use and to which access
from the rear is usually prohibited.
   (aa)   Streets. A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular
traffic. The following classifications shall apply:
   (1)   Access street. A platted street designed for the purpose of giving
access to adjacent property owners.
   (2)   Alley. A minor right-of-way privately or publicly owned, primarily for
service access to the back or side of properties.
   (3)   Arterials. This thoroughfare category includes those streets and
highways which carry large volumes of traffic at moderate speeds through and
within Valdese. These thoroughfares provide access to major commercial,
industrial, and public traffic generators.
   (4)   Major collector streets. As the name indicates, traffic from local
streets is collected by these thoroughfares and carried to arterial streets.
While also serving as connectors between arterials, these streets
perform an additional function of providing access to abutting properties.
Smaller volumes of traffic are carried on these streets and speeds are lower.
   (5)   Local or minor streets. The local street system comprises all
facilities not in one of the higher systems. It serves primarily to provide
direct access to abutting land and access to the higher order system.
   (6)   Cul-de-sac.  A short local street having but one end open to traffic
and the other end being permanently terminated and a vehicular turn-around
provided.
   (bb)   Subdivider. Any person, firm, organization, or corporation who
subdivides or develops any land deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined.
   (cc)   Subdivision. All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two (2)
or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale or
building development (whether immediate or future) and shall include all
divisions of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in
existing streets, but the following shall not be included within this
definition nor be subject to the regulations established herein, with exception
to zoning, building code and fire code regulations:
   EXEMPTIONS
   (1)    The combination or recombination of portions of previously subdivided
and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the
resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the town as shown in its
subdivision regulations;
   (2)   The division of land into parcels greater than ten (10) acres where no
street right-of-way dedication is involved;
   (3)   The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening
or opening of streets;
   (4)   The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is no
greater than two (2) acres into not more than three (3) lots, where no street
right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to
or exceed the standards of the town, as shown in this chapter.
   (5)   The division of a tract into parcels in accordance with the terms of a
probated will or in accordance with intestate succession under Chapter 29 of
the general statutes.
   (dd)   Subdivision Administrator.  The Planning Director for Valdese, North
Carolina, or his designated agent.
   (ee)   Town Council. The Town Council of the town.
(Ord. of 11/3/08; as amended by Ord. of / /)
Section 9-2021 and section 9-2022 reserved.
Section 9-2023   Word interpretation.
   For the purpose of this chapter, certain words shall be interpreted as
follows:
   (a)   The word “may” is permissive.
   (b)   The words “shall” and “will” are mandatory.
   (c)   The present tense includes the future tense and the future tense
includes the present tense.
   (d)   The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.
(Ord. of 11/3/08)
ARTICLE C
Procedure for review and approval of subdivision plats
Section 9-2030   Approval prerequisite to plat recordation.
   No final plat of a general subdivision within the jurisdiction of the town
as established in Section
9-2003 shall be recorded by the Register of Deeds of Burke County until it has
been approved by the proper board or official as provided herein. To secure
such approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall follow the procedures
established in this section. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2030.01   Plat required.
   In accordance with G.S. 160A-372, a final plat shall be prepared, approved,
and recorded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter whenever any
subdivision of land takes place. Whenever any manipulation of property lines or
property boundaries takes place within the jurisdiction of the town as
established in Section
9-2003 of this chapter that is exempt from these regulations as provided by
Section
9-2020 of this chapter, a plat clearly displaying such change must be presented
to the Subdivision Administrator. Each plat must be accompanied by a fee set
forth in the town’s fee schedule.
(Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2031   Minor subdivision approval process.
   (a)   If the land to be subdivided meets the requirements of a minor
subdivision as defined in Section
9-2020, the subdivider will not have to follow the same procedures as for a
major subdivision. The Subdivision Administrator shall approve minor
subdivision plats if the subdivider owns, leases, holds an option, or holds any
legal or equitable interest in any property adjacent to or located directly
across a street, easement, road or right-of-way from the property to be
subdivided, then the subdivision shall not qualify under the abbreviated
procedure for approval as a minor subdivision.
   (b)   The developer of a minor subdivision shall obtain all required permits
and provide all necessary information related to water, sewer, sediment/erosion
control, stormwater control, stream assessment, wetland assessment, watershed,
historical and archeological sites.
   (c)   The review process for a minor subdivision shall be adequate to
protect the public interest, but shall also provide minimum delay and expense
to the subdivider. A preliminary plat is not required. The developer may go
from a sketch plan to a final plat with approval of the Subdivision
Administrator. However, the following minor plat approval process may be used
only where the subdivision meets the requirements of a minor subdivision as
defined in Section
9-2020. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2031.01   Procedure for review of minor subdivisions.
   A preliminary plat shall not be required for approval for minor
subdivisions. Prior to submission of a final plat, the subdivider shall submit
to the Subdivision Administrator the sketch plan of the proposed subdivision
containing the following information:
   (1)   A sketch vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision in
relation to neighboring tracts, subdivisions, roads, and waterways;
   (2)   The boundaries of the entire tract and the portion of the tract to be
subdivided;
   (3)   The total acreage to be subdivided;
   (4)   The existing and proposed uses of the land within the subdivision and
the existing uses of land adjoining it;
   (5)   The existing street layout and right-of-way width, lot layout and size
of lots;
   (6)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner and/or developer;
   (7)   The name, if any, of the proposed subdivision;
   (8)   Streets and lots of adjacent developed or platted properties;
   (9)   The zoning classification of the tract of land and of adjacent
properties. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2031.02   Review procedure.
   The Subdivision Administrator shall review the sketch plan for general
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and shall advise the
subdivider or his agent of the regulations pertaining to the proposed minor
subdivision and the procedures to be followed in the preparation and submission
of the final plat. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2031.03   Approval of sketch plat by Subdivision Administrator.
   Upon approval of the sketch plan, the subdivider shall be advised that the
final plat may be prepared as long as it conforms to the sketch plan. The
approval of the sketch plan shall in no way be construed as constituting
official approval of the final plat. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2031.04   Dispute of findings.
   In the event that the subdivider disagrees with any findings of the
Subdivision Administrator concerning approval of a sketch plan of a minor
subdivision, the matter shall be taken to the Planning Board for a decision. No
final plat shall be prepared until the Planning Board has acted on the disputed
sketch plan.
(Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2031.05   Dispositions of copies.
   A copy of the sketch plan shall be retained as part of the files of the
Subdivision Administrator, with the original drawing being returned to the
subdivider or his authorized agent. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2031.06   Final plat approval for minor subdivisions.
   (1)   The Subdivision Administrator shall review the final plat for complete
compliance with the requirements outlined for final plat approval of these
minor subdivision regulations. The final plat shall be complete and show all
information required for final plats in Section
9-2035, and all certifications and notarizations required in Section
9-2031.07 for final plat approval of a minor subdivision.
   (2)   The final plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor
currently licensed and registered in the state by the North Carolina State
Board of Registration for  Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors. The final
plat shall conform to the provisions for plats, subdivisions, and mapping
requirements set forth in G.S. 47-30 as amended and the Manual of Practice for
Land Surveying in North Carolina. In the event of conflict between the
provisions for plats, subdivision and mapping requirements set forth in G.S 47-
30 as amended and the Manual of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina,
the provisions as set forth in G.S. 47-50 as amended shall control.
   (3)   Three copies of the final plat shall be submitted to the Subdivision
Administrator. One of these shall be on reproducible material; two (2) shall be
black or blue line paper prints. Material and drawing medium for the original
shall be in accordance with the Manual of Practice for Land Surveying in North
Carolina, where applicable, and the requirements of the Burke County Register
of Deeds. In the event of conflict between material and drawing medium for the
original as set forth in the Manual of Practice for Land Surveying in North
Carolina and the requirements of the Burke County Register of Deeds, the
requirements of the Burke County Register of Deeds shall control.
   (4)   The final plat shall be of a size suitable for recording with the
Burke County Register of Deeds and shall be at a scale of no less than one inch
equals two hundred (200) feet. Maps may be placed on more than one sheet with
appropriate match lines. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2031.07   Certifications to be depicted on final plat.
   (1)   The final plat shall meet the specifications in Section
9-2035. The following certificates shall appear on all three copies of the
final plat:
   (a)   Certificate of ownership and dedication:
 
I hereby certify that I am the owner of the property shown and described
hereon, which is located in the subdivision jurisdiction of the Town of
Valdese, and that I hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my free consent
and establish minimum building setback lines as noted.
 
___________________  __________________
Owner             Date
 
   (b)   Certificate of survey and accuracy: In accordance with the Manual of
Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina on the face of each map prepared
for recordation there shall appear a certificate executed by the person making
the survey or map including deeds any recorded data shown thereon. The
certificate shall include a statement of error of closure calculated by
latitudes and departures. Any lines on the map which were not actually surveyed
must be clearly indicated on the map and a statement included in the
certificate revealing the source of the information. The certificate shall take
the following form:
 
State of North Carolina          Burke County
 
I, ______________ certify that this map was (drawn by me) (drawn under my
supervision) from (an actual survey made by me) (an actual survey made under my
supervision) (deed description recorded in Book ___, Page ___, Book ___, Page
___, etc.) (Other); the ratio of precision as calculated by latitudes and
departures is 1: ___ (that the boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken
lines plotted from information found in Book ___, Page ___); that this map was
prepared in accordance with G.S. 47-30 as amended.
 
Witness my hand and seal this ____ day of ________ 20___.
 
_________________________
Registered Land Surveyor  Official Seal
 
_________________________
Registration Number
 
   (c)   In accordance with G.S. 47-30, the following certificate must be
included on the final plat:
 
State of North Carolina         Burke County
 
I, ____________________, review officer of Burke County, certify that the map
or plat to which this certification is affixed meets all statutory requirements
for recording.
 
__________________  _____________
Review Officer Date
 
   (d)   During his review of the final plat the Subdivision Administrator may
appoint an engineer or surveyor to confirm the accuracy of the final plat. If
substantial errors are found, the cost shall be charged to the subdivider and
the plat shall not be recommended for approval until such errors have been
corrected.
   (e)   If the Subdivision Administrator finds that the minor subdivision
final plat is in full compliance with the requirements of this article, he/she
may then sign the following certification:
 
I hereby certify that the minor subdivision plat hereon has been found to
comply with the minor subdivision regulations for Town of Valdese and is hereby
approved for recording in the office of the Register of Deeds.
 
_____________________ ___________
Subdivision Administrator Date
 
 
   (f)   If the Subdivision Administrator does not approve the final plat, he
shall instruct the subdivider concerning resubmission of a revised plat and the
subdivider may make such changes as will bring the plat into compliance with
the provisions of this article and resubmit the same for reconsideration by the
Subdivision Administrator, or appeal to the Town Council. If the subdivider
appeals to the Town Council, the Council shall review and approve or disapprove
the final plat within two (2) regularly scheduled Town Council meetings after
it receives the plat and recommendations of the Subdivision Administrator.
(Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2032   Major subdivision approval process.
   The following sections shall be followed to obtain approval of all major
subdivisions. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2032.01   Sketch plan for major subdivisions.
   Prior to the preliminary plat submission, the subdivider shall submit to the
Subdivision Administrator a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision for review
and comment containing the following information:
   (1)   A sketch vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision in
relation to neighboring tracts, subdivisions, roads, and waterways;
   (2)   The boundaries of the tract and the portion of the tract to be
subdivided;
   (3)   The total acreage to be subdivided;
   (4)   The existing and proposed uses of the land within the subdivision and
the existing uses of the land adjoining it;
   (5)   The proposed street layout with approximate pavement and right-of-way
width, lot layout and size of lots;
   (6)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner;
   (7)   The name of the proposed subdivision;
   (8)   Streets and lots of the adjacent developed or platted properties;
   (9)   The zoning classification of the tract and of the adjacent properties.
(Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2033   Preliminary plat — submission and review.
   (1)   For every subdivision within the territorial jurisdiction established
by Section
9-2003 of this chapter which does not qualify for the abbreviated minor
subdivision procedure, the subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat which
shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board before any construction or
installation of improvements may begin.
   (2)   Eight (8) copies of the preliminary plat (as well as any additional
copies which the Subdivision Administrator determines are needed to be sent to
other agencies) shall be submitted to the Subdivision Administrator at least
twenty (20) days prior to the Planning Board meeting at which the subdivider
desires the Planning Board to review the preliminary plat. The Subdivision
Administrator shall review the preliminary plat for general compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and any other applicable chapters and shall advise
the subdivider or his authorized agent of the procedures to be followed in the
preparation and submission of the preliminary and final plats. This review
shall in no way be construed as constituting an official action of approval for
recording of the subdivision by the Planning Board or the Town Council as
required by this chapter.
   (3)   Submission of the preliminary plat shall be accompanied by the fee as
set forth in the town’s fee schedule.
   (4)   Preliminary plats shall be of suitable size for recording with the
Burke County Register of Deeds and shall be at a scale of no less than one inch
equals two hundred (200) feet. Maps may be placed on more than one sheet with
appropriate match lines. (Reference to Section
9-2035.02 and
9-2035.03)
   (5)   Preliminary plats shall meet the specifications in
9-2035.05.
   (6)   After having received the preliminary plat from the subdivider, the
Subdivision Administrator shall submit copies of the preliminary plat and any
other accompanying material to other officials or agencies concerned with new
development including, but not limited to:
   a.   The district highway engineer as to proposed streets, highways, and
drainage systems;
   b.   The County Environmental Health Director or Valdese Public Works
Director as to proposed water or sanitary sewer systems;
   c.   Any other agency or official designated by the Planning Board or other
town official.
   (7)   The Planning Board shall review the preliminary plat at or before its
next regularly scheduled meeting which follows at least twenty (20) days after
the Subdivision Administrator receives the preliminary plat and the comments
from the appropriate agencies.
   (8)   The Planning Board shall, in writing, recommend approval, conditional
approval with recommended changes to bring the plat into compliance, or
disapproval with reasons within twenty (20) days of its first consideration of
the plat.
   (9)   If the Planning Board recommends approval of the preliminary plat, it
shall retain one copy of the plat for its minutes, and transmit two (2) copies
of the plat to the Town Council with its recommendation.
   (10)   If the Planning Board recommends conditional approval of the
preliminary plat, it shall keep one copy of the plat for its minutes, transmit
two (2) copies of the plat and its recommendation to Town Council, and return
the remaining copies of the plat and its recommendation to the subdivider.
   (11)   If the Planning Board recommends disapproval of the preliminary plat,
it shall retain one copy of the plat for its minutes, transmit two (2) copies
of the plat and its recommendation to the Town Council, and return the
remaining copies of the plat and its recommendation to the subdivider.
   (12)   If the Planning Board does not make a written recommendation within
thirty (30) days after its first consideration of the plat, the subdivider may
apply to the Town Council for approval or disapproval.
   (13)   If the Planning Board recommended disapproval of the preliminary
plat, the subdivider may present the preliminary plat to the Town Council at
its next regularly scheduled meeting which follows the Planning Board’s
decision by at least twenty (20) days. Failure of the subdivider to present the
preliminary plat whose disapproval was recommended by the Planning Board at
said regularly scheduled Town Council meeting constitutes abandonment of the
plat as submitted, but shall not prevent the subdivider from subsequently
submitting to the Planning Board a revised preliminary plat for the same parcel
of land in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (14)   If the Town Council approves the preliminary plat, such approval
shall be noted on two (2) plats. One plat shall be retained by the Town Council
and one copy shall be returned to the subdivider. If the Town Council approves
the preliminary plat with conditions, approval shall be noted on two (2) plats
along with a reference to the conditions. One plat along with the conditions
shall be retained by the Town Council and one preliminary plat along with the
conditions shall be returned to the subdivider. If the Town Council disapproves
the preliminary plat, the reasons for such disapproval shall be specified in
writing. One plat and the reasons shall be retained by the Town Council and one
plat shall be returned to the subdivider. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2033.01   Information to be contained or depicted on the preliminary
and final plats.
   The preliminary and final plats shall depict or contain the information
indicated in the following table. An “X” indicates that the information is
required:
 
INFORMATION Preliminary Final
Title Block Containing
   Property designation
   Name of Owner
   Location (including township, county and state)                            X X
   Date or dates survey was conducted and plat prepared
   A scale of drawing in feet per inch listed in words or figures
   A bar graph.
   Name, address, registration number of the registered land surveyor
Name of the subdivider                                                           X X
A sketch vicinity map showing the relationship between the proposed subdivision  X X
and surrounding area
Corporate limits, township boundaries, county lines if on the subdivision tract  X X
Names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners, registered land surveyors,
land planners, architects, landscape architects, and professional engineers      X X
responsible for the subdivision
Registration numbers and seals of professional engineers                         X X
The boundaries of the tract, or portion thereof, to be subdivided, distinctly    X X
and accurately represented with all bearings and distances shown
North arrow and orientation                                                      X X
The names of owners of adjacent properties                                       X X
The exact boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, fully dimensioned by
lengths and bearings, and the location of existing boundary lines of adjoining   X X
lands
The names of any adjoining subdivisions of record or proposed and under review   X X
The zoning classifications of the tract to be subdivided and adjoining           X X
properties
Existing property lines of tract to be subdivided and adjoining properties       X X
Existing buildings or other structures water courses, railroads, bridges,
culverts, storm drains on the land to be subdivided and land immediately         X X
adjoining
Proposed lot lines, lot and block numbers, and approximate dimensions            X X
The lots numbered consecutively throughout the subdivision                         X
Wooded areas, marshes, swamps, rock outcrops, ponds, lakes, streams, streambeds  X X
and any other natural features affecting the site
   The exact location of the flood hazard, floodway and floodway fringe from the
community’s FEMA maps                                                          X X
   Base flood elevation data for subdivisions which contain at least five (5)
lots or fifty acres, whichever is less
 
 
STREET INFORMATION Preliminary Final
Proposed streets                                                            X X
Existing and platted streets on adjoining properties and in the proposed    X X
subdivision
Rights-of-way locations and dimensions                                      X X
Pavement widths                                                             X X
Design engineering data for all corners and curves                          X X
Typical street cross sections                                               X X
Street names                                                                X X
Street maintenance agreement in accordance with Section
9-2050.04 and                                                                X
9-2050.05 of this chapter
Type of street dedication; all streets must be designated “public” or
“private.”
 
Where public streets are involved which will be dedicated to the town, the
subdivider must submit all street plans to the Subdivision Administrator
for approval prior to preliminary plat approval.                            X X
 
Where public streets are involved which will not be dedicated to the town,
the subdivider shall supply the Subdivision Administrator with all the
appropriate documentation for NCDOT District Highway Office review and
approval.
Where streets are to be dedicated to the public, but have not been accepted
into the town or the state system before lots are sold, a statement          X
explaining the status of the streets in accordance with Section
9-2050.05 of this chapter
If any street is proposed to intersect with a state maintained road, the
subdivider shall apply for driveway approval as required by the NCDOT,       X
Division of Highways’ Manual on Driveway Regulations.
Evidence that the subdivider has obtained such approval                     X X
 
 
OPEN/COMMON/PUBLIC SPACE Preliminary Final
Location of all easements                                                  X X
Trails                                                                     X X
Natural buffers                                                            X X
Pedestrian or bicycle paths                                                X X
Parks and recreation areas with specific type indicated                    X X
School sites                                                               X X
Areas to be dedicated to or reserved for public use                        X X
Areas to be used for purposes other than residential with the purposes of  X X
each stated
The future ownership of recreation and open space lands
 
Dedication or reservation for public use to governmental body, for owners  X
to duly constituted homeowners’ association, or for tenants remaining in
subdivider’s ownership.
 
 
UTILITY INFORMATION                                           Preliminary Final
Location of all utility easements                             X           X
If deemed necessary by the Subdivision Administrator, the
plans for utility layouts including:
Sanitary sewers
Storm sewers
Other drainage facilities, if any
Water distribution lines
Natural gas lines                                             X           X
Telephone lines
Cable or Internet lines
Electric lines
Plans should illustrate connections to existing systems,
showing line sizes, the location of fire hydrants, blow-offs,
manholes, force mains and gate valves.
Plans for individual water supply and sewerage disposal       X           X
systems, if any
 
 
SITE CALCULATIONS Preliminary Final
Acreage in total tract to be subdivided                                     X X
Acreage in parks and recreation areas, and other nonresidential uses        X X
Total number of parcels created                                             X X
Acreage of each lot in the subdivision                                      X X
Linear feet in streets                                                      X  
The name and location of any property or buildings within the proposed
subdivision or within any contiguous property that is located on the US     X X
Department of Interior’s National Register of Historic Places
Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the
location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line
(with errors of closure), block line and building line, whether curved or
straight, and including true north point. This should include the radius,    X
central angle, point of tangency, tangent distance and arcs and chords of
all curved streets and curved property lines. All dimensions should be to
the nearest one-tenth (1/10) of a foot and angles to the nearest minute.
The accurate location and description of all monuments, markers and control  X
points
A copy of any proposed deed restrictions or similar covenants. Such         X X
restrictions are mandatory when private recreation areas are established
A copy of the erosion control plan submitted to the appropriate authority,  X X
if such plan is required.
Topographic map with contour intervals of no greater than 20 ft. at a scale  X
of no less than 1:24,000
All certifications required in section                                       X
9-2035.04
Any other information considered by either the subdivider, Planning Board   X X
or Town Council to be pertinent to the review of the plat.
 
Plats not illustrating or containing the above listed data shall be returned by
the Subdivision Administrator to the subdivider or his authorized agent for
completion and resubmission. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2034   Final plat approval process.
Section 9-2034.01   Improvements Installation.
   Upon the approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning Board and Town
Council, the subdivider may proceed with the preparation of the final plat and
install the required improvements or arrange for installation of the required
improvements in accordance with the approved preliminary plat and the
requirements of this chapter. Prior to approval of a final plat, the subdivider
shall have completed installation of the improvements or provided guarantees of
such installation, as specified in this chapter. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2034.02   Town participation and costs.
   The town at the election of the Town Council, may participate in the costs
of providing water and sewer services and in the cost of paving streets and
sidewalks, including curb and guttering, in accordance with the plans shown on
the approved plat. If the subdivider desires town participation, a written
request should be made to the town prior to the installation of any
improvements.
(Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2034.03   Performance guarantee.
   (1)   Following approval of the preliminary plat by the Town Council, the
subdivider may proceed with the preparation of the final plat and the
installation of or arrangement for required improvements in accordance with the
approved preliminary plat and the requirements of this chapter. Prior to
approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall have installed the improvements
specified in this chapter or guaranteed their installation as provided herein.
No final plat will be accepted for review by the Planning Board or Town Council
unless accompanied by a written notice by the Town Manager and/or Town Engineer
acknowledging compliance with the improvement and guarantee standards of this
chapter. The final plat shall constitute only that portion of the preliminary
plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at that time; such
portion shall conform to all requirements of this chapter.
   (2)   In lieu of requiring the completion, installation, and dedication of
all improvements prior to final plat approval, the town may enter into an
agreement with the subdivider whereby the subdivider shall agree to complete
all required improvements. Once said agreement is signed by both parties and
the security required herein is provided, the final plat may be approved by the
Town Council, if all other requirements of this chapter are met. To secure this
agreement, the subdivider shall provide, subject to the approval of Town
Council, either one, or a combination of the following:
   (a)   Surety performance bond(s).  The subdivider shall obtain a performance
bond(s) from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in North
Carolina. The bonds shall be payable to the town and shall be in an amount
equal to one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the entire cost, as
estimated by the subdivider and approved by the Town Council, of installing all
required improvements. The duration of the bond(s) shall be until such time as
the improvements are accepted by Town Council.
   (b)   Cash or equivalent security. The subdivider shall deposit cash and
irrevocable letter of credit or other instrument readily convertible into cash
at face value, either with the town or in escrow with a financial institution
designated as an official depository of the town. The use of any instrument
other than cash shall be subject to the approval of Town Council. The amount of
deposit shall be equal to one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the cost,
as estimated by the subdivider and approved by Town Council, of installing all
required improvements. If cash or other instrument is deposited in escrow with
a financial institution as provided above, then the subdivider shall file with
Town Council an agreement between the financial institution and himself
guaranteeing the following:
   1.   That the escrow account shall be held in trust until released by the
Town Council and may not be used or pledged by the subdivider in any other
matter during the term of escrow; and
   2.   That in case of a failure on the part of the subdivider to complete
said improvements, the financial institution shall, upon notification by the
Town Council, and submission by Town Council to the financial institution of an
engineer’s estimate of the amount needed to complete the improvements,
immediately either pay to the town the funds estimated to complete the
improvements, up to the full balance of the escrow account or deliver to the
town any other instrument fully endorsed or otherwise made payable in full to
the town.
   3.   Upon default, meaning failure on the part of the subdivider to complete
the required improvements in a timely manner as spelled out in the performance
bond or escrow agreement, then the surety, or the financial institution holding
the escrow account shall, if requested by the Town Council, pay all or any
portion of the bond or escrow fund to the town the amount needed to complete
the improvements based on an engineering estimate. Upon payment, the Town
Council, in its discretion, may expend such portion of said funds as it deems
necessary to complete all or any portion of the required improvements. The town
shall return to the subdivider any funds not spent in completing the
improvements.
   (4)   The Town Council may release a portion of any security posted as the
improvements are completed and recommended for approval by the Planning Board.
Within thirty (30) days after receiving the Planning Board recommendation, the
Town Council shall approve said improvements. If the Town Council approves said
improvements, then it shall immediately release any security posted. (Ord. of
11/3/08)
Section 9-2034.04   Defects guarantee.
   (1)   The Town Council shall require a bond guaranteeing utility taps,
curbs, gutters, street pavement, sidewalks, drainage facilities, water and
sewer lines, and other improvements against defects for one year. If said
improvements are constructed at different times, then said guarantee shall
continue until one year from the date of acceptance of the improvement last
constructed. The amount of the bond shall be determined by the Town Manager or
consulting engineer and shall be in cash or made by a surety company authorized
to do business in North Carolina.
   (2)   The Town Council shall require the subdivider to submit a letter to
the Town Clerk in which he agrees to maintain all improvements and any ditch
which has been dug in connection with the installation of such improvements.
The obligation to maintain all improvements and ditches shall be binding to the
subdivider for a period of one year following the acceptance of the
improvements by the town. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2034.05   Final plat review.
   No final plat will be accepted for review by the Planning Board or Town
Council unless accompanied by written notice by the staff planner acknowledging
compliance with this chapter. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2035   The final plat.
   The final plat may be approved for only that portion of the preliminary
plat, which the subdivider proposes to record and develop; however, all
properties on the final plat shall conform to all requirements of this chapter.
No final plat shall be approved unless and until the subdivider shall have
installed, in that area represented on the final plat, all improvements
required by this chapter (or shall have guaranteed their installation as
provided for in Section
9-2034.03 of this chapter and all permanent reference points described in
Article D of this chapter).
(Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2035.01   Plat submitted.
   The subdivider shall submit five (5) copies of the final plat, so marked, to
the Subdivision Administrator not less than twenty (20) days prior to the
Planning Board meeting at which the approval of the plat is to be considered.
One additional copy shall be prepared in accordance with G.S. 47-30 and shall
bear all the required certifications set forth in Section
9-2035.04 of this chapter, at which time it will be considered for approval.
The reproducible drawing shall be given to the Subdivision Administrator not
later than the date of the Planning Board meeting at which approval is
requested. The plat shall be submitted not more than twelve (12) months after
the date on which the preliminary plat was approved; provided, however, a
written extension of this time limit may be granted by the Planning Board on or
before the one-year anniversary of the approval. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2035.02   Size of plat and scale.
   Final plats shall be of a size suitable for recording with the Burke County
Register of Deeds. Where size of land areas or suitable scale to assure
legibility require, maps may be placed on two (2) or more sheets with
appropriate match lines. Final plats shall be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch
equals two hundred (200) feet, or greater. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2035.03   Plat prepared.
   The final plat shall be prepared by a surveyor licensed and registered to
practice in the State of North Carolina. The final plat shall substantially
conform to the preliminary plat as it was approved. The final plat shall
conform to the provisions of G.S. 47-30. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2035.04   Certifications required.
   The following signed certificates shall appear on the reproducible copy of
the final plat which is submitted to the Planning Board by the subdivider:
   (a)   Certification of ownership and dedication.
 
I hereby certify that I am/we are the owner of the property shown and described
hereon, which is located in the subdivision jurisdiction of Valdese and that I/
we hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my free consent and establish
minimum building setback lines as noted.
 
_________________      _________________
Owner                Date
 
(Notary Statement)
   (b)   Certificate of survey and accuracy. In accordance with the Manual of
Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina on the face of each map prepared
for recordation there shall appear a certificate executed by the person making
the survey or map including deeds any recorded data shown thereon. The
certificate shall include a statement of error of closure calculated by
latitudes and departures. Any lines on the map which were not actually surveyed
must be clearly indicated on the map and a statement included in the
certificate revealing the source of the information. The certificate shall take
the following form:
 
State of North Carolina          Burke County
 
I, ______________ certify that this map was (drawn by me) (drawn under my
supervision) from (an actual survey made by me) (an actual survey made under my
supervision) (deed description recorded in Book ___, Page ___, Book ___, Page
___, etc.) (Other); the ratio of precision as calculated by latitudes and
departures is 1: ___ (that the boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken
lines plotted from information found in Book ___, Page ___); that this map was
prepared in accordance with G.S. 47-30, as amended.
 
Witness my hand and seal this ____ day of ________ 20___.
 
________________________
Registered Land Surveyor  Official Seal
 
_________________________
License or Registration Number
 
 
   (c)   Certificate or approval of the design and installation of utilities,
and other required improvements.
 
I hereby certify that all required improvements have been installed in an
acceptable manner and according to the Valdese specifications and standards in
the Subdivision or that guarantees of the installation of the required
improvements in an amount and manner satisfactory to Valdese have been
received.
__________________ ________________
Valdese Town Manager  Date
 
 
   (d)   If the Planning Board approves the final plat, such approval shall be
indicated on each copy of the plat by the following signed certificate:
   CERTIFICATION OF APPROVAL BY THE PLANNING BOARD.
 
The Valdese Planning Board hereby approves the final plat for the
___________________ Subdivision.
 
_   ____________  ________
Chairman, Valdese Planning Board Date
 
 
   (e)   If the Town Council approves the final plat, such approval shall be
shown on each recordable plat by the following signed certificate:
   CERTIFICATION OF APPROVAL BY THE TOWN COUNCIL
 
Certificate of Approval for Recording
 
I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to
comply with the Subdivision Ordinance for Valdese, North Carolina and that this
plat has been approved by the Town Council for recording in the Office of the
Register of Deeds of Burke County.
 
_ ________________ ____________
Town Clerk, Town of Valdese Date
 
 
   (f)   Certificate of private street designation.
 
All roads in this subdivision are hereby declared private and shall not be
maintained by the Town of Valdese or the North Carolina Department of
Transportation. The maintenance of all streets and roads in this subdivision
shall be the responsibility of  , and it shall be the responsibility of  to
bring the roads up to the standards of the North Carolina Department of
Transportation Secondary Roads Council or the Town of Valdese before any
private streets or roads on this plat are included, at any time after the
approval of this plat, into the North Carolina State Maintained Road System or
into the town’s municipal system.
 
 
Subdivider or Agent
 
   (g)   Certificate of review officer approval.
 
State of North Carolina         Burke County
 
I, ____________________, review officer of Burke County, certify that the map
or plat to which this certification is affixed meets all statutory requirements
for recording.
_____________  ____________
Review Officer  Date
 
(Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2035.05   Contents required.
   The final plat shall depict or contain the information listed in Section
9-2033. Plats not illustrating or containing the data listed in Section
9-2033 shall be returned by the Subdivision Administrator to the subdivider or
his authorized agent for completion and resubmission. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2036   Review procedure.
   Final plats shall be reviewed according to the following procedure. (Ord. of
11/3/08)
Section 9-2036.01   Planning Board review.
   (a)   The Planning Board shall approve or disapprove the final plat within
thirty (30) days of its first consideration.
   (b)   During its review of the final plat, the Planning Board may appoint an
engineer or surveyor to confirm the accuracy of the final plat. If substantial
errors are found, the costs shall be charged to the subdivider and the plat
shall not be approved until such errors have been corrected.
   (c)   If the Planning Board disapproves the final plat, the Subdivision
Administrator shall state in writing its reasons for such action, specifying
the provisions of this chapter with which the plat does not comply. One copy of
this statement shall be transmitted to the subdivider within fifteen (15) days
of disapproval and one copy shall be retained by the Planning Board as part of
its proceedings. If the final plat is disapproved, the subdivider may make such
changes as will bring the plat into compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and resubmit same for reconsideration by the Planning Board.
(Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2036.02   Town Council review.
   (a)   Upon approval of the final plat by the Planning Board, the Town
Council shall review and approve or disapprove the plat at its next regularly
scheduled meeting, which takes place at least fifteen (15) days after the
Planning Board submits its recommendation. This applies only if the Planning
Board recommendation is submitted at least fifteen (15) days prior to the Town
Councils regularly scheduled meeting.
   (b)   If the final plat is disapproved by the Town Council, the reasons for
such disapproval shall be stated in writing, specifying the provision(s) of
this chapter with which the final plat does not comply. One (1) copy of such
reasons shall be retained by the Town Council as a part of its proceedings, one
(1) copy shall be transmitted to the Subdivision Administrator, and one (1)
copy shall be transmitted to the subdivider. If the final plat is disapproved,
the subdivider may make such changes as will bring the final plat into
compliance with this chapter and resubmit same for consideration by the
Planning Board as identified in Section
9-2036.01. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2036.03   Disposition of copies.
   Upon action by the Town Council on the final plat, the Subdivision
Administrator shall retain one (1) copy and return the reproducible copy and
any other copies to the developer. The reproducible plat shall be filed with
the Register of Deeds. One (1) print shall be retained by the Subdivision
Administrator. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2036.04   Recording the final plat.
   The subdivider shall file the approved major subdivision final plat with the
Register of Deeds of Burke County for recording within sixty (60) days after
the date of the Town Council approval. Otherwise, such approval shall be null
and void. The subdivider shall file the approved minor subdivision final plat
with the Register of Deeds of Burke County for recording within sixty (60) days
after the date of the Subdivision Administrator approval. Otherwise, such
approval shall be null and void.
(Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2036.05   Resubdivision procedures.
   For any replatting or resubdivision of land, the same procedures, rules, and
regulations shall apply as prescribed herein for an original subdivision. Lot
sizes may, however, be varied on an approved plan after recording, provided
that:
   (a)   No lot or tract of land shall be created or sold that is smaller than
the size shown on the approved plan;
   (b)   Drainage, easements, or rights-of-way shall not be changed;
   (c)   Street alignment and block sizes shall not be changed;
   (d)   The property line between the back of the lots shall not be changed;
   (e)   The rear portion of lots shall not be subdivided from the front parts;
and
   (f)   The character of the area shall be maintained.
(Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2036.06   Recombination of land.
   (1)   Any plat or any part of any plat may be voided by the owner at any
time before the sale of any lot in the subdivision by a written instrument to
which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the same to be voided.
   (2)   Such instrument shall be approved by the same agencies as approved the
final plat. The governing body may reject any such instrument which abridges or
destroys any public rights in any of its public uses, improvements, streets or
alleys.
   (3)   Such instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or approved and
recorded and filed in the same manner as a final plat; and being duly recorded
or filed shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the
plat so vacated, and to divest all public rights in the streets, alleys, and
public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described in such plat.
   (4)   When lots have been sold, the plat may be voided in the manner
provided in subsections (1) through (3) of this section by all owners of the
lots in such plat joining in the execution of such writing. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2037 through section 9-2039 reserved.
ARTICLE D
Installation of permanent reference points and improvements
Section 9-2040   Permanent reference points.
   Prior to the approval of the final plat, permanent reference points shall
have been placed in accordance with the following requirements:
   (1)   Subdivision corner tie. At least one (1) corner of the subdivision
shall be designated by course and distance (tie) as required by standards of
practice set forth in G.S. 47-30.
   (2)   Monuments. Within each block of a subdivision at least two (2)
monuments designed and designated as control corners shall be installed.
Installation of monuments shall be in accordance with the standards of practice
set forth in G.S. 47-30.
   (3)   Property markers. A steel or wrought iron pipe, solid iron pin, rebar
or the equivalent not less than one-half (1/2) inch in diameter and at least
eighteen (18) inches in length shall be set at all property corners or offset
in the property line if the property corner is inaccessible (center of creek or
street, etc), except those located by monuments. A marker shall also be set at
a point of curve, point of intersection, property corner, point of tangency
along street right of way and reference point unless a monument is placed at
said points. Additional markers shall be placed where necessary. (Ord. of 11/3/
08)
Section 9-2040.01   Public sites and open space.
   In subdividing property, due consideration should be given by the subdivider
and the Planning Board to the designation of suitable sites for parks, schools,
and other uses. Such provision should be indicated on the sketch plan in order
that it may be determined when and in what manner such areas will be required.
(Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2040.02   Accesses to parks, schools, etc.
   Streets shall be designed and walkways dedicated to assure convenient access
to adjacent parks, playgrounds, schools and other places of public assembly.
Dedicated walkways shall not be less than ten (10) feet in width.
(Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2040.03   Restrictions on land subject to flooding.
   Lots that are subject to flooding shall not be established in subdivisions
for the purpose of creating residential building sites except as herein
provided. Where the developer proposes to provide a levee or raise the floor
elevations above the flood level, an engineering report shall accompany the
subdivision application.
   (1)   If there is any watercourse of any type running through or within one
hundred and fifty (150) feet of the property proposed for subdividing, the
prospective subdivider shall furnish reasonable evidence to the Planning Board
that residential lots within the subdivision will not be flooded.
   (2)   No proposed residential building lot shown that is wholly subject to
flooding shall be approved. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2041   Design and standards and required improvements.
   Street requirements for subdivisions shall meet the current Minimum
Construction Standards of North Carolina Department of Transportation, Division
of Highways, and all of the requirements of this chapter. In the case of
conflict in requirements, the more stringent shall apply except in the case of
specific exceptions allowed for hillside subdivisions. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2042 through section 9-2049 reserved.
ARTICLE E
Required improvements, dedication, reservation and minimum standards of design
Section 9-2050   General requirements.
   Each major subdivision shall contain the improvements specified in this
article, which shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter and paid for by the subdivider, unless other means of financing is
specifically stated in this chapter. Land shall be dedicated and reserved in
each major subdivision as specified in this article. Each major subdivision
shall adhere to the minimum standards of design established by this article.
(Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2050.01   Conformity to existing maps or plans.
   The location and width of all proposed streets shall be in conformity with
official plans, the adopted thoroughfare plan, maps of the town and existing or
amended plans of the Planning Board. Property owners must reserve required
right-of-way for proposed road improvements, identified in the adopted
thoroughfare plan, when developing property. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2050.02   Continuation of existing roads.
   The proposed road layout shall be coordinated with the existing road system
of the surrounding area and, where possible, existing principal roads shall be
extended.
(Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2050.03   Access to adjacent properties.
   Where, in the opinion of the Planning Board, it is desirable to provide
access to an adjoining property, proposed roads shall be extended by dedication
to the boundary of such property and a temporary turnaround shall be provided.
(Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2050.04   Private streets.
   Private streets may be allowed in subdivisions; ten- acre exempt
developments and gated subdivisions provided they meet minimum construction
standards of NC Department of Transportation Subdivision Roads manual, the town
subdivision general requirements and minimum standards of design, and the North
Carolina State Fire Code. The town will not maintain any private street. The
town will not maintain any private street. The town will not accept into its
street maintenance system any private street that does not meet the standards
listed in this chapter. (Ord. of 11/3/08; as amended by Ord. of / /)
Section 9-2050.05   Subdivision street disclosure statement.
   (a)   All streets shown on the final plat shall be designated in accordance
with G.S. 136-102.6 as either public or private. The designation of the streets
as public shall be conclusively presumed as an offer of dedication to the
public.
   (b)   Where streets are dedicated to the public but not accepted into the
town’s municipal system, before lots are sold, a statement explaining the
status of the street shall be included in the final plat.
   (c)   For all private streets, a disclosure statement naming the responsible
party for street maintenance shall be included on the final plat in accordance
with 9-2035.04(f). (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2050.06   Large tracts and parcels.
   Where land is subdivided into lots greater than one (1) acre and less than
ten (10) acres, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow for the opening
of future roads and logical further re-subdivision. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2050.07   Lots.
   All lots shall front upon a public or private street. Every lot must front
for at least thirty-five (35) feet on a public or private street. Insofar as
practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight lines or radial
to curbed street lines. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
9-2050.07.1   Flag lots.
   The Planning Board may approve flag lots in exceptional cases where it is
impractical to serve an isolated lot by a public street. The frontage of the
flag lot shall have a minimum width of thirty-five (35) feet providing an
access strip between two (2) regular lots to the isolated building site. The
area of such strip shall be excluded in computing the lot area and width, and
the length of said strip shall not exceed three hundred (300) feet. The lot
must be able to meet all dimensional and size requirements of the designated
zoning district. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2050.08   Reserved.
Section 9-2050.09   Contour map.
   A contour map shall be provided if requested by the Subdivision
Administrator. The contour interval required will depend upon topographic and
drainage characteristics and shall be specified by the Subdivision
Administrator. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2050.10   Street names.
   Proposed streets, which are obviously in alignment with others existing and
named, shall bear the assigned name of the existing streets. In no case shall
the name for proposed streets duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing
street names, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard,
drive, place, court, etc.
(Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2051   Design standards.
   The following design standards shall be considered minimum requirements
unless the subdivision qualifies as a Hillside Subdivision (See Section
9-2054) or the Cluster Design Open Space option is used (See Section
9-2053). Streets or roads of types not listed in the following standards, such
as arterials, shall meet the requirements of the Thoroughfare Plan, the NCDOT,
and the Planning Board. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2051.01   Public streets.
   All streets shall be designed, within natural limitations of the land, to
form part of an interconnected pattern as illustrated below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/adeb133b442280ad8bc3431317823f426b5e2f33/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2857.png]
 
A A common subdivision showing a poor street layout due to few connections and
  many dead ends.
B Better street layouts showing multiple links and a gridded network of
  streets.
 
   (a)   Right-of-way widths. Minimum street right-of-way widths shall be in
accordance with the major street plan and shall be not less than the following:
 
TYPE OF STREET                MINIMUM RIGHT-OF-WAY (FEET)
(1) Arterial                  100
(2) Collector streets - Minor 60
(3) Local or minor            50
(residential streets)
(4) Cul-de-sacs*              100
(5) Alleys**                  20
 
*   The distance from the edge of the pavement of the cul-de-sac to the right-
of-way line shall not be less than the distance from the edge of the pavement
to the right-of-way line on the street into the cul-de-sac.
**   Only allowed with a conditional use permit in a planned unit development.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/adeb133b442280ad8bc3431317823f426b5e2f33/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2859.png]
   (b)   Pavement widths. Width for local roads and streets shall be as
follows:
 
ROAD TYPE             PAVEMENT WIDTH WITH CURB PAVEMENT WIDTH WITHOUT CURB
                      AND GUTTER               AND GUTTER
Residential Collector 30                       24
Local or Minor        22                       22
(Residential Streets)
Cul-de-sac            80                       80
Alley*                16                       16
 
* Only allowed with a conditional use permit in a planned unit development
   (c)   Grades. Street grades shall be as follows:
 
Street Type    Maximum Grade Minimum Grade without Curb Minimum Grade with Curb
                             & Gutter                   and Gutter
Local or Minor 12%           0.5%                       1%
Collector      9%            0.5%                       1%
Alley*         12%           0.5%                       1%
Cul-de-sac     5%            1%                         1%
 
* Only allowed with a conditional use permit in a planned unit development
   Grades approaching intersections shall not exceed five percent (5%) for a
distance of not less than one hundred (100) feet from the centerline of said
intersection.
   (d)   Horizontal curves. Where a centerline deflection angle occurs, a
circular curve shall be introduced, having a centerline radius of not less than
the following:
 
Street Type       Radius (in feet)
Collector Streets 230
Local or Minor    150
Alley*            35
 
* Only allowed with a conditional use permit in a planned unit development
   (e)   Vertical curves. All vertical curves shall have such length as
necessary to provide safe sight distance based on NCDOT Minimum Construction
Standards for Subdivision Roads.
   (f)   Intersections. Streets shall be laid out as follows:
   (1)   Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and no
street shall intersect at less than seventy-five (75º) degrees.
   (2)   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-
five (125) feet shall be avoided.
   (3)   Intersections with a major street or highway shall be at least eight
hundred (800) feet apart. This requirement may be waived by the Planning Board
if such requirement would prevent a property owner fronting on a major street
or thoroughfare from having access to such a major street or highway.
   (g)   Cul-de-sacs. Permanent dead end streets are strongly discouraged
except when required by extreme topography, water, other natural features. When
permitted, no dead-end street shall be longer than twelve hundred (1200) feet
or provide access to more than twelve (12) lots. Measurement shall be from the
center line of the last intersection of a through street to the center of the
turnaround of the cul-de-sac. Cul-de-sacs should not be used to avoid
connection with an existing street or to avoid extension of an important
street.
   (h)   Marginal access streets. Where a tract of land to be subdivided
adjoins a principal arterial street, the subdivider may be required to provide
a marginal access street parallel to the arterial street or reverse frontage on
a minor street for the lots to be developed adjacent to the arterial. When
reverse frontage is established, private driveways shall be prevented from
having direct access to the principal arterial.
   (i)   Nonresidential streets. The subdivider of a nonresidential subdivision
shall provide streets in accordance with the NCDOT Division of Highways
Subdivision Roads Minimum Construction Standards, July 1, 1985 as amended, and
the standard of this chapter, whichever are stricter in regard to each
particular item. Cross-access between adjacent commercial subdivision, existing
and new, is strongly encouraged wherever possible.
   (j)   Access points. Subdivisions that front on more than one public road
shall provide a minimum of one access point on at least two (2) public roads.
Exceptions may be made due to extreme topography, water and other natural
features. If a subdivision has more than one access point on the same public
road, those access points must be separated by at least three hundred (300)
feet or as many feet as possible based on the property’s road frontage,
topography, water and other natural features affecting the property. (Ord. of
11/3/08)
Section 9-2051.02   Blocks.
   The maximum and minimum length and width of blocks shall be as follows:
   (a)   Length. Block lengths shall not exceed twelve hundred (1200) feet nor
be less than four hundred (400) feet. Where deemed necessary by the Planning
Board, a pedestrian path easement of at least ten (10) feet in width may be
required.
   (b)   Widths. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots of
minimum depth, except where fronting on major streets or prevented by
topographic conditions or abutting a water area, in which case a single tier of
lots may be approved.
   (c)   Block numbers. Block numbers shall conform to the town street
numbering system, if applicable. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2052   Lot designs.
   All lots in new subdivisions shall conform to the zoning requirements of the
district in which the subdivision is located. Conformance to zoning
requirements means, among other things, that the smallest lot in the
subdivision must meet all dimensional requirements of the zoning district. It
is not sufficient merely for the average lot to meet zoning requirements.
(Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2052.01   Lots.
   The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall reflect due consideration for
topography and drainage. Lots shall conform to the requirements of this chapter
and, in addition, shall conform to the following provisions. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2052.02   Arrangement.
   All lots shall front upon a public or private street. Every lot must front
for at least thirty-five (35) feet on a public or private street. Insofar as
practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight lines or radial
to curved street lines. Double frontage lots shall be avoided wherever possible
except where marginal access streets will be provided as per section
9-2051.01(h). (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2052.03   Lake frontage lots.
   Lake frontage lots shall have a minimum width of one hundred (100) feet at
the front building line. All other lots within four hundred and sixty feet
(460) of the official pond level of the lakes within Burke County shall have a
minimum width of one hundred (100) feet at the front building line. Lots shall
also adhere to the Rule 15A NCAC 02B.0243 by the NC Division of Water Resources
entitled Catawba River Basin: Protection and Maintenance of Existing Riparian
Buffers. (Ord. of 11/3/08; as amended by Ord. of 2/6/17)
Section 9-2052.04   Area.
   All lots shall have an area that complies with the requirements of the
zoning district in which the lot is located. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2052.05   Width.
   All lots shall have a minimum width that complies with the requirements of
the zoning district in which the lot is located. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2052.06   Depth.
   All lots shall have a minimum mean depth that complies with the requirements
of the zoning district in which the lot is located. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2052.07   Orientation of lot lines.
   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street
lines. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2052.08   Building setback lines.
   Building setback lines shall comply with the requirements of the zoning
district in which the lot is located. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2052.09   Easements.
   (1)   Utility and drainage easements centered on rear or side lot lines
shall be provided where necessary and shall be at least twenty (20) feet in
width, and ten (10) feet on either side of the property lines. A greater width
may be required for the installation and maintenance of the facility.
   (2)   Pedestrian path easements of ten (10) feet in width shall be provided
when such area is required by the Planning Board.
   (3)   Where a subdivision is or will be traversed by a water course,
drainage way, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a storm water
easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of
such water course, and an additional width of twelve and one-half (12.5) feet
from said lines of the water course for the construction and maintenance. (Ord.
Of 11/3/08; as amended by Ord. of 2/6/17)
Section 9-2052.10   Reserved.
Section 9-2052.11   Storm water drainage.
   (1)   The subdivision must meet the latest adopted requirements specified by
the state sediment and erosion control program, town watershed protection
ordinance, phase II stormwater ordinance, national flood insurance program, US
Army Corp of Engineers regulations, (Section 404 of the Clean Water Act), and
any other jurisdictional requirements under local, state, and federal rules or
laws. Terms used in this section are as defined in the North Carolina Erosion
and Sediment Control Planning and Design Manual.
   (2)   Where curbs and gutters are constructed, they shall be in accordance
with the standards of the North Carolina Department of Transportation’s
Guidelines for Curb Cuts and Ramps for Handicapped Persons.
   (3)   No surface water shall be channeled or directed into a sanitary sewer.
   (4)   Where feasible, the subdivider shall connect the storm water drainage
system to an existing storm drainage system.
   (5)   Where an existing storm drainage system cannot feasibly be extended to
the subdivision, a surface drainage system shall be designed to protect the
proposed development from water damage.
   (6)   Surface drainage courses shall have side slopes of at least three (3)
feet or horizontal distance for each one (1) foot of vertical distance, and
courses shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the drainage area without
flooding. The minimum grade along the bottom of a surface drainage course shall
be a vertical fall of at least one (1) foot in each one hundred (100) feet of
horizontal distance.
   (7)   Where a subdivision is or will be traversed by a water course,
drainage way, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a storm water
easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of
such water course, and an additional width of twelve and one-half (12.5) of the
said lines of the water course for the construction and maintenance
   (8)   Where storm sewers, drains and structures are installed, they shall be
of a size and type and location as required by this chapter, town standards,
and good engineering practices. The minimum size of storm drains shall be
fifteen (15) inches in diameter. The design flow for storm sewer collectors
shall be at least a ten (10) year storm frequency and the design flow shall be
at a twenty-five (25) year storm frequency for culverts and storm sewers
crossing streets. Storm drains carrying water from street right-of-way shall be
placed along lot lines where feasible and shall extend for a distance of
thirty-five (35) feet minimum back of the building line. All off-street storm
drains or extensions shall be installed initially by the subdivider and the
responsibilities thereafter shall be transferred to the purchaser(s) (or
property owners association if applicable). Such extensions shall have
permanent easements centered with the pipe. The utility easement shall be of a
width determined necessary for maintenance purposes by the town Public Works
Department based upon enclosure depth, topography and location of existing and
proposed improvements, but no less than twenty (20) feet. The town shall have a
right to enter for maintenance purposes where it determines that the public
health, safety, or general welfare constitutes a public necessity for such
maintenance. However, the town does not otherwise maintain off-street storm
drains. Where easements are required, they shall be noted on the final plat.
   (9)    All pipes in street rights-of-way shall be constructed of N.C.
Department of Transportation approved plastic, reinforced concrete, corrugated-
aluminum or aluminized steel.
   (10)   Culverts shall be provided to accommodate all natural water flow and
shall be sufficient length to permit full width roadway and the required
slopes. Cross drains shall be built on straight line and grade shall be laid on
a firm base, but not on rock. Pipes shall be laid with the spigot pointing in
the direction of the flow and with the end filled and matched to provide tight
joints and a smooth uniform invert. They shall be placed at a sufficient depth
below the roadbed to avoid dangerous pressure of impact, and in no case shall
the top of the pipe be less than one foot (1') below the road bed.
   (11)   Where off-site runoff is to be conveyed through the subdivision, the
design of popes and/or channels shall be based on the full build out of the
off-site drainage area(s) based on current zoning.
   (12)   Where storm water is released from a storm drainage system, whether
onto the developed tract or to an off-site tract, the water shall be released
in a non-erosive manner such that downstream properties are not damaged. Such
protection shall be designed based on the design storm applicable to the storm
drainage system.
(Ord. of 11/3/08; as amended by Ord. of 2/6/17)
Section 9-2052.12   Water and sewer utilities.
   (a)   All lots within new major subdivisions shall connect to town water
system and sanitary sewer system if available. These utilities shall be
installed at the subdivider’s expense.
   (b)   Water and sanitary sewer systems shall be designed by a qualified
North Carolina registered professional engineer. System design and construction
shall be in accordance with this chapter, town standards, and good engineering
practices, as well as with all applicable local, state and federal rules and
laws.
   (c)   All easements for water and sewer lines to be installed outside the
public street right-of-way shall have a minimum width of twenty-five (25) feet,
centered with the pipeline. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2052.13   Pedestrian walkways.
   (a)   All major subdivisions are encouraged to incorporate pedestrian
facilities. These facilities include, but are not limited to, sidewalks,
walking trails, paths, bicycle lanes and green ways. New facilities shall
connect to existing facilities if there are any present.
   (b)   All sidewalks shall conform to all current Americans With Disabilities
Act (ADA) standards. All sidewalks shall be placed in the right-of-way. (Ord.
of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2053   Cluster development and planned unit development.
   (a)   The purpose of providing for the clustering of development and the
resultant open space is to offer recreation at or near each home, to improve
the appearance of the area through preservation of green space, to counter the
undesirable effects of urban congestion and monotony, and to encourage group
participation in community activities by all ages on a local block or
neighborhood basis. This assists in building community and personal stability
and security. Local parks, recreation areas, and other spaces in a planned
neighborhood pattern are intended to conserve areas of natural beauty,
encourage cooperative relationships between neighbors, and help promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (b)   The purpose of this section is to provide an alternative subdivision
procedure for single family use; or, governed by the minimum lot size
requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance (see Section
9-2052). This is to be accomplished by permitting the density of dwelling units
contemplated by the minimum lot size requirements to be maintained on an
overall basis when applied to specific tracts of land, and thereby provide for
desirable and proper open space. Cluster subdivisions shall follow requirements
for planned unit developments in the Valdese Zoning Ordinance (see Sections
9-3111 and
9-3112). (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2054   Hillside subdivisions.
   Hillside Subdivisions shall comply with the following standards. (Ord. of
11/3/08)
Section 9-2054.01   Street design.
Section 9-2054.01.01   Widths.
   The public or private street shall have a right-of-way of not less than
fifty (50) feet except that a right-of-way of forty (40) feet will be permitted
if a reduced width is essentially unavoidable and is approved by the Planning
Board. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2054.01.02   Cul-de-sacs.
   Permanent dead end streets are strongly discouraged except when required by
extreme topography, water, or other natural features. The required turnaround
on a dead-end private street in a hillside subdivision shall have a roadway
diameter of not less than fifty (50) feet and a right-of-way diameter of not
less than sixty (60) feet. If the street length does not exceed three hundred
(300) feet and if construction difficulties will not permit a turnaround, the
use of a “Y” or a “T” or other turning space of a design such as will allow a
vehicle with a wheel base of at least twenty (20) feet to complete a turning
movement with a maximum of one backing movement, may be permitted if approved
by the Planning Board.
(Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2054.01.03   Grading.
   Grading will not be required for the full right-of-way in hillside
subdivisions if the Planning Board determines that full grading will prevent
the convenient access to adjoining property or will destroy the natural beauty
of the site by excessive cut and fill. However, where slope extends beyond the
right-of-way, slope easements shall be added where needed. Easement shall
extend ten (10) feet beyond top of cut where cut exceeds fifteen (15) feet
vertically. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2054.01.04   Street grades.
   In hillside land subdivisions, maximum street grades permitted shall be
fourteen percent (14%) unless the Planning Board determines that a steeper
grade is essentially unavoidable and would not create excessive danger. (Ord.
of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2054.02   Street improvements for hillside subdivisions.
Section 9-2054.02.01   Pavement.
   Pavement widths shall not be less than specified in Section
9-2051.01 and
9-2050.04 except where the average cross slope is sixteen percent (16%) or
greater, pavement widths may be reduced with Planning Board approval as
follows:
   (a)   Where the average cross slope is between sixteen percent (16%) and
thirty-three percent (33%), minimum pavement width may be reduced to eighteen
(18) feet.
   (b)   Where the average cross slope is greater than thirty-three percent
(33%), no street shall be constructed.
   (c)   Where pavement width is reduced, on-street parking shall not be
permitted. (Ord. of 11/3/08)
Section 9-2054.03   Hillside lots.
   All lots in a hillside subdivision shall meet the requirements of the zoning
designation of the property.
(Ord. of 11/3/08)
CHAPTER 3
Zoning
ARTICLE A
Preliminary Sections
Section
9-3001   Purpose.
Section
9-3002   Authority.
Section
9-3003   Short title.
Section
9-3004   Jurisdiction.
Section
9-3005   Official zoning map.
Section
9-3006   Identification of official zoning map.
Section
9-3007 through section 9-3010 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Definitions
Section
9-3011   Interpretation and definition of terms and words.
Section
9-3012   Definitions.
Section
9-3013 through section 9-3020 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Establishment of Districts and General Rules
Section
9-3021   Use districts.
Section
9-3022   Interpretation of the zoning map.
Section
9-3023 through section 9-3030 reserved.
ARTICLE D
General Provisions
Section
9-3031   Application.
Section
9-3032   Nonconforming uses.
Section
9-3032.1   Continuing nonconforming uses of land.
Section
9-3032.2   Continuing the use of nonconforming buildings.
Section
9-3033   Interpretation of district regulations.
Section
9-3034   Zoning of annexed areas.
Section
9-3035   Lot of record.
Section
9-3036   Front yard setbacks for dwellings.
Section
9-3037   Height limitations.
Section
9-3038   Visibility at intersections.
Section
9-3039   Location of accessory buildings.
Section
9-3040   Provisions for landlocked lots.
Section
9-3041   Vested rights.
Section
9-3042   Permitted accessory uses in all districts.
Section
9-3043   Setbacks along thoroughfares.
Section
9-3044   Property maintenance.
Section
9-3045   Home occupations.
Section
9-3046   Buffers.
Section
9-3046.1   Standards.
Section
9-3046.2   Planting specifications.
Section
9-3047   Provisions for ten-acre exempt developments.
Section
9-3048   Provisions for gated subdivisions
Section
9-3049 through section 9-3050 reserved.
ARTICLE E
Use Requirements by District
Section
9-3051   Neighborhood Residential District (R-8).
Section
9-3051.1   Permitted uses.
Section
9-3051.2   Off-street parking and loading requirements.
Section
9-3051.3   Sign requirements.
Section
9-3051.4   Dimensional requirements.
Section
9-3052   Residential District (R-12A).
Section
9-3052.1   Permitted uses.
Section
9-3052.2   Off-street parking and loading requirements.
Section
9-3052.3   Sign requirements.
Section
9-3052.4   Dimensional requirements.
Section
9-3053   Residential District (R-12).
Section
9-3053.1   Permitted uses.
Section
9-3053.2   Off-street parking and loading requirements.
Section
9-3053.3   Sign requirements.
Section
9-3053.4   Dimensional requirements.
Section
9-3054   Office-Institutional District (O-I).
Section
9-3054.1   Permitted uses.
Section
9-3054.2   Off-street parking and loading requirements.
Section
9-3054.3   Sign requirements.
Section
9-3054.4   Dimensional requirements.
Section
9-3055   Central Business District (B-1).
Section
9-3055.1   Permitted uses.
Section
9-3055.2   Off-street parking and loading requirements.
Section
9-3055.3   Sign requirements.
Section
9-3055.4   Dimensional requirements.
Section
9-3055.5   Amortization of certain conditions within the B-1 District.
Section
9-3056   General Business District (B-2).
Section
9-3056.1   Permitted uses.
Section
9-3056.2   Off-street parking and loading requirements.
Section
9-3056.3   Sign requirements.
Section
9-3056.4   Dimensional requirements.
Section
9-3057   Reserved.
Section
9-3058   Manufacturing District (M-1).
Section
9-3058.1   Permitted uses.
Section
9-3058.2   Off-street parking and loading requirements.
Section
9-3058.3   Sign requirements.
Section
9-3058.4   Dimensional requirements.
Section
9-3059   Flood Plain Overlay District (FP).
Section
9-3059.1   Permitted uses.
Section
9-3059.2   Off-street parking and loading requirements.
Section
9-3059.3   Sign requirements.
Section
9-3059.4   Dimensional requirements.
Section
9-3060   Special requirements for certain uses.
Section
9-3060.01   Accessory dwellings.
Section
9-3060.02   Crematory or crematorium.
Section
9-3060.03   Day care homes and day care centers.
Section
9-3060.04   Kennels.
Section
9-3060.05   Outdoor seasonal sales.
Section
9-3060.06   Bed and breakfast inns.
Section
9-3060.07   Electronic gaming operations.
Section
9-3060.08   Artisan food and beverage producer.
Section
9-3060.09   Restaurants in O-I district.
Section
9-3060.10   Detached garages.
Section
9-3061   Animal keeping.
Section
9-3062 through section 9-3070 reserved.
ARTICLE F
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Section
9-3071   Parking spaces to be required and permanent.
Section
9-3072   Use of parking lots permitted.
Section
9-3073   Enforcement.
Section
9-3074   Schedule of parking spaces.
Section
9-3075   Required loading and unloading.
Section
9-3076   Parking lot design requirements.
Section
9-3077   Landscaping of parking area.
Section
9-3078   Dumpsters/trash containers.
Section
9-3079   Compliance with stormwater and erosion control standards.
Section
9-3080 reserved.
ARTICLE G
Manufactured Homes and Manufactured Home Parks
Section
9-3081   General provisions.
Section
9-3082   Definitions.
Section
9-3083   Location of manufactured homes.
Section
9-3084   Provisions for manufactured homes.
Section
9-3085   Provisions for existing manufactured home parks.
Section
9-3086 through section 9-3090 reserved.
ARTICLE H
Sign Regulations
Section
9-3091   Purpose.
Section
9-3092   Applicability.
Section
9-3093   General provisions.
Section
9-3094   District classification.
Section
9-3095   Sign types.
Section
9-3096   Sign measurement.
Section
9-3097   Permanent on-premise signs requiring a permit.
Section
9-3097.1   On-premise signs.
Section
9-3097.2   Permanent off-premise signs limited to non- commercial public
service directional signs.
Section
9-3097.3   Subdivision, multi-family, and manufactured home park signs.
Section
9-3097.4   Electronic message signs.
Section
9-3098   Temporary signs requiring a permit.
Section
9-3099   Temporary off-premise signs requiring approval.
Section
9-3100   Signs permitted without a permit.
Section
9-3101   Master signage programs.
Section
9-3101.1   Planned development flexibility option.
Section
9-3102   Prohibited signs.
Section
9-3103   Application and issuance of sign permits.
Section
9-3103.1   Application.
Section
9-3103.2   Issuance of permit.
Section
9-3103.3   Fees.
Section
9-3103.4   Completion of construction.
Section
9-3104   Unlawful cutting of trees or shrubs.
Section
9-3105   Nonconforming signs.
Section
9-3106   Sign definitions.
Section
9-3107 through section 9-3110 reserved.
ARTICLE I
Planned Unit Developments
Section
9-3111   Planned Unit Development— Residential (PUD-R).
Section
9-3111.1   Permitted uses and requirements.
Section
9-3112   Planned Unit Development— Business (PUD-B).
Section
9-3112.1   Permitted uses and requirements.
Section
9-3113 through section 9-3115 reserved.
ARTICLE J
Administration, Enforcement, and Penalties
Section
9-3116   Zoning Enforcement Officer.
Section
9-3117   Zoning permit required.
Section
9-3118   Application for a zoning permit.
Section
9-3119   Certificate of occupancy required.
Section
9-3120   Penalties for violations.
Section
9-3121   Remedies.
Section
9-3122 through section 9-3125 reserved.
ARTICLE K
Planning Board
Section
9-3126   Establishment of the Planning Board.
Section
9-3127   Proceedings and duties of the Planning Board.
Section
9-3128 through 9-3130 reserved.
ARTICLE L
Board of Adjustment
Section
9-3131   Establishment of the Board of Adjustment.
Section
9-3132   Jurisdiction and decision of the Board of Adjustment.
Section
9-3133   Proceedings of the Board of Adjustment.
Section
9-3134   Appeals, hearings and notice.
Section
9-3135   Stay of proceedings.
Section
9-3136   Fees for variances and appeals.
Section
9-3137   Powers and duties of the Board of Adjustment.
Section
9-3138   Appeals from the Board of Adjustment.
Section
9-3139 through section 9-3140 reserved.
ARTICLE M
Amendments
Section
9-3141   Procedure for amendments.
Section
9-3142   Action by the Planning Board.
Section
9-3143   Town Council consideration.
Section
9-3144   Required notifications.
Section
9-3145   Town Council action.
Section
9-3146   Protest petitions.
Section
9-3147 through section 9-3150 reserved.
ARTICLE N
Watershed Protection
Section
9-3151   Authority and enactment.
Section
9-3152   Jurisdiction.
Section
9-3153   Exceptions to applicability.
Section
9-3154   Cluster or planned unit development.
Section
9-3155   Buffer areas required.
Section
9-3156   Watershed Administrator and duties thereof.
Section
9-3157   Appeal from the Watershed Administrator.
Section
9-3158   Establishment of a Watershed Review Board.
Section
9-3159   Powers and duties of the Watershed Review Board and Board of
Adjustment.
Section
9-3160   Appeals from the Town Council or Board of Adjustment.
Section
9-3161   High density development standards.
Section
9-3162   High density development permit application.
Section
9-3163   Storm water control structures.
Section
9-3164   Posting of financial security required.
Section
9-3165   Maintenance and upkeep.
Section
9-3166   Application and inspection fees.
Section
9-3167   Inspections and release of the performance bond.
Section
9-3168   Remedies.
Section
9-3169   Sanctions.
Section
9-3170   Criminal penalties.
Section
9-3171 through section 9-3180 reserved.
ARTICLE O
Legal Status Provisions
Section
9-3181   Conflict with other regulations.
Section
9-3182   Repeal of existing zoning ordinance.
Section
9-3183   Validity.
Section
9-3184   Enactment.
Section
9-3185 through section 9-3194 reserved.
ARTICLE P
Telecommunications Tower Ordinance
Section
9-3195   Definitions.
Section
9-3196   General guidelines and requirements.
Section
9-3197   Administrative approved uses.
Section
9-3198 through section 9-3200 reserved.
ARTICLE Q
Flood Damage Prevention
Section
9-3201   Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives.
Section
9-3201.1   Statutory authorization.
Section
9-3201.2   Findings of fact.
Section
9-3201.3   Statement of purpose.
Section
9-3201.4   Objectives.
Section
9-3202   Definitions.
Section
9-3203   General provisions.
Section
9-3203.1   Lands to which article applies.
Section
9-3203.2   Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas.
Section
9-3203.3   Establishment of floodplain development permit.
Section
9-3203.4   Compliance.
Section
9-3203.5   Abrogation and greater restrictions.
Section
9-3203.6   Interpretation.
Section
9-3203.7   Warning and disclaimer of liability.
Section
9-3203.8   Penalties for violation.
Section
9-3204   Administration.
Section
9-3204.1   Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
Section
9-3204.2   Floodplain development application, permit and certification
requirements.
Section
9-3204.3   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
Section
9-3204.4   Corrective procedures.
Section
9-3204.5   Variance procedures.
Section
9-3205   Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
Section
9-3205.1   General standards.
Section
9-3205.2   Specific standards.
Section
9-3205.3   Reserved.
Section
9-3205.4   Standards for floodplains without established base flood elevations.
Section
9-3205.5   Standards for riverine floodplains with BFE but without established
floodways or non- encroachment areas.
Section
9-3205.6   Floodways and non-encroachment areas.
Section
9-3205.7   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO).
Section
9-3206   Legal status provisions.
Section
9-3206.1   Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing flood damage
prevention ordinance.
Section
9-3206.2   Effect upon outstanding floodplain development permits.
Section
9-3206.3   Effective date.
ARTICLE R
Phase II Stormwater
Section
9-3301   General provisions.
Section
9-3301.1   Title.
Section
9-3301.2   Authority.
Section
9-3301.3   Findings.
Section
9-3301.4   Purpose.
Section
9-3301.5   Applicability and jurisdiction.
Section
9-3301.6   Interpretation.
Section
9-3301.7   Design manual.
Section
9-3301.8   Relationship to other laws, regulations and private agreements.
Section
9-3301.9   Severability.
Section
9-3301.10   Effective date and transitional provisions.
Section
9-3302   Administration and procedures.
Section
9-3302.1   Review and decision-making entities.
Section
9-3302.2   Review procedures.
Section
9-3302.3   Applications for approval.
Section
9-3302.4   Approvals.
Section
9-3302.5   Appeals.
Section
9-3303   Standards.
Section
9-3303.1   General standards.
Section
9-3303.2   Development standards for low-density projects.
Section
9-3303.3   Development standards for high-density projects.
Section
9-3303.4   Standards for stormwater control measures.
Section
9-3303.5   Variances.
Section
9-3304   Maintenance.
Section
9-3304.1   General standards for maintenance.
Section
9-3304.2   Operation and maintenance agreement.
Section
9-3304.3   Inspection program.
Section
9-3304.4   Performance security for installation and maintenance.
Section
9-3304.5   Notice to owners.
Section
9-3304.6   Records of installation and maintenance activities.
Section
9-3304.7   Nuisance.
Section
9-3305   Enforcement and violations.
Section
9-3305.1   General.
Section
9-3305.2   Remedies and penalties.
Section
9-3305.3   Procedures.
Section
9-3306   Definitions.
Section
9-3306.1   Terms defined.
ARTICLE S
Regulation of Land Disturbing Activities
Section
9-33401   Purpose.
Section
9-33402   Exemptions.
Section
9-33403   Permit requirements.
Section
9-33404   Control of soil erosion, off-site soil deposits, and other forms of
pollution.
Section
9-33405   Fees.
ARTICLE T
Illicit Discharges and Connections and Onsite Wastewater
Section
9-3501   Illicit discharges and connections.
Section
9-3502   Onsite wastewater.
Section
9-3503   Remedies and penalties.
ARTICLE A
Preliminary Sections
Section 9-3001   Purpose.
   This chapter regulates the uses of buildings, structures, and land for
trade, industry, commerce, residence, recreation, public activities or other
purposes; the size of yards, and other open spaces; the location, height, bulk,
number of stories and size of buildings and other structures; the density and
distribution of population; creating districts for said purposes and
establishing the boundaries thereof; defining certain terms used herein;
providing penalties for violations; providing for a Board of Adjustment and
Planning Board and defining the duties and powers of said Boards; repealing
conflicting ordinances; and for other purposes. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/
10)
Section 9-3002   Authority.
   The Town Council enacts this chapter pursuant to the authority granted by
the General Statutes of North Carolina. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
State law reference: Planning and regulation of development, see G.S. Chapter
160A, Article 19, Part 3
Section 9-3003   Short title.
   This chapter should be known as the “Zoning Ordinance” or “Watershed
Ordinance,” and the map identified by the title “Official Zoning Map, Valdese,
NC,” may be known as the “Zoning Map” or the “Watershed Map.” (Ord. of 1/10/05;
Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3004   Jurisdiction.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all property within
the corporate limits of the town. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3005   Official zoning map.
   The districts established in Article C of this chapter as shown on the
official zoning map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, are hereby
adopted as part of this chapter. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3006   Identification of official zoning map.
   The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor
attested by the Town Clerk, and bearing the seal of the town. Said Map shall be
retained in the office of the Planning Department of the town. (Ord. of 1/10/
05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3007 through section 9-3010 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Definitions
Section 9-3011   Interpretation and definition of terms and words.
   For the purpose of interpreting this chapter, certain words or terms are
herein defined. Unless otherwise stated, the following words shall have the
meaning herein defined.
   (a)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
   (b)   Words in the singular include the plural; words in the plural include
the singular.
   (c)   The word “person” includes a firm, association, organization,
corporation, trust, and company as well as an individual.
   (d)   The word “lot” includes the word “structure.”
   (e)   The word “building” includes the word “structure.”
   (f)   The word “shall” is mandatory, not directory.
   (g)   The words “used” or “occupied” as applied to any land or buildings
shall be construed to include the words “intended, arranged, or designed to be
used or occupied.”
   (h)   The word “Zoning Enforcement Officer” includes the word “Watershed
Administrator.” (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3012   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Accessory dwelling: See Dwelling, Accessory.
   Accessory use, accessory structure: A use or structure on the same lot with,
and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure.
   Adult establishment: Any structure or use of land which meets the
definitions as outlined in G.S. 14-202.10. Licensed masseurs (for example,
health massage/body work therapists) are excluded.
   Agricultural industry: Commercial poultry or swine production, cattle or
swine feed lots, fur bearing animal farms, commercial plant production (not
retail nurseries), commercial fish or poultry hatcheries, and other similar
activities.
   Alley: A publicly dedicated and maintained right-of-way twenty feet (20) or
less in width that provides only a secondary means of access to abutting
property and is not intended for general traffic circulation.
   Animal hospital:  See Veterinary hospital or clinic.
   Apartment: A room or suite of one or more rooms in a multiple structure
intended for use as a residence by a single family.
   Artisan food and beverage producer: An establishment that engages in on-site
commercial production of food and/or beverage products to a final form
employing batch-processing or hand-crafting using traditional methods, and
distributes to customers on-site via product tasting and direct sales and/or
off-site to retailers and wholesalers. Typical products may include coffee
roasters, chocolatiers, confectioneries, cideries, wineries, microbreweries,
brewpubs, and craft distilleries.
   Automotive body repair:  An establishment where the following services may
be rendered on a motor vehicle; body repair, straightening of automotive body
parts, painting, welding, storage of automobiles not in operating condition.
   Automotive repair: A building or area used for the temporary storage, care,
and repair of motor vehicles including both minor and major mechanical
overhauling.
   Automotive service station: A building used for the sale and dispensing of
fuel, lubricants, tires, batteries, accessories, and supplies, including
installation and minor services customarily incidental thereto. Fuel pumps
shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from any property or right-of-way
line. Facilities for washing and for chassis and gear lubrication of vehicles
are permitted if enclosed in a building. Service stations shall not include
premises where heavy automobile maintenance activities such as engine
overhauls, automobile painting, and bodywork are conducted.
   Automotive wrecking yard: The dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles
or trailers, or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles
or their parts. The presence on any lot of four or more motor vehicles, which,
for a period exceeding thirty (30) days, have not been capable of operating
under their own power and from which parts have been or are to be removed for
reuse or sale, shall constitute an automobile wrecking yard.
   Bank: Financial institution engaged in deposit banking and closely related
functions such as the extension of credit by means of loans and investments,
and fiduciary activities.
   Bar: A commercial enterprise devoted primarily to the serving of alcoholic
beverages and in which the service of food is only incidental to the
consumption of such beverages. Bars include taverns, pubs, night clubs, and
similar drinking establishments serving alcoholic beverages but do not include
taprooms/tasting rooms in microbreweries and brewpubs.
   Basement: That portion of a building that is partly or completely below
grade. A basement shall be termed a cellar when more than one-half of its
height is below the average adjoining grade. A basement shall be termed a story
if the vertical distance from the average adjoining grade to the ceiling is
more than five feet (5).
   Bed and breakfast inn: A house, or portion thereof, where short-term lodging
rooms and meals are provided for compensation. The operator of the inn shall
live on the premises or on adjacent premises. (See Section
9-3060.06)
   Beer: Includes "malt beverage" as defined by G.S. 18B-101(9).
   Best management practices (BMP): A structural or nonstructural management-
based practice used singularly or in combination to reduce nonpoint source
inputs to receiving waters in order to achieve water quality protection goals.
   Boardinghouse: A building other than a motel or hotel where, for
compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging is
provided for three or more persons, but not to exceed eight persons. The owner
of the boarding house shall reside on the premises.
   Bona fide farm: See Farm, bona fide.
   Breezeway: A covered passageway connecting a single family residence and an
accessory structure.
   Brewery: An establishment for the manufacture of beer.
   Brewpub: A restaurant with facilities for the manufacture of beer onsite for
consumption and retail sale at the restaurant. Where allowed by law, brewpubs
may often sell beer "to go" and/or distribute to off-site accounts.
   Buffer: A buffer shall consist of a planting strip at least ten (10) feet in
width, composed of deciduous or evergreen trees or a mixture of each, spaced
not more than ten (10) feet apart and not less than one (1) row of dense
shrubs, spaced not more than five (5) feet apart and five (5) feet or more in
height after one (1) growing season, and said strip shall be planted and
maintained in a healthy, growing condition by the property owner. No such
buffer shall, however, extend nearer to a street right-of-way line than the
established building line of the adjoining lot.
   Buffer (watershed): An area of natural or planted vegetation through which
stormwater runoff flows in a diffuse manner so that the runoff does not become
channelized and which provides for infiltration of the runoff and filtering of
pollutants. The buffer is measured landward from the normal pool elevation of
impounded waters and from the bank of each side of free-flowing streams,
rivers, branches, etc.
   Building: An independent enclosed structure, anchored to a permanent
foundation and having exterior or party walls and a roof designed for the
support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any
kind. The connection of two buildings by means of an open porch, breezeway,
passageway, carport or other such open structure, with or without a roof, shall
not be deemed to make them one building.
   Building, accessory: A building subordinate to the main building on a lot
and used for purposes customarily incidental to the main or principal building,
and located on the same lot therewith.
   Building, coverage: See Lot coverage.
   Building, height: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation
of the finished lot grade at the front building line to the highest point of
the roof beams adjacent to the front of the wall in the case of a flat roof; to
the average height of the gables in the case of a pitched roof; and to the deck
line in the case of a mansard roof.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/adeb133b442280ad8bc3431317823f426b5e2f33/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2861.png]
   Building, principal: A building or structure in which the primary use of the
lot on which the building is located is conducted. A structure, or where the
context so indicates, a group of structures in or on which is conducted the
principal use of the lot on which such structure is located.
   Building, setback: A line establishing the minimum allowable distance
between the nearest portion of any building, excluding the outermost five feet
(5) of any overhang, uncovered porches, steps, gutters, and similar fixtures,
and the related front, rear, or side property or right-of-way line, whichever
is closest to the building.
   Built-upon area: That portion of a development project that is covered by
impervious or partially impervious cover including buildings, pavement, gravel,
recreation facilities, etc., excluding wooden slatted decks and the water area
of a swimming pool.
   Business, general: Commercial establishments that, in addition to serving
day-to-day commercial needs of a community, also supply the more durable and
permanent needs of a whole community, including supermarkets, department
stores, discount stores, variety stores, hardware and garden supply stores,
apparel and footwear stores, florists, gift shops, jewelry stores, book and
stationery stores, specialty shops, sporting goods stores, furniture and home
furnishing stores, automotive supply stores, and appliance stores.
   Business, office-type: Quasi-commercial uses that generally accommodate
occupations such as administrative, executive, legal, accounting, writing,
clerical, stenographic, and drafting occupations, and including offices of a
charitable, philanthropic, religious, or educational nature.
   Car wash, detail shop: An area of land and/or a structure with machine- or
hand-operated facilities used principally for the cleaning, washing, polishing,
or waxing of motor vehicles; a building or area that provides facilities for
washing and cleaning motor vehicles, which may use production line methods with
a conveyor, blower, or other mechanical devices, and which may employ some hand
labor.
   Carport: An accessory structure that provides shelter for vehicles or boats,
and is open on all sides.
   Cellar: See Basement.
   Cemetery: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the human dead
and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including land on which columbariums,
mausoleums or similar structures are located.
   Certificate of occupancy: Permit that is issued by the Town after the
erection or structural alteration of a building, or part of a building; the
permit allows the owner, tenant, or occupant thereof to occupy the structure
and shows that the structure has been completed in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
   Child care institution: An institutional facility housing orphaned,
abandoned, dependent, abused, or neglected children.
   Church: A structure in which persons regularly assemble for religious
worship and which is maintained by a religious body organized to sustain public
worship.
   Clinic: An organization of professional specialists such as physicians or
dentists, who have their offices in a common building. A clinic shall include
laboratory facilities in conjunction with normal clinic services.
   Club: An establishment operated by a corporation or association of persons
for social, literary, political, educational, fraternal, or charitable
purposes, but which is not operated for profit.
   Cluster development: The grouping of buildings in order to conserve land
resources and provide for innovation in the design of the project. This term
includes non-residential development as well as single- family residential and
multi-family developments. For the purpose of this chapter, planned unit
development and mixed use development are considered as cluster development.
   Community center: A place, structure, area, or other facility used for and
providing religious, fraternal, social, and/or recreational programs generally
open to the public and designed to accommodate and serve the community at
large.
   Comprehensive plan: A plan, or any portion thereof, adopted by the planning
board and Town Council, establishing goals, objectives, and policies designed
to manage the quantity, type, cost, location, timing, and quality of
development and redevelopment in the town community.
   Conditional use permit: A permit, granted by the Town Council after the
Council holds a public hearing, which authorizes a use which would not
generally be appropriate throughout a particular zoning district, but which, if
controlled as to number, size, location, or relation to the neighborhood, would
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   Condominium: A single family dwelling unit constructed in a series or group
of attached units where each dwelling unit is to be deeded and/or separately
owned from other units, and where all land is owned in common by owners of all
the dwelling units collectively. (Also See Dwelling)
   Convenience store: A retail establishment where beverages, packaged food,
tobacco products or similar convenient goods for customers are sold, and where,
in addition gasoline and/or diesel fuel is supplied and dispensed, provided
that all gasoline pumps shall be located at twenty (20) feet from any property
or right-of-way line.
   Craft Distillery: An establishment where spirituous liquor is produced on-
site, and which shall include a tasting room in which guest or customers may
sample the products. The building in which the craft distillery operates shall
not exceed four thousand (4,000) square feet.
   Crematory or crematorium:  A properly installed, certified apparatus
intended for use in the act of cremation. (See Section
9-3060.02)
   Critical area: The area adjacent to a water supply intake or reservoir where
risk associated with pollution is greater than from the remaining portions of
the watershed. The critical area is defined as the area one- half mile upstream
and draining to a water supply reservoir or water intake located in a steam or
river; or to the ridge line of the watershed, whichever comes first.
   Day care home: A private residence where care, protection, and supervision
are provided on a regular schedule, to no more than five (5) preschoolers and
three (3) school age children at one time, including children of the adult
provider.
   Day care center:  A building or structure where care, protection and
supervision is provided on a regular schedule to at least nine (9) or more
children, including the children of the adult provider. Day care centers shall
not be located within a dwelling unit.
   Development: The use or occupancy of any land or structure, or the
construction, erection, alteration, or moving of any structure; any land
disturbing activity which adds to or changes the amount of impervious or
partially impervious cover on a land area or which otherwise decreases the
infiltration of precipitation into the soil.
   Distillery: An establishment where spirituous liquor is produced on-site,
and which may include a tasting room in which guest or customers may sample the
product.
   Domestic pets: Animals that are customarily kept for company, pleasure, or
enjoyment within the home or yard such as domestic dogs, domestic cats,
domestic tropical birds, domestic rodents, domestic rabbits, and domestic fish.
(See Section
9-3061(c), Animal Keeping)
   Driveway: A vehicular way, other than a street or alley that provides
vehicular access from a street to or through off-street parking and/or loading
areas.
   Duplex: See Dwelling, two-family.
   Dwelling, accessory: A dwelling unit which is located on the same lot as a
detached or attached single family house, has a first floor area no greater
than 650 square feet, is owned by the owner of the principal dwelling unit but
occupied by another. If the principal dwelling is a group home, use of an
accessory dwelling shall not increase the number of residents otherwise
permitted in a single home. (See Section
9-3060.01)
   Dwelling, multiple or multi-family: A building or portion thereof,
containing three (3) or more dwelling units, designed for occupancy by three
(3) or more families living independently of each other.
   Dwelling, single-family: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by
one family, the structure having only one dwelling unit.
   Dwelling, two-family or duplex: A building containing two (2) dwelling units
designed exclusively for occupancy by two (2) families independent of each
other, such as a duplex building unit.
   Dwelling unit: A room or group of rooms within a structure forming a single,
independently habitable unit containing independent kitchen, sanitary
facilities, sleeping facilities, and provided such structure complies with the
town minimum housing code.
   Easement: A grant by a property owner to the use of land by the public, a
corporation, or persons for specific purposes such as the construction of
utilities, drainage ways and roadways.
   Electronic gaming operations. Any business enterprise, whether as a
principal or accessory use, where persons utilize electronic machines,
including but not limited to, computers and gaming terminals, to conduct games
of chance, including sweepstakes, and where cash merchandise or other items of
value are redeemed or otherwise distributed, whether or not the value of such
distribution is determined by electronic games played or predetermined odds.
This includes, but is not limited to, internet sweepstakes or video
sweepstakes. This does not include any lottery approved by the State of North
Carolina.
   Essential services: Publicly or privately owned facilities or systems for
the distribution of gas, electricity, steam or water, the collection and
disposal of sewage or refuse; the transmission of communications; or similar
functions necessary for the provision of public services. Radio transmission
facilities for use by ham radio operators or two-way radio facilities for
business or governmental communications shall be deemed accessory uses and not
essential services, provided no transmitter or antenna tower exceeds 180 feet
in height. Essential services are divided into three classes:
      Class 1   Transmission lines (above and below ground) including
electrical, natural gas, and water/wastewater distribution lines; pumping
stations, lift stations, and telephone switching facilities (up to 200 square
feet);
      Class 2   Elevated water storage tanks; package treatment plants;
telephone switching facilities (over 200 square feet), substations, or other
similar facilities used in connection with telephone, electric, steam, and
water facilities; raw water treatment facilities.
      Class 3   Generation, production, or treatment facilities such as power
plants and sewage treatment plants.
   Existing development: Those projects that are built or those projects that
at a minimum have established a vested right under state zoning law as of the
effective date of this chapter based on at least one of the following criteria:
   (1)   Having expended substantial resources (time, labor, money) based on a
good faith reliance upon having received a valid local government approval to
proceed with the project; or
   (2)   Having an outstanding valid building permit as authorized by the G.S.
153A-344.1 and 160A-385.1; or
   (3)   Having an approved site specific or phased development plan as
authorized by the G.S. 153A-344.1 and 160A-385.1.
   Family: An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage,
or adoption living together in a dwelling unit; or a group of not more than six
(6) persons, one (1) or more of whom is not related by blood, marriage, or
adoption to the others.
   Family care home: A dwelling with support and supervisory personnel that
provides room and board, personal care and habilitation services in a family
environment for not more than six (6) resident disabled persons. Disabled
person means a person with a temporary or permanent physical, emotional, or
mental disability, including but not limited to mental retardation, cerebral
palsy, epilepsy, autism, hearing and sight impairments but not including
mentally ill persons who are dangerous to others as defined in G.S. 122C-3
(11)b.
   Farm, bona fide: Any tract of land containing at least three acres which is
used for dairying or for the raising of agricultural products, forest products,
livestock or poultry, and which may include facilities for the sale of such
products from the premises where produced. The definition of “farm” and “bona
fide farm” shall not include agricultural industries.
   Farmers market:  The seasonal selling or offering for sale at retail of
home-grown vegetables or produce, occurring in a pre-designated area, where the
vendors are generally individuals who have raised the vegetables or produce or
have taken the same on consignment for retail sale.
   Financial institution: A use or structure where financial, pecuniary,
fiscal, or monetary services are made available to the public, including but
not limited to depository institutions (that is, banks, credit unions, savings
and loans, etc.), non-depository credit institutions (that is, credit agencies,
loan brokers, etc.), holding companies (but not predominantly operating
companies), other investment companies, brokers and dealers in securities and
commodities contracts, and security and commodity exchanges.
   Flag lot: Lots or parcels that are approved by the town which have an access
corridor providing a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet of frontage on an
approved public street, with the bulk of the lot or parcel being otherwise
landlocked by other property. Such access shall have a minimum width of thirty-
five (35) feet. The area of the access corridor shall be excluded in computing
the lot area and width, and the length of said strip shall not exceed one
hundred (100) feet.
   Flea market: An occasional or periodic sales activity held within a
structure or open area where groups of individual sellers offer goods, new and
used, for sale to the public, not to include private garage sales.
   Floodplain: That area within the one-in-one hundred (100 year) regional
flood contour elevation subject to periodic flooding as designated by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer based upon United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development FIA flood hazard boundary maps.
   Floor area, gross: The sum of enclosed areas on all floors of a building or
buildings measured from the outside faces of exterior walls, including halls,
lobbies, arcade, stairways, elevator shafts, enclosed porches and balconies,
and any below-grade floor areas used for access and storage. Not countable as
floor area are open terraces, open patios, open atriums, open balconies, open
carport garages, and breezeways.
   Floor area ratio: Determined by dividing the gross floor area off all
buildings on a lot by the area of that lot.
   Garage: An enclosed accessory structure that provides shelter for vehicles
or boats.
   Garage, public: A building designed and used for the storage of automobiles
and operated as a business enterprise with a service charge or fee being paid
to the owner or operator for the parking or storage of privately owned
vehicles.
   Gated subdivision: A subdivision in which access to the gated subdivision is
restricted by gates or other devices.
   Grade: An average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to
the exterior walls of a building or structure.
   Government building: A building, use, or facility serving as a governmental
agency office, police station, fire station, library, post office, or similar
facility, but not including a vehicle storage yard, correctional facility,
sanitary landfill, solid waste transfer or disposal facility, wastewater
treatment facility, educational or health institution, university, group home,
or housing for persons who are participating in work release programs or who
have previously served and completed terms of imprisonment for violations of
criminal laws.
   Hazardous material: Any substance listed as such in: SARA Section 302,
Extremely Hazardous Substances, CERCLA Hazardous Substances, or Section 311 of
CWA (oil and hazardous substances).
   Hillside subdivision: Land proposed to be subdivided which has a slope of
sixteen percent (16%) or greater. That is, an average difference in elevation
of at least sixteen (16) feet in a horizontal distance of one hundred (100)
feet. The average shall be obtained from at least fifteen (15) measurements,
each twenty (20) feet from the next.
   Home occupation: An occupation, service, profession or enterprise carried on
within a dwelling unit or accessory structure by a resident. Hobbies shall not
be subject to the requirements of this section. (See Section
9-3045)
   Hospice and Palliative Care Facility: A freestanding licensed facility(s)
which provides palliative and supportive medical and other health services to
meet the holistic needs of terminally ill patients and their families in an
inpatient or group residential setting.
   Hospital: An institution providing health services primarily for human in-
patient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and including related
facilities such as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities,
central services facilities, and staff offices that are an integral part of the
facilities.
   Hotel: A facility offering transient lodging accommodations on a daily rate
to the general public and providing additional services, such as restaurants,
meeting rooms, and recreational facilities.
   Industrial development: Any non-residential development that requires an
NPDES permit for an industrial discharge and/or requires the use or storage of
any hazardous material for the purpose of manufacturing, assembling, finishing,
cleaning, or developing any product.
   Inoperable vehicle: Any wrecked or non-operable automobile, truck, or other
vehicle which does not bear a current license plate.
   Junk yard: The use of more than four hundred (400) square feet of any lot
for the outdoor storage and/or sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, or
other junk, and including storage of inoperable motor vehicles and dismantling
of such vehicles or machinery.
   Kennel: Any premises wherein any person(s) engages in the business of
boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, grooming or
selling of domestic pets.
   Landfill: A Class 3 Essential Services facility for the disposal of solid
waste on land in a sanitary manner in accordance with G.S. Chapter 130A,
Article 9. For the purpose of this chapter, this term does not include
composting facilities.
   Large brewery: A brewery with an annual beer production over fifteen
thousand (15,000) barrels and may contain a tap room/tasting room.
   Loading, off-street: Space located outside of any street right-of-way or
easement and designed to accommodate the temporary parking of vehicles used for
bulk pickups and deliveries.
   Lot: A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a main
building or group of buildings and accessory buildings, together with such
yards, open spaces, and lot areas as are required by this chapter, and having
not less than the minimum required frontage upon a street, either shown on a
plat of record, or considered as a unit of property and described by metes and
bounds.
   Lot, corner: A lot abutting on and at the intersection of two or more
streets. See Article D.
   Lot coverage: The percentage of a lot which may be covered with buildings or
structures (excluding walks, drives, and other similar uses) and recreational
facilities which are accessory to a permitted use (such as swimming pools).
Properties within the critical or protected areas as defined by the Water
Supply Watershed Protection Act shall include walks, drives, and all other
impervious and graveled surfaces in the total lot coverage.
   Lot, double frontage or through lot: A lot having its front and rear yards
each abutting on a street. See Article D.
   Lot depth: The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
   Lot, landlocked: A lot which does not abut a public street, or which
otherwise does not meet the minimum street frontage requirements of the zoning
district in which is located.
   Lot, frontage: The linear distance by which a lot abuts an approved public
street. See Article D.
   Lot, interior: A lot in which only one of its sides abuts a street. See
Article D.
   Lot line: A property line dividing one lot from another or from a street or
other right-of-way. See Article D.
   Lot of record: A lot which is described by reference to a recorded plat, or
described by metes and bounds or similar method, the description of which has
been so recorded by the Burke County Register of Deeds, and which has been
given a separate tax identification number by the Burke County Tax mapping
Department.
   Lot, substandard: A lot that has less than the required minimum area or size
as established by the zone in which it is located, and provided that such lot
was of record as a legally created lot on the effective date of this chapter.
   Lot width: The straight linear distance between the side lot lines, measured
at the two points where the minimum building line, or setback line, intersects
the side lot lines.
   Major watershed variance: A variance from the minimum statewide water supply
watershed protection criteria that results in any one or more of the following:
   (1)   Any variation in the design, maintenance or operation requirements of
a wet detention pond or other approved stormwater system;
   (2)   The relaxation, by a factor greater than ten (10) percent, of any
management requirement under the low density option;
   (3)   The relaxation, by a factor greater than five (5) percent, of any
buffer or built-upon area requirement under the high density option.
   Manufactured home: A structure designed for living or sleeping purposes,
transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis
and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected
to the required utilities.
      Class A manufactured home (multi-section/double- wide). A manufactured
home that meets or exceeds the construction standards established by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development that were in effect at the time of
construction and is a multi section unit.
      Class B manufactured home (single-wide). Class B single-wide manufactured
home that meets or exceeds the construction standards established by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development that were in effect at the time of
construction and is a single- wide unit.
   Manufactured home park: Any existing lot or parcel on which two (2) or more
manufactured homes are used, leased or rented or intended to be used, leased or
rented for occupancy. Existing manufactured home parks shall comply with
Article G of this chapter.
   Marina: A facility for the storing, servicing, fueling, berthing, and
launching and securing of private pleasure craft that may include the sale of
fuel and incidental supplies for the boat owners, crews, and guests.
   Massage therapy: The systematic and scientific manipulation and treatment of
the soft tissues of the body for therapeutic or remedial purposes, specifically
for improving muscle tone and circulation and promoting circulation and
promoting health and physical well-being. The term includes but is not limited
to the manipulation of muscular structure of the body, by use of pressure,
friction, stroking, percussion, kneading, vibration by manual or mechanical
means, range of motion and nonspecific stretching. Massage therapy does not
include diagnosis, the treatment of illness or disease, or any service or
procedure for which a license to practice medicine, chiropractic, physical
therapy, or podiatry is required by law.
   Microbrewery: A brewery that produces less than fifteen thousand (15,000)
barrels of beer per year with a portion of its beer sold to the public.
   Mini-warehouse: A building consisting of individual, small, self-contained
units that are leased or owned for the storage of business and household goods
or contractors supplies.
   Minor watershed variance: A variance that does not qualify as a major
variance from the minimum statewide watershed protection rules that results in
a relaxation, by a factor up to five (5) percent of any buffer, density, or
built-upon requirements under the high density option; or that results in a
relaxation, by a factor up to ten (10) percent, of any management requirement
under the low density option.
   Mixed use: Commercial, office-institutional, and/or residential uses within
the same building where each use is independent of the other use(s).
   Modular home: A dwelling unit constructed in accordance with the standards
set forth in the North Carolina State Building Code (NCSBC) and composed of
components substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and transported to
the building site for final assembly on a permanent foundation. Among other
possibilities, a modular home may consist of two or more sections transported
to the site in a manner similar to a manufactured home (except that the modular
home meets the NCSBC) or may consist of a series of panels or room sections
transported on a truck and erected or joined together on the site.
   Motel: A building or group of detached or connected buildings designed or
used primarily for providing sleeping accommodations for automobile travelers
and having a parking space adjacent to a sleeping room. An automobile court or
a tourist court with more than one unit or a motor lodge shall be deemed a
motel.
   Multi-family building: See Dwelling, multiple or multi- family.
   Neighborhood recreation: Public or private neighborhood, tennis, or other
courts, swimming pools or similar indoor and/or outdoor uses that are operated
on a fee or membership basis primarily for the use of persons who reside in the
neighborhood that the facility is located. “Neighborhood Recreation” structures
shall include accessory uses, such as snack bars, pro shops, and locker rooms,
which are designed and intended primarily for the use of patrons of the
principal recreational use.
   Nonconforming building: Any building that does not meet the limitations on
building size and/or location on a lot for the district in which such building
is located, and for the use to which such building is being put.
   Nonconforming lot of record: A lot described by a plat or deed that was
recorded prior to and lawfully existed prior to the adoption of this chapter,
but which does not meet the limitations on size, depth, width, street frontage,
or other development requirements of the statewide watershed protection rules
for the district in which such lot is located.
   Nonconforming use: A lawful use of land that does not comply with the use
regulation for its zoning district as defined by this chapter.
   Non-residential development: All development other than residential
development, agriculture and silviculture.
   Nursing home: A health care facility licensed by the state to provide long-
term medical services according to the directives of a patient’s physician and
standards of quality set by the state and the facility. Nursing homes in North
Carolina are staffed by professional personnel under the direction of a
licensed nursing home administrator; they deliver a variety of medical and
social services to their patients.
   Office: A building or portion thereof wherein services are performed
involving predominantly administrative, professional, or clerical operations.
   Open space: Any front, side, or rear yards, courts, or usable open space
provided around a building in order to meet the requirements of this chapter.
   Open storage: The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk,
material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than twenty-four
(24) hours.
   Outdoor seasonal sales: Outdoor seasonal sales are temporary uses, which
include but are not limited to outdoor Christmas tree sales, pumpkin sales,
plant sales, and similar uses. Outdoor seasonal sales are not intended to
include the sale of manufactured items such as furniture, bedding, automobile
parts, or household goods.(See Special Use Requirements)
   Park: Any public or private land available for recreational, educational,
cultural, or aesthetic use.
   Parking lot: Any designated area designed for temporary accommodation of
motor vehicles of the motoring public in normal operating condition, for a fee
or as a service.
   Parking space: A storage space of not less than nine feet by eighteen feet
(9 × 18) for one automobile, plus the necessary access space. It shall always
be located outside the designated street right-of-way.
   Pet: See Domestic pets.
   Planned unit development (PUD): A form of development characterized by a
unified site design for a number of buildings. The design is intended to
provide for common open space and for a mix of building types and uses. It
permits the planning of a project and a calculation of densities over the
entire development rather than on an individual lot-by-lot basis. The site plan
must include two (2) or more principal buildings. Such development shall be
based on a plan, that allows for flexibility of design most available under
normal district requirements.
   Planning jurisdiction: The area within which the town is authorized to plan
and regulate development pursuant to the authority granted in G.S. Chapter
160A, Article 19.
   Protected area (PA): Area adjoining and upstream of the critical area of WS-
IV watersheds. The boundaries of the protected area are defined as within five
(5) miles upstream of and draining to a water supply reservoir, or to the ridge
line of the watershed, whichever comes first; or within ten miles of and
draining to a water intake in a stream or river, or to the ridge line of the
watershed, whichever comes first.
   Recycling center: A building in which used material is separated and
processed prior to shipment to others who will use those materials to
manufacture new products.
   Recycling collection point: A drop-off point for temporary storage of
recoverable resources. No processing of such items at the recycling collection
point is allowed. Such facilities should generally be located in a shopping
center parking lot or in other public/quasi- public areas, such as churches and
schools.
   Recycling plant: A facility that is not a junk yard and in which recoverable
resources, such paper, glass, and metal products, are recycled, reprocessed,
and treated to return such products to a condition in which they may again be
used for consumption.
   Religious institution: A church, synagogue, temple, mosque, or other place
of religious worship, including any accessory use or structure, such as a
school, day care center, or dwelling, located on the same lot.
   Residential care facility: A building or facility used primarily to provide
residential, social and personal care for children, the aged or others who
suffer some limit on the ability for self-care, but where medical care is not a
major service, such as adult daycare facilities, homes for the aged, rest homes
and other like uses.
   Residential development: Buildings for residence such as attached and
detached single-family dwellings, apartment complexes, condominiums,
townhouses, cottages, etc., and their associated outbuildings such as garages,
storage buildings, gazebos, etc.
   Restaurant: An establishment in which food or beverages are cooked or
prepared and offered for sale and where consumption is permitted on the
premises whether or not entertainment is offered, and including establishments
commonly referred to as cafes, grilles, taverns, clubs, private clubs, drive-
ins, and fast food establishments.
   Satellite dish antenna: An antenna, three (3) feet or more in diameter,
designed to receive television, radio, and other communication signals
primarily from orbiting satellites.
   Schools: A facility that provides a curriculum of elementary and secondary
academic instruction, including kindergartens, elementary schools, middle high
schools, and high schools.
   Service station:  See Automotive service station.
   Setback: A line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the
nearest portion of any or building, excluding the outermost five (5) feet of
any overhang, uncovered porches, steps, gutters, and similar fixtures, and the
related front, rear, or side property or right-of-way line, whichever is
closest to the building. Sign setbacks shall apply to the entire sign including
any overhang or projection.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/adeb133b442280ad8bc3431317823f426b5e2f33/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2863.png]
   Sign: Any object, device, structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors,
which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to
an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event
or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols,
fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. “Signs” do not include the
flag or emblem of any nation, organization of nations, state, city, or any
fraternal, religious, or civic organizations; works of art which in no way
identify an object, person, institution, organization, business, product,
service, event or location by any means; or scoreboards located on athletic
fields.
   Single-family home: See Dwelling, single-family.
   Single family residential: Any development where:
   (1)   No building contains more than one dwelling unit;
   (2)   Every dwelling unit is on a separate lot; and
   (3)   Where no lot contains more than one (1) dwelling unit.
   Site plan: A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete
dimensioning, the boundaries of a site and the location of all buildings,
structures, uses, and principal site development features for a specific parcel
of land.
   Story: The space within a building, other than a cellar, included between
the surface of any floor and the surface of the ceiling next above. In
computing the height of a building, the height of a basement or cellar shall
not be included where more than one-half of the height of such basement or
cellar is below the average adjoining grade.
   Street (public road, lane, way, terrace, drive): A dedicated and accepted
public right-of-way used, or intended to be used, for passage or travel by
motor vehicles which affords the principal means of access to abutting
properties.
   Street, private: Any right-of-way or area set aside to provide vehicular
access that has not been accepted for maintenance or intended to be accepted
for maintenance by the town or the state and which is not maintained by the
town or the state.
   Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent location on the ground, or attachment to something having a permanent
location on the ground, including buildings, sheds, carports, swimming pools,
shelters, decks, patios, fences, business signs, and billboards and similar
structures.
   Structural alterations: Any change, except for repair or replacement, in the
supporting members of a structure, such as, but not limited to, bearing walls,
columns, beams, or girders.
   Taproom/tasting room: A room ancillary to an artisan food and beverage
producer that is used for the sampling by the public of products produced on
site.
   Temporary portable building: A building intended for non-residential use for
a limited time period, consisting of one or more modules constructed off the
ultimate site of use and transported to that site either on its own wheels or
otherwise.
   Temporary uses and structures, including seasonal markets: See Outdoor
seasonal sales.
   Ten-acre exempt development: A division of land that meets the statutory
exemption from subdivision regulations as set forth in G.S. 47-30, whereby all
tracts are greater than ten (10) acres and where no street right-of-way
dedication is involved. A ten-acre development must abut a public street and
shall not exceed five building parcels.
   Two-family dwelling: See Dwelling, two-family.
   Truck terminal: A building or area in which freight brought by truck is
assembled and/or stored for routing or reshipment, or in which semi-trailers,
including tractor and/or trailer units and other trucks, are parked or stored.
   Variance, zoning. Permission by the Board of Adjustment that authorizes the
recipient to do that which, according to the strict letter of this chapter, he
could not otherwise legally do. Subject to other provisions of this chapter and
General Statutes, the Board of Adjustment may permit a variance from certain
provisions of this chapter upon making the findings set forth in Article XI, of
this chapter.
   Veterinary hospital or clinic: A use or structure intended or used primarily
for the testing and treatment of the physical disorders of animals; not
principally used for the overnight boarding or grooming of well animals; not
permitting outdoor cages, pens or runs for the confinement of animals unless
expressly permitted in the district; and not used for the training of animals.
The operator shall be licensed by and under the control of the North Carolina
State Veterinary Medical Board.
   Water dependent structure: Any structure for which the use requires access
to or proximity to or citing within surface waters to fulfill its basic
purpose, such as boat ramps, boat houses, docks and bulkheads. Ancillary
facilities such as restaurants, outlets for boat supplies, parking lots and
commercial boat storage areas are not water dependent structures.
   Watershed: The entire land area contributing surface drainage to a specific
point (for example, the water supply intake.)
   Watershed Administrator: An official designated by the town responsible for
administration and enforcement of this Article. This term shall also include
the term “Zoning Enforcement Officer.”
   Watershed variance: A permission to develop or use property granted by the
Board of Adjustment or Watershed Review Board relaxing or waiving a water
supply watershed management requirement adopted by the Environmental Management
Commission that is incorporated into this chapter.
   Winery: A building or property at which wine is produced, and which may
include a tasting room.
   Yard: A space on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied,
and unobstructed by building or structure from ground to sky except where
encroachment and accessory buildings are expressly permitted.
   Yard, front: An open space on the same lot between the principal building
facade and the closer of the front street right-of-way line or property line
extending the full width of the lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/adeb133b442280ad8bc3431317823f426b5e2f33/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2865.png]
   Yard, rear: An open space between the rear line of the principal building
and the rear line of the lot and extending the full width of the lot.
   Yard, side: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal
building between the side line of the building and the side line of the lot and
extending from the front yard line to the rear yard line.
   Zoning Enforcement Officer: The town official responsible for enforcement
and administration of this chapter. This term shall also include the terms
“Watershed Administrator” and “Zoning Administrator.”
   Zoning permit: A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator indicating
compliance with the requirements of this chapter. This term shall also include
the term “watershed protection permit.” (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 11/5/07; Ord.
of 12/6/10; Ord. of 12/3/12; Ord. of 12/1/14; Ord. of 6/29/15; Ord. of 3/3/16;
Ord. of 4/4/16; as amended by Ord. of / /)
Section 9-3013 through section 9-3020 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Establishment of Districts and General Rules
Section 9-3021   Use districts.
   The town is hereby divided into eight (8) zoning districts designated as
follows:
      R-12   Residential District
      R-12A   Residential District
      R-8   Residential District
      O-I   Office-Institutional District
      B-1   Central Business District
      B-2   General Business District
      M-1   General Manufacturing District
      FP   Floodplain Overlay District
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3022   Interpretation of the zoning map.
   (a)   Where, due to the scale, lack of detail or illegibility of the zoning
map, there is an uncertainty, contradiction or conflict as to the intended
location of any zoning district boundary as shown thereon, the Zoning
Administrator shall make an interpretation of said map upon request of any
person. Any person aggrieved by such interpretation may appeal such
interpretation to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Zoning Administrator and
the Zoning Board of Adjustment, in interpreting the zoning map or deciding any
appeal, shall apply the following standards:
   (b)   Boundary lines:
   (1)   Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow lot lines, or be
parallel or perpendicular thereto, or along the center lines of alleys,
streets, rights-of-way or water courses, unless such boundary lines are fixed
by dimensions shown on the zoning map.
   (2)   Where zoning districts boundary lines are so indicated that they
approximately follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such
boundary lines.
   (3)   Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot, the location of
any such zoning district boundary line, unless indicated by dimensions shown on
the zoning map, shall be determined by the use of the map scale shown thereon.
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3023 through section 9-3030 reserved.
ARTICLE D
General Provisions
Section 9-3031   Application.
   (a)   Use. No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no
building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, moved or structurally
altered except in conformity with the regulations of this chapter or amendments
thereto, for the district in which it is located.
   (b)   Height and density. No building shall hereafter be erected or altered
so as to exceed the height limit, or to exceed the density regulations of this
chapter for the district in which it is located.
   (c)   Lot size. No lot shall be reduced in size so that the lot width or
depth, front, side or rear yards, lot area per family or other requirements of
this chapter are not maintained, except in cases of street widening.
   (d)   Yard use limitations. No part of a yard or other open space required
around any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this
chapter shall be included as a part of a yard or other open space similarly
required for another building.
   (e)   One principal building on any lot. Every building hereafter erected,
moved, or structurally altered shall be located on a lot of record and in no
case shall there be more than one (1) principal building and its customary
accessory buildings on any lot, except in the case of a specially designed
complex of institutional, residential, industrial, or commercial buildings in
an appropriate zoning district, as permitted by Article I of this chapter.
   (f)   Building lot must abut public street. No building shall be
constructed, erected upon, or moved to any lot that does not abut by thirty-
five (35) feet, a publicly dedicated or maintained street or on a private
street, that meets the standards of the North Carolina Department of
Transportation Street standards as to maintenance, disclosure and construction
except as provided in Section
9-3040, Provisions for Landlocked Lots, Section
9-3047, Provisions for Ten-Acre Exempt Developments, and Section 9-4048,
Provisions for Gated Subdivisions.
   (g)   Necessary repairs permitted. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the
strengthening or restoration to a safe or lawful condition of any part of any
building or structure declared unsafe or unlawful by the Building Inspector,
the Fire Chief, or any other duly authorized town officials.
   (h)   Water and sewer requirements. The lot sizes for the various districts
in Article E of this chapter were drawn based upon the assumption that adequate
water supply and sewage disposal systems are available to each and every lot.
The lack of adequate systems for one or both facilities may require larger lot
areas or, in some instances, not permit development as intended. (Ord. of 1/10/
05; Ord. of 12/6/10; as amended by Ord. of / /)
Section 9-3032   Nonconforming uses.
   After the effective date of this chapter, existing structures, or the uses
of land or structures which would be prohibited under the regulations for the
district in which it is located (if they existed on the adoption date of this
chapter), shall be considered as nonconforming. Nonconforming structures or
uses (as defined in Article B of this chapter) may be continued provided they
conform to the following provisions set forth in Sections
9-3032.1 and
9-3032.2. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3032.1   Continuing nonconforming uses of land.
   (a)   Extension of use. The enlargement or extension of nonconforming uses
of land is prohibited.
   (b)   Change of use. Any nonconforming uses of land may be changed to a
conforming use or, with the approval of the Town Council, to any use more in
character with the uses permitted in the district in question.
   (c)   Cessation of use. When a non-conforming use of land is discontinued
for a consecutive period of one hundred eighty (180) days, the property
involved may thereafter be used only for conforming purposes. (Ord. of 1/10/05;
Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3032.2   Continuing the use of nonconforming buildings.
   (a)   Extension or enlargement. Nonconforming buildings and nonconforming
uses may not be enlarged.
   (b)   Change of use. Except as otherwise provided, the lawful use of a
building existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter may be continued,
even though such use does not conform to the provisions of this chapter.
Furthermore, such building may be structurally altered and any nonconforming
use therein changed subject to the following regulations:
   (1)   The order of classification of uses from highest to lowest for the
purpose of this section shall be as follows: residential district uses,
business district uses, industrial district uses, as permitted by this chapter.
   (2)   A nonconforming use may be changed to a use of higher classification
but not to a use of lower classification. A nonconforming use may not be
changed to another use of the same classification unless the new use shall be
deemed by the Town Council, after public notice and hearing, to be less harmful
to the surrounding neighborhood, than the existing nonconforming use.
   (3)   A nonconforming use may be extended throughout any portion of a
completed building that, when the sue was made nonconforming by this Article or
subsequent amendments, was designed or arranged to accommodate such use.
However, a nonconforming use may not be extended to additional buildings or to
land outside the original building.
   (4)   A conditional use permit has been issued by the Town Council for the
proposed change or alteration.
   (c)   Cessation of use. If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a
consecutive period of one hundred eighty (180) days, any future use of the
buildings and premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (d)   Repairs, maintenance, damage, or destruction.
   (1)   If a structure located on a lot where a non- conforming situation
exists is damaged to an extent that the costs of repair or replacement would
exceed fifty (50) percent of the appraised valuation of the damaged structure,
then the damaged structure may be repaired or replaced only in accordance with
the regulations of the district in which it is located. Any repairs or
replacement of a non-conforming situation, including residential structures,
must be started (obtain building permit) within one hundred eighty (180) days
after the initial damage.
   (e)   Manufactured homes. Regarding manufactured homes, refer to Article G.
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 1/7/08; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3033   Interpretation of district regulations.
   (a)   Uses by right. Uses not designated as permitted by right or subject to
additional conditions shall be prohibited. Conditional uses are permitted
according to the additional regulations imposed. These conditional uses may be
approved only by the Town Council. Additional uses when in character with the
district may be added to the chapter by amendment.
   (b)   Minimum regulations. Regulations set forth by this chapter shall be
minimum regulations. If the district requirements set forth in this section are
at a variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules,
regulations or ordinances, the more restrictive or higher standard shall
govern.
   (c)   Land covenants. Unless restrictions established by covenants for the
land are prohibited by or are contrary to the provisions of this chapter,
nothing herein contained shall be construed to render such covenants
inoperative. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3034   Zoning of annexed areas.
   Any areas annexed into the town, upon annexation, shall be rezoned to an
appropriate zoning district, upon recommendation by the Planning Board and
approval by the Town Council following notifications and public hearings as
required by the General Statutes. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3035   Lot of record.
   (a)   Every lot to be built upon shall abut, by at least thirty-five (35)
feet, a public street or other public way, and no dwelling shall be placed or
built upon a lot that does not abut upon a public street or other public way by
the same distance except as provided in Section
9-3040, Provisions for Landlocked Lots, Section
9-3047 Provisions for Ten-Acre Exempt Development, and Section
9-3048, Provisions for Gated Subdivisions.
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10; Ord. of 12/6/10; as amended by Ord. of / /)
Section 9-3036   Front yard setbacks for dwellings.
   The front yard setback requirements of this chapter for dwellings shall not
apply to any lot where the average setback of existing buildings located wholly
or partially within one hundred (100) feet on either side of the proposed
dwelling and on the same side of the same block and use district as such lot is
less than the minimum required front yard depth. In such case the setback on
such lots may be less than the required setback but not less than the average
of the existing setbacks on the aforementioned lots, or a distance of ten (10)
feet from the street right-of-way line, whichever is greater. (Ord. of 1/10/05;
Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3037   Height limitations.
   The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires,
belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy; monuments; water
towers; chimneys; smokestacks; conveyors; flag poles; masts; serials and
similar structures except as otherwise noted in the vicinity of airports.
Telecommunications towers shall adhere to the height restrictions of Article P.
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3038   Visibility at intersections.
   The minimum development standards set forth in this section shall apply to
land abutting street intersections delineated as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/adeb133b442280ad8bc3431317823f426b5e2f33/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2867.png]
   (1)   A triangular area formed by intersecting the sides on curb (or
pavement edge where there is no curb) measuring thirty-five (35) feet in each
direction along the curb or pavement edge from the point of intersection, and
on the third side by the diagonal line connecting the ends of the thirty-five
(35)-foot sides as illustrated; or
   (2)   A triangular area formed by intersecting the street right of way lines
measuring twenty-five (25) feet in each direction from the point of
intersection along the street right of way, and on the third side by the
diagonal line connecting the ends of the thirty-five (35)-foot sides as
illustrated
   (3)   Within the triangular areas as described above, and except as provided
below, no structure, sign, plant, shrub, tree, berm, fence, wall, or other
object of any kind shall be installed, constructed, set out or maintained to
obstruct cross-visibility at a level that exceeds 30 inches above the level of
the center of the street.
   (4)   On streets maintained by the North Carolina Department of
Transportation, additional sight distance requirements may apply.
   (5)   In other than 90-degree intersections or where grades mandate, the
town may impose additional sight triangles.
   Exemptions
   The restrictions set forth in 9-3038 shall not apply to the following:
   (a)   Existing natural grades which, by reason of natural topography, rise
thirty (30) or more inches above the level of the center of the adjacent
intersection;
   (b)   Limbs and foliage from trees outside the triangular area trimmed in
such a manner that no limbs or foliage extend into the triangular area between
30 and 96 inches above the level of the center of the butting intersection;
   (c)   Fire hydrants, public utility poles, street markers, governmental
signs, electrical junction boxes and traffic-control devices.
   (d)   The clear sight triangles at street intersection restrictions
established in this Section shall not apply to structures located in the B-
1 Central Business District.
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3039   Location of accessory buildings.
   (a)   On any residential lot, except as hereafter provided, accessory
buildings shall not be located in any front or side yard, shall not cover more
than thirty (30) percent of any rear yard and shall be at least five (5) feet
from any other building on the same lot and at least twenty (20) feet from any
buildings used for human habitation on adjoining lots. All parts of the
building, including the footings and roof overhang, shall be a minimum of ten
(10) feet from any lot line; and further provided that in the case of corner
lots such buildings or structures shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet
from any side line right of way line. Exception: residential accessory
buildings located in the B-1 Zoning District which shall be a minimum of five
(5) feet from any lot line.
   (b)   Residential carports may be permitted in the side yard of a single-
family dwelling provided such carports meet the side yard setback of a
principal structure for the applicable zoning district. For the purposes of
this section, a residential carport shall be defined as an accessory building
consisting of a roof where the side walls are open and where the purpose of
such a structure is to provide covered parking for non- commercial (passenger)
motor vehicles. The storage of materials or equipment, other than motor
vehicles, in a residential carport is prohibited if the carport is not located
in the rear yard.
   (1)   A detached garage may be permitted in the side yard of a single-family
dwelling provided such garage meets all of the side yard setbacks of the
principal structure for the applicable zoning district and that it meets the
general requirements/conditions for a detached garage as outlined in Section
9-3060.10.
   (2)   A residential property owner may apply for a conditional use permit to
build a detached garage within the front yard subject to meeting all of the
conditions set forth in Section
9-3060.10.
   (c)   Residential accessory buildings may be located in a front or side yard
provided the lot is used for single- family purposes and is greater than five
(5) acres in size (area). In such a case, the residential accessory building
shall be set back from the front property line a minimum of two hundred (200)
feet and shall meet all other applicable setbacks.
   (d)   On any commercial or industrial lot, accessory buildings may be
located in a side or rear yard, provided they do not cover more than fifty (50)
percent of the total area of the lot. Such accessory buildings shall be at
least ten (10) feet from any other building on the same lot and at least twenty
(20) feet from any buildings used for human habitation on adjoining lots.
Vehicular canopies for gas pumps may project into a required front setback;
provided, however, such canopies may project no closer than within five (5)
feet of the right of way line or property line and such structures may not
extend into required buffer or side yard setback areas. All parts of each
accessory building, including the footings and roof overhangs, shall be a
minimum of ten (10) feet from any lot or right of way line. Fuel pumps shall be
at least twenty (20) feet from property or right of way lines. Accessory
buildings and structures shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from any
side property or right of way line. Exception: non-residential accessory
buildings located in the B-1 zoning district shall be a minimum five (5) feet
from any lot or right of way line. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10; Ord. of
6/29/15)
Section 9-3040   Provisions for landlocked lots.
   (a)   Existing landlocked lots within the residential zoning district,
defined as a lot that does not abut a public street by at least thirty-five
(35) feet and therefore does not meet the requirement that the lot have a
minimum frontage on a public street of thirty-five (35) feet, may nevertheless
be developed for one single-family dwelling unit if the lot otherwise meets the
zoning requirements of the zone in which the lot is located and provided that
the lot has a recorded easement of ingress and egress to and from a public
street which is appurtenant to the lot and which meets the following
requirements:
   (1)   A private easement with a minimum continuous width of twenty-five (25)
feet is acquired from intervening property owners; provided, however, an
easement with a minimum continuous width of less than twenty-five (25) feet and
a maximum length of three hundred (300) feet may be permitted only in
situations where an easement with a minimum continuous width of twenty-five
(25) feet would create a nonconformity with respect to this chapter;
   (2)   The recorded documents creating the easement that public service,
utility and emergency personnel and vehicles shall have freedom of ingress and
egress to and from the landlocked property;
   (3)   The recorded documents shall include a maintenance agreement
specifying the party responsible for maintaining the easement and its traveled
surface;
   (4)   The easement must have an all weather surface of gravel, concrete or
asphalt with a minimum continuous width of ten (10) feet to ensure access of
public service, utility, and emergency personnel and vehicles;
   (b)   Landlocked lots shall not be subdivided. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/
6/10)
Section 9-3041   Vested rights.
   (a)   The purpose of this section is to implement the provisions of G.S.
160A-385.1, pursuant to which a statutory zoning vested right is established
upon approval of a site specific development plan.
   (b)   Definitions.
   (1)   Approval authority. The Town Council, Planning Board, Board of
Adjustment, Town Clerk, Zoning Administrator, or other board or official
designated by this chapter as being authorized to grant the specific zoning or
land use permit approval that constitutes a site specific development.
   (2)   Site specific development plan.
   a.   A plan of land development submitted to the town for purposes of
obtaining one of the following zoning or land use permits or approvals:
   1.   Zoning permit as provided by this chapter.
   2.   Conditional use permit as provided by this chapter.
   3.   Minor subdivision approval.
   4.   Major subdivision approval.
   b.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, neither a sketch plan, nor any other
document that fails to describe with reasonable certainty the type and
intensity of use for a specified parcel or parcels of property shall constitute
a site specific development plan.
   (3)   Zoning vested rights. A right pursuant to G.S. 160A-385.1 to undertake
and complete the development and use of property under the terms and conditions
of an approved site specific development plan, provided that such development
shall begin within two (2) years following issuance of the zoning vested right.
Under the terms of this chapter, a two (2) year zoning vested right shall be
established upon issuance of a zoning permit. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/
10)
Section 9-3042   Permitted accessory uses in all districts.
   The following accessory uses are permitted in all districts:
   (a)   Accessory uses and structures that are clearly related to and
incidental to the permitted principal use or structure on the lot. (See Section
9-3039.)
   (b)   Fences and walls. Fences consisting of masonry, rock, wire or wooden
material and hedges may be installed on any residential lot, provided that the
height of such fencing or walls shall be limited to a maximum height of four
(4) feet in the front yard. Fencing and walls in the side or rear yard of
residential property shall be limited to a maximum of eight (8) feet in height.
Retaining walls and required screenings shall not be subject to the above
height requirements.
   (c)   Parking lots. See Article F, Off-Street Parking Requirements. (Ord. of
1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3043   Setbacks along thoroughfares.
   Pursuant to the authority granted by G.S. 160A-306, the following setback
requirements shall apply to lots along thoroughfares:
   (a)   The minimum street setbacks for lots in each zoning district that
abuts a thoroughfare shown in the adopted thoroughfare plan shall be measured
from the existing right-of-way line for each classification of thoroughfare and
shall meet the following requirements:
 
Thoroughfare Classification             Additional Setback
Existing street recommended for
securing additional right- of-way of    Ten (10) feet
ten (10) feet or less
Existing street recommended for         One-half the difference between the
securing additional right-of- way of    existing and recommended rights-of-way,
more than ten (10) feet                 but less than ten (10) feet
Not recommended for securing additional No additional setback required
right-of-way
Note: Where rights-of-way for street widening have been acquired, setbacks
shall be measured from the right-of-way line that has been established.
 
   (b)   Use of additional setback. The additional setback adjacent to the
existing right-of-way may not be developed for parking, but may be used for
fences, buffers, landscaping, signs, lighting fixtures, or other similar
improvements. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3044   Property maintenance.
   (a)   This section shall apply to all properties within the town
jurisdiction. The requirements contained herein shall be become effective upon
adoption of this chapter; however, no enforcement proceedings shall commence
under this section until sixty (60) days after adoption. This sixty (60) day
period is to allow property owners time to make necessary improvements required
under this section.
   (b)   Construction. All new structures shall be designed, constructed and
maintained in accordance with the following standards: All structures shall
comply with applicable provisions of this chapter, and the state building code
as adopted by the State Building Code Council, and the town minimum housing
code, and such other building ordinances as may be adopted and or amended by
the town from time to time.
   (c)   Maintenance. All structures erected, occupied or continued under this
chapter shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance with
all applicable codes and provisions of this chapter. Specifically:
   (1)   All existing structures shall comply with applicable provisions of
this chapter and the following codes, including but not limited to the State
Building Code Volume IX—Existing Buildings, the requirements of the code under
which the building was built, and the town minimum housing code.
   (2)   A structure shall have no more than twenty (20) percent of its
exterior roofs, walls, and other elements of the structure covered with
disfigured, cracked, or peeling surface materials for a period of more than
thirty (30) consecutive days.
   (3)   A structure shall not be maintained with broken windows, holes in
exterior surfaces including roofs and walls, ripped awnings, loose materials,
loose elements or other obvious exterior defects for a period of more than
thirty (30) consecutive days. Exterior materials shall form a weather tight
surface with no holes, excessive cracks or decayed surfaces that permit air to
penetrate rooms where such rooms are designed, used, permitted, or intended for
human occupancy or use.
   (4)   A structure shall not have weeds, trees, vines, or other vegetation
growing upon it greater than twelve (12) inches in height in an untended manner
for a period of more than fifteen (15) consecutive days.
   (5)   All site lighting, parking areas, fences, railings, driveways, curbs,
wheel stops, sidewalks, gutters, stormwater management areas and systems, and
other improvements and appurtenances shall be maintained in working order and
reasonably free of defects.
   (6)   The owner or tenant shall maintain all landscape areas, trees and
shrubs in a neat and healthy condition free of diseased, dead, or bare areas,
free of debris and free of grass or weeds greater than twelve (12) inches in
height.
   (7)   The owner or tenant shall maintain all required landscaped areas in a
manner consistent with the requirements of this chapter. Dead plants shall be
replaced as necessary to maintain compliance with the regulations contained
herein.
   (8)   The property owner shall maintain the property and the exterior
portions of any structures thereupon free of accumulations of debris, junk,
garbage, or trash, including but not limited to discarded furniture and other
household goods, inoperative vehicles, and inoperative equipment, except within
approved dumpsters or trash enclosures, enclosed storage areas, or on land
approved for the operation of a junk yard. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3045   Home occupations.
   (a)   A home occupation is permitted accessory to any dwelling unit (except
manufactured housing) in accordance with the following requirements:
   (1)   The home occupation must be clearly incidental to the residential use
of the dwelling and must not change the essential residential character of the
dwelling.
   (2)   A home occupation conducted in an accessory structure shall be housed
only in a garage or other accessory structure typically associated with a
dwelling.
   (3)   The use shall employ no person who is not a resident of the dwelling.
   (4)   A home occupation housed within the dwelling shall occupy no more than
twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area of the dwelling.
   (5)   There shall be no visible outside display of stock in trade that is
sold on the premises.
   (6)   There shall be no outdoor storage or visible evidence of equipment or
materials used in the home occupation, excepting equipment or materials of a
type and quantity that could reasonably be associated with the principal
residential use.
   (7)   Operation of the home occupation shall not be visible from any
dwelling on an adjacent lot, nor from a street.
   (8)   Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles will be permitted
in connection with the conduct of the home occupation.
   (9)   The home occupation shall not utilize mechanical, electrical, or other
equipment which produces noise, electrical or magnetic interference, vibration,
heat, glare, or other nuisances outside the dwelling or accessory structure
housing the home occupation.
   (10)   Home occupations shall be limited to those uses which do not draw
clients to the dwelling on a regular basis.
   (11)   No business identification or advertising signs are permitted.
   (12)   All home occupations shall require a zoning permit. Permits are not
transferable from person to person or from address to address.
   (13)   There may be one annual inspection by the town staff to ensure the
home occupation is operating within the requirements specified by this chapter.
The town staff shall have the right at any time, upon reasonable request, to
enter and inspect the premises covered by the zoning permit for safety and
compliance purposes.
   (14)   In no case shall a home occupation be open to the public at times
earlier than 8:00 a.m. nor later than 9:00 p.m.
   (15)   No more than one home occupation shall be permitted within any single
dwelling unit or accessory structure.
   (16)   There shall be no deliveries to or from a home occupation with a
vehicle larger than a three-quarter (3/4) ton truck.
   (17)   No home occupation shall cause an increase in the use of any public
utilities or services (water, sewer, garbage collection, etc.) so that the
combined total use for dwelling unit and home occupation purposes exceeds the
average for residences in the neighborhood.
   (18)   Home occupations shall comply with all local, state, and federal
regulations pertinent to the activity pursued, and the requirements of or
permission granted by this section shall not be construed as an exemption from
such regulations.
   (19)   Any non-conforming home occupation shall be discontinued or comply
with all applicable provisions of this section within sixty (60) days after the
home occupation first became non-conforming.
   (20)   Any pre-existing (prior to the date of adoption of this section and
approved by zoning permit) home occupation, made non-conforming by this
section, may be continued for a period of two (2) years after adoption of this
section or the discovery of the non-conforming use.
   (b)   The following uses are permitted in a home occupation:
   (1)   Architectural, drafting, and graphic services;
   (2)   Art restoration;
   (3)   Art/photography studio;
   (4)   Barber shop;
   (5)   Beauty salons;
   (6)   Consulting offices;
   (7)   Contracting offices;
   (8)   Data processing;
   (9)   Dressmaking, sewing, and tailoring;
   (10)   Electronic assembly and repair;
   (11)   Engineering services;
   (12)   Financial planning and investment services;
   (13)   Flower arranging;
   (14)   Gardening and landscaping services;
   (15)   Home crafts;
   (16)   House cleaning services;
   (17)   Insurance sales broker;
   (18)   Interior design;
   (19)   Jewelry making and repair;
   (20)   Locksmith;
   (21)   Mail order (not including retail sales from the site);
   (22)   Real estate sales broker;
   (23)   Sales representative, general;
   (24)   Tutoring;
   (25)   Upholstering, furniture.
   (c)   The following uses are prohibited in a home occupation:
   (1)   Adult oriented businesses;
   (2)   Large appliance repair;
   (3)   Automotive repair shops;
   (4)   Automotive painting;
   (5)   Carpentry/cabinet making;
   (6)   Caterers and food vendors;
   (7)   Commercial cabinetry shop;
   (8)   Dance studios;
   (7)   Furniture construction;
   (8)   Kennels;
   (9)   Machine shops;
   (10)   On-site vehicular sales;
   (11)   Rental businesses;
   (12)   Engine/mechanical repair shops;
   (13)   Trucking services;
   (14)   Welding shops;
   (15)   Other uses not listed as a permitted use. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of
12/6/10)
Section 9-3046   Buffers.
   Intent: The purpose of this article is to preserve and protect the health,
safety, and general welfare of the residents of the town by promoting the
environmental and public benefits of buffers. It is intended to improve
compatibility and provide transition between different zones and preserve the
character and aesthetics of an area. (See “Buffer” definition in Section
9-3012). (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3046.1   Standards.
   (1)   When industrial and commercial property is developed adjacent to
vacant property zoned residential or when nonresidential uses are developed in
residential zones, a buffer shall be required.
   (2)   The planted buffers as provided in Section
9-3046 shall be required in all industrial and commercial zones when these
areas abut residential zones and for all nonresidential uses in residential
zones.
   (3)   All plant types required in this article shall consist of plants at
least three (3) feet in height when planted.
   (4)   When two (2) rows of plantings are required, plants shall be staggered
in a triangular pattern so that there is a plant spaced the required distance
apart as specified in Section 9-3046.2.4.
   (5)   When the existing natural buffer provides adequate screening, the
existing buffer should remain. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall determine
if sufficient buffer does exist.
   (6)   The buffer shall be shown in detail on the site plan approved by the
town.
   (7)   The buffer shall be installed and approved before a certificate of
occupancy will be granted except when seasonal weather conditions are not
conducive, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for up to ninety
(90) days.
   (8)   The buffer shall be maintained, and dead and diseased plants replaced
by the owner or occupant of the premises. The outside storage of materials
shall be prohibited in the area between the planted buffer and the residential
district. The owner or occupant of the premises shall properly and continuously
maintain this area.
   (9)   If a fence is erected on the residential district side of the planted
buffer by the party establishing the buffer, the fence shall be one of the
following types:
   a.   A six (6) foot high wood, basket weave type fence;
   b.   A six (6) foot high picket type fence;
   c.   A six (6) foot high chain link type fence;
   d.   A six (6) foot high open type fence;
   e.   A six (6) foot high solid masonry wall.
   (10)   Fences with barbed or razor wire shall be located on the inside of
the buffer. The height of the buffer plantings shall equal the height of the
barbed or razor wire at the time of the planting. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/
6/10)
Section 9-3046.2   Planting specifications.
   (a)   Manufacturing-Industrial Zones (M-I) that abut residential zones (R-8,
R-12, R-12A). A planted buffer shall reach a minimum height of eight (8) feet.
Plants used on a buffer shall be a species that forms a continuous year-round
opaque screen within three (3) years after planting. The planted buffer shall
be composed of two (2) rows of plants no more than ten (10) feet apart in each
row. One (1) of the plant types listed in Section
9-3046.1(d) shall be used, and the plants shall be located no further apart
than the distance indicated for each plant type. The planted buffer area shall
be at least ten (10) feet wide.
   (b)   Commercial or Business Zones (B-1, B-2, O-I) that abut residential
zones (R-8, R-12, R-12A) and non-residential uses in residential zones (R-8, R-
12, R-12A). A planted buffer shall reach a minimum height of six (6) feet.
Plants used on a buffer shall be a species that forms a continuous year-round
opaque screen within three (3) years after planting. The planted buffer shall
be composed of one (1) row of plants no more than ten (10) feet apart in the
row. One (1) of the plant types listed in Section
9-3046.1(d) shall be used, and the plants shall be located no further apart
than the distance indicated for each plant type. The planted buffer area shall
be at least ten (10) feet wide.
   (c)   Required buffer heights and topographic considerations. The required
height of the planted buffer shall be measured in relation to the elevation of
the edge of the adjacent area to be screened. In such cases as the ground
elevation of the location at which the screen is to be planted is less than the
elevation of the proposed building site, the required height of the screen
shall be increased in an amount equal to said difference in elevation.
   (d)   Plant types and spacing.
   (1)   Below are listed the types of plants that shall be used in planted
buffers and the maximum distance each plant type shall be planted apart.
Substitution for another plant type not listed is to be made in writing to the
zoning administrator and is subject to verification that the proposed plant
will thrive and provide adequate screening. No more than thirty (30) percent of
the total plantings in a buffer shall be deciduous plants.
 
Plant Distance Apart (in feet)
Arbor Vitae                       4
Ligustrum Japonicum and varieties 5
Photinia                          5
Holly                             5
   a.   Nellie R. Stevens   5
   b.   Fosters #2          4
   c.   Savannah            4
   d.   Bufordi             5
Eleangnus Pungens                 5
OsmanthusVarieties                4
Pfitzer Juniper                   4
Doublefle Viburnum                5
Forsythia                         3
White Pine                        8 to 10
Scotch Pine                       5 to 6
Deodara Cedar                     8 to 10
Dogwood                           8 to 10
Flowering Cherry                  8 to 10
Flowering Crabapple               8 to 10
Bradford Pear                     8 to 10
Oak                               8 to 10
Linden                            8 to 10
Leyland Cypress                   8 to 10
 
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3047   Provisions for ten-acre exempt developments.
   Ten-acre exempt developments shall be approved by the Town of Valdese upon
allowance of a Conditional Use Permit. Before an application for the permit is
approved, there shall be findings that the following general standards are met:
   (1)   The use will not materially endanger the public health, safety, and
general welfare.
   (2)    The use will not substantially injure the value of adjoining or
abutting property.
   (3)   The use is consistent with any adopted area plans that encompass the
property subject to the application.
   (4)   The development access road shall remain private.
   (5)   The development access road shall be constructed in accordance with
the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code standards.
   (6)   An easement shall be granted to the Town of Valdese to guarantee
access for Public Safety, Public Works, and Planning Department.
   (7)   An entity other than the town, such as property owners, homeowners
association, community group, property management company, or similar type of
organizations, shall be responsible for upkeep and maintenance.
   (8)   The development shall not exceed 5 (five) building tracts.
   (9)   Public Works shall not be responsible for any garbage pick-up, rough
trash services, white goods or yard waste, except at a designated area located
nearest the entrance to the property, as approved by the Town of Valdese.
   (10)   The development shall comply with the requirements outlined in Code
of Ordinances Part 5 Municipal Utilities, Chapter 1, Water Supply and
Distribution and Chapter 2, Sewer Collection and Disposal.
(Ord. of / /)
Section 9-3048   Provisions for gated subdivisions.
   Gated Subdivisions shall be approved by the Town of Valdese in upon
allowance of a Conditional Use Permit. Before an application for the permit is
approved, there shall be findings that the following general standards are met:
   (1)   The use will not materially endanger the public health, safety, and
general welfare.
   (2)    The use will not substantially injure the value of adjoining or
abutting property.
   (3)   The use is consistent with any adopted area plans that encompass the
property subject to the application.
   (4)   Subdivision roads within gated subdivisions shall remain private.
   (5)   Subdivision roads shall be paved in accordance with the North Carolina
Department of Transportation Road Standards and shall comply with the North
Carolina Fire Prevention Code standards.
   (6)   The subdivision gate and access road for ingress and egress shall be
compliant with the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code and subject to approval
by the Planning Department, Fire Department, Police Department and Public Works
Department.
   (7)   An easement shall be granted to the Town of Valdese to guarantee
access for Public Safety, Public Works, and Planning Department.
   (8)   An entity other than the Town of Valdese, such as property owners,
homeowners association, community group, property management company or similar
type of organizations, shall be responsible for upkeep and maintenance.
   (9)   The gated ingress/egress areas, along with the exterior gate(s)
encompassing the development, shall be kept in working order and shall be
repaired and/or replaced in the event they are disabled and/or damaged.
   (10)   The development shall comply with the requirements outlined in Code
of Ordinances Part 5 Municipal Utilities, Chapter 1, Water Supply and
Distribution and Chapter 2, Sewer Collection and Disposal.
(Ord. of / /)
Section 9-3049 through section 9-3050 reserved.
ARTICLE E
Use Requirements by District
Section 9-3051   Neighborhood Residential District (R-8).
   Intent: The district shall provide for town-scaled residential development
within walking distance (generally one-fourth (1/4) mile) of services. Streets
shall be interconnected and a range of lot sizes is encouraged. The
Neighborhood Residential District is to permit the completion and conformity of
residential subdivisions. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3051.1   Permitted uses.
   (a)   Uses permitted by right:
   (1)   Boarding house.
   (2)   Cemeteries.
   (3)   Churches.
   (4)   Essential services 1 and 2.
   (5)   Family care homes.
   (6)   Government buildings up to five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross
floor area.
   (7)   Manufactured homes, Class A.
   (8)   Modular home.
   (9)   Neighborhood and outdoor recreation.
   (10)   Parks.
   (11)   Single-family homes.
   (12)   Two-family homes (duplexes).
   (b)   Uses permitted with special requirements:
   (1)   Accessory dwellings.
   (2)   Bed and breakfast inns.
   (c)   Uses permitted with a conditional use permit:
   (1)   Bakeries, delicatessens and the like, provided the products prepared
or processed on the premises shall only be sold at retail and only on the
premises.
   (2)   Barber and beauty shops.
   (3)   Day care center.
   (4)   Florist shops, but not commercial greenhouses.
   (5)   Grocery stores.
   (6)   Laundromats
   (7)   Mixed uses.
   (8)   Multi-family building.
   (9)   Planned unit development—business.
   (10)   Planned unit development—residential.
   (11)   Produce stands and open air markets, retail only.
   (12)   Public and private elementary and secondary schools.
   (13)   Residential care facility.
   (14)   Detached garage located in front yard.
   (15)   Ten-acre exempt development.
   (16)   Gated subdivision.
   (d)   Permitted accessory structures and uses:
   (1)   Accessory uses and structures that are clearly related to and
incidental to the permitted principal use or structure on the lot.
   (2)   Day care home.
   (3)   Home occupations. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10; Ord. of / /)
Section 9-3051.2   Off-street parking and loading requirements.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be met for all uses as
required by Article F of this chapter. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3051.3   Sign requirements.
   See Article H of this chapter. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3051.4   Dimensional requirements.
   (a)   Minimum lot width:
   (1)   Single-family home—fifty (50) feet.
   (2)   Two-family home—sixty (60) feet.
   (3)   Multi-family homes—seventy (70) feet for three (3) dwelling units plus
ten (10) feet for each four (4) additional dwelling units.
   (4)   Non-residential buildings—seventy (70) feet.
   (b)   Minimum building setback:
   (1)   Minimum front building setback:—twenty (20) feet.
   (2)   Minimum side building setback—ten (10) feet (fifteen (15) feet for
side abutting a street right-of-way)
   (3)   Minimum rear building setback—twenty-five (25) feet.
   (c)   Maximum building height:
   (1)   Maximum building height for residential structures— forty (40) feet.
   (2)   Maximum building height for non-residential structures—fifty (50)
feet.
   (d)   Minimum lot sizes and maximum lot coverages: Development activities
that do not require a sedimentation/erosion control plan under state law are
subject only to subdivisions (1) and (3) below.
   (1)   Lots deeded prior to October 1, 1993, to be developed for single-
family detached dwellings:
   a.   Either water or sewer: minimum lot size twenty thousand (20,000) square feet;
   b.   Water and sewer: minimum lot size eight thousand (8,000) square feet;
   c.   Maximum permissible lot coverage by principal and accessory buildings
shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the total lot area.
   (2)   Lots deeded on or after October 1, 1993, to be developed for single-
family detached dwellings where the development requires a sedimentation/
erosion control plan under state law:
   a.   OPTION 1:
   1.   No water and no sewer—forty thousand square (40,000)
   2.   Either water or sewer—twenty thousand (20,000) square feet;
   3.   Water and sewer—eight thousand (8,000) square feet;
   4.   Maximum permissible impervious surface coverage as defined in this
chapter shall not exceed thirty- six (36) percent of the total lot area, or
twenty-four (24) percent of the total lot area if the lot is located in a WS-
4 critical area or abuts a curb and gutter street system.
   b.   OPTION 2:
   1.   No water and no sewer—forty thousand (40,000) square feet;
   2.   Either water or sewer—twenty-one thousand seven hundred eighty (21,780)
square feet (½ acre);
   3.   Water and sewer—fourteen thousand five hundred twenty (14,520) square
feet (1/3 acre), or twenty-one thousand seven hundred eighty (21,780) square
feet (½ acre) if the lot is located within a WS-4 critical area or if the lot
abuts a curb and gutter street system.
   4.   Maximum permissible lot coverage by principal and accessory buildings
shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total lot area.
   (3)   Lots to be developed for multi-family dwellings, where the development
does not require a sedimentation/erosion control plan under state law:
   a.   Water and sewer required—eight thousand (8,000) square feet for the
first unit, four thousand (4,000) square feet for the second unit, and three
thousand (3,000 square feet for each additional unit.
   b.   Maximum permissible lot coverage by principal and accessory buildings
shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total lot area.
   (4)   Lots to be developed for multi-family dwellings, where the development
requires a sedimentation/erosion control plan under state law:
   a.   OPTION 1:
   1.   Water and sewer required— eight thousand (8,000) square feet for the
first unit, four thousand (4,000) square feet for the second unit, and three
thousand (3,000) square feet for each additional unit.
   2.   Maximum permissible impervious surface coverage, as defined in this
chapter, shall not exceed thirty-six (36) percent of the total lot area, or
twenty-four (24) percent of the total lot area if the lot is located within a
WS-4 critical area or if the lot abuts a curb and gutter street system.
   b.   OPTION 2:
   1.   Water and sewer required—fourteen thousand, five hundred twenty
(14,520) square feet (1/3 acre) for each unit, or twenty-one thousand, seven
hundred eighty (21,780) square feet (½ acre) for each unit if the lot is
located within a WS-4 critical area or if the lot abuts a curb and gutter
street system.
   2.   Maximum permissible lot coverage by principal and accessory buildings
shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the total lot area. (Ord. of 1/10/05;
Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3052   Residential District (R-12A).
   Intent: The R-12A district is intended to be a moderately quiet, medium-high
density residential living area consisting of single-family, two-family and
multi- family dwellings, along with limited home occupations and limited
private and public community uses. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3052.1   Permitted uses.
   (a)   Uses permitted by right:
   (1)   Boarding house.
   (2)   Cemeteries.
   (3)   Churches.
   (4)   Essential services 1 and 2.
   (5)   Family care homes.
   (6)   Government buildings up to 5,000 square feet of gross floor area.
   (7)   Modular home.
   (9)   Neighborhood and outdoor recreation.
   (10)   Parks.
   (11)   Single-family homes, excluding manufactured homes.
   (12)   Two-family homes (duplexes).
   (b)   Uses permitted with special requirements:
   (1)   Accessory dwellings.
   (2)   Bed and breakfast inns.
   (3)   Day care center.
   (c)   Uses permitted with a conditional use permit:
   (1)   Multi-family building.
   (2)   Residential care facilities.
   (3)   Planned unit development—residential.
   (4)   Public and private elementary and secondary schools.
   (5)   Detached garage located in front yard.
   (6)   Ten-acre exempt development.
   (7)   Gated subdivision.
   (d)   Permitted accessory structures and uses:
   (1)   Accessory uses and structures that are clearly related to and
incidental to the permitted principal use or structure on the lot.
   (2)   Day care home.
   (3)   Home occupations. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10; Ord. of 6/29/15;
Ord. of / /)
Section 9-3052.2   Off-street parking and loading requirements.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be met for all uses as
required by Article F of this chapter. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3052.3   Sign requirements.
   See Article H of this chapter. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3052.4   Dimensional requirements.
   (a)   Minimum lot width:
   (1)   Single-family home—seventy (70) feet.
   (2)   Multi-family homes—seventy (70) feet for three dwelling units plus ten
(10) feet for each additional dwelling unit.
   (3)   Non-residential buildings—seventy (70) feet.
   (b)   Minimum building setback:
   (1)   Minimum front building setback—thirty-five (35) feet.
   (2)   Minimum side building setback —ten (10) feet (fifteen (15) feet for
side abutting a street right-of-way).
   (3)   Minimum rear building setback —twenty-five (25) feet.
   (c)   Maximum building height:
   (1)   Maximum building height for residential structures —forty (40) feet.
   (2)   Maximum building height for non-residential structures —fifty (50)
feet.
   (d)   Minimum lot sizes and maximum lot coverages: Development activities
that do not require a sedimentation/erosion control plan under state law are
subject only to Sections 1 and 3 below.
   (1)   Lots deeded prior to October 1, 1993, to be developed for single-
family detached dwellings:
   a.   Either water or sewer minimum lot size twenty thousand (20,000) square feet;
   b.   Water and sewer minimum lot size twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
   c.   Maximum permissible lot coverage by principal and accessory buildings
shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the total lot area.
   (2)   Lots deeded on or after October 1, 1993, to be developed for single-
family detached dwellings where the development requires a Sedimentation/
Erosion Control Plan under State law:
   a.   OPTION 1:
   1.   No water or sewer—forty thousand (40,000) square feet;
   2.   Either water or sewer—twenty thousand (20,000) square feet;
   3.   Water and sewer—twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
   4.   Maximum permissible impervious surface coverage as defined in this
chapter shall not exceed thirty- six percent (36%) of the total lot area, or
twenty-four percent (24%) of the total lot area if the lot is located in a WS-
4 critical area or abuts a curb and gutter street system.
   b.   OPTION 2:
   1.   No water and no sewer—forty thousand (40,000) square feet;
   2.   Either water or sewer— twenty-one thousand, seven hundred eighty
(21,780) square feet (½ acre);
   3.   Water and sewer—fourteen thousand, five hundred twenty (14,520) square
feet (1/3 acre), or twenty-one thousand, seven hundred eighty (21,780) square
feet (½ acre) if the lot is located within a WS-4 critical area or if the lot
abuts a curb and gutter street system.
   4.   Maximum permissible lot coverage by principal and accessory buildings
shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area.
   (3)   Lots to be developed for multi-family dwellings, where the development
does not require a sedimentation/erosion control plan under state law:
   a.   Water and sewer required—twelve thousand (12,000) square feet for the
first unit, four thousand (4,000) square feet for the second unit, and three
thousand (3,000) square feet for each additional unit.
   b   Maximum permissible lot coverage by principal and accessory buildings
shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area.
   (4)   Lots to be developed for multi-family dwellings, where the development
requires a sedimentation/erosion control plan under state law:
   a.   OPTION 1:
   1.   Water and sewer required minimum lot size twelve thousand (12,000) square feet for the
first unit, minimum lot size four thousand (4,000) square feet for the second unit, and minimum lot size three
 thousand (3,000) square feet for each additional unit.
   2.   Maximum permissible impervious surface coverage, as defined in this
chapter, shall not exceed thirty-six percent (36%) of the total lot area, or
twenty- four percent (24%) of the total lot area if the lot is located within a
WS-4 critical area or if the lot abuts a curb and gutter street system.
   b.   OPTION 2:
   1.   Water and sewer required—fourteen thousand, five hundred twenty
(14,520) square feet (1/3 acre) for each unit, or twenty-one thousand, seven
hundred eighty (21,780) square feet (½ acre) for each unit if the lot is
located within a WS-4 critical area or if the lot abuts a curb and gutter
street system.
   2.   Maximum permissible lot coverage by principal and accessory buildings
shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the total lot area. (Ord. of 1/10/05;
Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3053   Residential District (R-12).
   Intent: The district shall provide for agricultural uses as well as single-
family development. The purpose of the R-12 District is to provide an adequate
amount of land for agricultural uses and single-family residential development.
Uses that would interfere with the quiet, less urban residential nature of
single-family neighborhoods, such as multi-family and commercial uses, are not
appropriate in this district. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3053.1   Permitted uses.
   (a)   Uses permitted by right:
   (1)   Cemeteries.
   (2)   Churches.
   (3)   Essential services 1 and 2.
   (4)   Family care homes.
   (5)   Government buildings up to five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross
floor area.
   (6)   Modular home.
   (7)   Neighborhood and outdoor recreation.
   (8)   Parks.
   (9)   Single-family homes, excluding manufactured homes.
   (b)   Uses permitted with special requirements:
   (1)   Accessory dwellings.
   (2)   Bed and breakfast inns.
   (c)   Uses permitted with a conditional use permit:
   (1)   Bona fide farms but not agricultural industry.
   (2)   Public and private elementary and secondary schools.
   (3)   Residential care facility.
   (4)   Detached garage located in front yard.
   (5)   Ten-acre exempt development.
   (6)   Gated subdivision.
   (d)   Permitted accessory structures and uses:
   (1)   Accessory uses and structures that are clearly related to and
incidental to the permitted principal use or structure on the lot.
   (2)   Day care home.
   (3)   Home occupations. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10; Ord. of 6/29/15;
Ord. of / /)
Section 9-3053.2   Off-street parking and loading requirements.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be met for all uses as
required by Article F of this chapter. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3053.3   Sign requirements.
   See Article H of this chapter. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3053.4   Dimensional requirements.
   (a)   Minimum lot width:
   (1)   Single-family home—seventy (70) feet.
   (2)   Non-residential buildings—seventy (70) feet.
   (b)   Minimum building setback:
   (1)   Minimum front building setback:—thirty-five (35) feet.
   (2)   Minimum side building setback—ten (10) feet (fifteen (15) feet for
side abutting a street right-of-way).
   (3)   Minimum rear building setback—twenty-five (25) feet.
   (c)   Maximum building height:
   (1)   Maximum building height for residential structures—forty (40) feet.
   (2)   Maximum building height for non-residential structures—fifty (50)
feet.
   (d)   Minimum lot sizes and maximum lot coverages: Development activities
that do not require a sedimentation/erosion control plan under state law are
subject only to section 1 below.
   (1)   Lots deeded prior to October 1, 1993, to be developed for single-
family detached dwellings:
   a.   Either water or sewer—twenty thousand (20,000) square feet;
   b.   Water and sewer—twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
   c.   Maximum permissible lot coverage by principal and accessory buildings
shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the total lot area.
   (2)   Lots deeded on or after October 1, 1993, to be developed for single-
family detached dwellings where the development requires a sedimentation/
erosion control plan under state law:
   a.   OPTION 1:
   1.   No water and no sewer—forty thousand (40,000) square feet;
   2.   Either water or sewer—twenty thousand (20,000) square feet;
   3.   Water and sewer—twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
   4.   Maximum permissible impervious surface coverage as defined in this
chapter shall not exceed thirty-six percent (36%) of the total lot area, or
twenty-four percent (24%) of the total lot area if the lot is located in a WS-
4 critical area or abuts a curb and gutter street system.
   b.   OPTION 2:
   1.   No water and no sewer—forty thousand (40,000) square feet;
   2.   Either water or sewer—twenty-one thousand, seven hundred eighty
(21,780) square feet (½ acre);
   3.   Water and sewer—fourteen thousand, five hundred twenty (14,520) square
feet (1/3 acre), or twenty-one thousand, seven hundred eighty (21,780) square
feet (½ acre) if the lot is located within a WS-4 critical area or if the lot
abuts a curb and gutter street system.
   4.   Maximum permissible lot coverage by principal and accessory buildings
shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area. (Ord. of 1/10/05;
Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3054   Office-Institutional District (O-I).
   Intent: The Office-Institutional District is designed to provide a wide
range of professional and institutional uses, as well as space for public and
quasi-public uses. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 1/5/09; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3054.1   Permitted uses.
   (a)   Uses permitted by right:
   (1)   Art galleries.
   (2)   Auditoriums, armories, publicly owned recreation facilities.
   (3)   Business office type.
   (4)   Child care institution.
   (5)   Churches.
   (6)   Community center.
   (7)   Essential services 1 and 2.
   (8)   Funeral homes.
   (9)   Financial services.
   (10)   Government buildings up to five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross
floor area.
   (11)   Hospice and palliative care facility.
   (12)   Hospitals.
   (13)   Libraries.
   (14)   Medical or professional services.
   (15)   Mixed uses.
   (16)   Modular home.
   (17)   Museums.
   (18)   Music or dance institutions/schools.
   (19)   Neighborhood and outdoor recreation.
   (20)   Nursing homes.
   (21)   Residential care facilities.
   (22)   Parks.
   (23)   Single-family home, excluding manufactured homes, provided setback
requirements of the R-8 Residential are met.
   (24)   Veterinary hospital or clinic.
   (b)   Uses permitted with special requirements:
   (1)   Accessory dwellings.
   (2)   Day care center.
   (3)   Bed and breakfast inns.
   (4)   Brewpubs.
   (5)   Microbreweries.
   (6)   Restaurants.
   (c)   Uses permitted with a conditional use permit:
   (1)   Multi-family building.
   (2)   Planned unit development—business.
   (3)   Planned unit development—residential.
   (4)   Public and private elementary and secondary schools.
   (d)   Permitted accessory structures and uses:
   (1)   Accessory uses and structures that are clearly related to and
incidental to the permitted principal use or structure on the lot.
   (2)   Day care homes.
   (3)   Home occupations.
   (e)   Within the O-I District all principal and accessory uses shall be
conducted wholly within enclosed buildings with the exception of drive-through
service, vending machinery, incidental displays of merchandise, displays
associated with official festivals and similar incidental outdoor displays.
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 1/5/09; Ord. of 12/6/10; Ord. 12/1/14)
Section 9-3054.2   Off-street parking and loading requirements.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be met for all uses as
required by Article F of this chapter. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3054.3   Sign requirements.
   See Article H of this chapter. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3054.4   Dimensional requirements.
   (a)   Minimum lot width: none.
   (b)   Minimum building setback:
   (1)   Minimum front building setback:—twenty (20) feet.
   (2)   Minimum side building setback—ten (10) feet. An average of ten (10)
feet may meet the side building setback requirements under the following
requirements:
   a.   A conditional use permit is required.
   b.   Under no circumstances shall the principal building be any closer than
five (5) feet from the side property line.
   c.   An opaque, vegetative buffer is required along the side property line
where the averaging option is approved. However, if topography or other issues
make the buffer impractical, other options may be used.
   (3)   Minimum rear building setback—fifteen (15) feet.
   (c)   Maximum building height: fifty (50) feet.
   (d)   Minimum lot sizes and maximum lot coverages. Within the Office-
Institutional District, there is no minimum lot size and development activities
can cover one hundred percent (100%) of the lot area not within the required
setbacks. However, if the development activity requires a sedimentation/erosion
control plan, the maximum permissible impervious surface coverage, as defined
by this chapter, shall not exceed thirty-six percent (36%) of the total lot
area, or twenty-four percent (24%) of the total lot area if the lot is located
within a WS-4 critical area or if the lot abuts a curb and gutter street
system. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3055   Central Business District (B-1).
   Intent: The purpose of Central Business District is to accommodate and
encourage further expansion and renewal in the historic/business core of the
town. A variety of business, retail, professional, financial, cultural, and
other related services are encouraged in an effort to provide the mix of
activities necessary to shoppers. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3055.1   Permitted uses.
   (a)   Uses permitted by right:
   (1)   Alcoholic beverages, packaged, retail sales.
   (2)   Amusements such as indoor theater, pool rooms, and bowling alleys.
   (3)   Art galleries.
   (4)   Auditoriums, armories, publicly owned recreation facilities.
   (5)   Automobile parking lots.
   (6)   Automobile parts and supplies sales, new.
   (7)   Bakeries, where the products are sold exclusively at retail on the
premises.
   (8)   Barber and beauty shops.
   (9)   Bicycle sales and repair shops.
   (10)   Bus terminals and railroad stations.
   (11)   Business colleges, barber and beauty schools, art schools, music and
dance studios, and similar organizations, but not vocational schools, all
without students in residence.
   (12)   Business office type.
   (13)   Churches.
   (14)   Clubs and lodges catering exclusively to member and their guests.
   (15)   Community center.
   (16)   Convenience stores.
   (17)   Dry cleaning and laundry pickup stations and dry cleaning facilities.
   (18)   Essential services 1 and 2.
   (19)   Farmers market.
   (20)   Financial services.
   (21)   Florist shops, but not commercial greenhouses.
   (22)   Food stores, retail only.
   (23)   Funeral homes.
   (24)   Government buildings.
   (25)   Gunsmiths.
   (26)   Hand-made crafts, retail sale of, and production for on-site sales.
   (27)   Hotels, motels, boarding houses.
   (28)   Laundromats.
   (29)   Locksmiths.
   (30)   Medical or professional services.
   (31)   Massage therapy.
   (32)   Mixed uses.
   (33)   Museums.
   (34)   Neighborhood and outdoor recreation.
   (35)   Newsstands, newspaper offices and printing facilities incidental to
such offices.
   (36)   Office equipment and supplies, sales and service.
   (37)   Parks.
   (38)   Pawn shops.
   (39)   Photographic studios and camera supply stores.
   (40)   Retail printing, publishing and reproduction establishments.
   (41)   Radio and television, electronics repair and sales.
   (42)   Restaurants, including drive through windows as an accessory use.
   (43)   Retail establishments such as department, clothing, fabric, shoe,
variety, notion, drug, hardware, furniture, appliance, music, art, antique,
jewelry, sporting goods, toy, hobby, book, and stationary stores, but not
excluding similar retail establishments.
   (44)   Shoe repair shops.
   (45)   Tailor, dressmaking and millinery shops.
   (46)   Taxi stands.
   (47)   Telecommunication offices.
   (48)   Theaters, indoor.
   (b)   Uses permitted with special requirements:
   (1)   Bed and breakfast inns.
   (2)   Day care center.
   (3)   Outdoor seasonal sales.
   (4)   Artisan food and beverage producer.
   (c)   Uses permitted with a conditional use permit:
   (1)   Bars.
   (2)   Drop boxes (on-premise only).
   (3)   Modular home.
   (4)   Multi-family building.
   (5)   Planned unit development—business.
   (6)   Planned unit development—residential.
   (7)   Public and private elementary and secondary schools.
   (8)   Single-family home, excluding manufactured homes.
   (d)   Permitted accessory structures and uses:
   (1)   Accessory uses and structures that are clearly related to and
incidental to the permitted principal use or structure on the lot.
   (2)   Day care home.
   (3)   Home occupations.
   (4)   Within the B-1 District all principal and accessory non-residential
uses shall be conducted wholly within enclosed buildings with the exception of
gasoline pumps, drive-through service, outdoor dining facilities associated
with a restaurant, incidental displays of produce and merchandise or published
materials, vending machinery, displays associated with official festivals and
similar incidental outdoor displays. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10; Ord. of
12/1/14; Ord. of 3/3/16)
Section 9-3055.2   Off-street parking and loading requirements.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be met for all uses as
required by Article F of this chapter. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3055.3   Sign requirements.
   See Article H of this chapter. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3055.4   Dimensional requirements.
   (a)   Minimum lot width: none. (Minimum frontage on a public street shall be
thirty-five (35) feet).
   (b)   Minimum building setback:
   (1)   Minimum front building setback—zero (0) feet.
   (2)   Minimum side building setback—zero (0) feet (fifteen (15) feet for
side abutting a residential district).
   (3)   Minimum rear building setback—zero (0) feet (fifteen (15) feet for
side abutting a residential district).
   (4)   Note: If side or rear yards are provided they must be at least ten
(10) feet in width.
   (c)   Maximum building height: fifty (50) feet.
   (d)   Minimum lot sizes and maximum lot coverages. Within the B-1 Central
Business District, there is no minimum lot size and development activities can
cover one hundred percent (100%) of the lot area. However, if the development
activity requires a sedimentation/erosion control plan, the maximum permissible
impervious surface coverage, as defined by this chapter, shall not exceed
thirty-six percent (36%) of the total lot area, or twenty-four (24%) of the
total lot area if the lot is located within a WS-4 critical area or if the lot
abuts a curb and gutter street system. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3055.5   Amortization of certain conditions within the B-1 District.
   (a)   The uses listed in section
9-3055.5(b) shall comply with the requirements of this section (
9-3055.5) within one (1) year of the adoption of this chapter.
   (b)   Sales of automobiles, recreational vehicles and other motor vehicles.
   (c)   Within one (1) year of adoption of this chapter all principal and
accessory non-residential uses, except those as provided for in section
9-3055.1(c)(1) shall be conducted wholly within enclosed buildings. Additional
exception: the outside display of automobiles, recreational vehicles and other
motor vehicles for sale may be continued for existing businesses.
   (d)   Storage of inoperable vehicles on premises for more than seven (7)
days shall cease within thirty (30) days of the adoption of this chapter.
   (e)   The uses listed in section
9-3055.5(b) shall comply with the following:
   (1)   All parking areas, including display areas for vehicles, shall be
paved with asphalt or concrete. Vehicles shall not be parked on grass or
graveled areas.
   (2)   All vehicles shall be setback five (5) feet from any right of way
line.
   (3)   All vehicles for sale shall be separated from other vehicles for sale
by a distance not less than four (4) feet. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3056   General Business District (B-2).
   Intent: The intent of the General Business District is to encourage the
establishment of areas for general business that do not require a central
location. These districts are normally located along major radial highways
leading out of town where they provide retailing goods and services to the
traveling public and local residents. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 11/5/07; Ord.
of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3056.1   Permitted uses.
   (a)   Uses permitted by right:
   (1)   Adult Establishments as defined in North Carolina General Statute Sec.
14-202.10 subject to the following requirements:
   a.   No adult establishment shall be located within a radius of one thousand
(1,000) feet of another adult establishment.
   b.   No adult establishment shall be located within a radius of one thousand
(1,000) feet of any residential district, nursing home, retirement home,
church, child care center, park or playground.
   c.   All distances related to adult establishments shall be measured as
follows:
   1.   The distance for the separation from residential zoning and protected
uses shall be measured from the closest edge of the building occupied by an
adult use to the nearest residential zoning district or to the property line of
a protected use.
   2.   The distance for separation between adult uses shall be measured from
the closest edges of the buildings occupied by adult uses.
   d.   No more than one adult establishment may be located within the same
structure.
   (2)   Alcoholic beverages, packaged, retail sales.
   (3)   Amusements such as indoor theaters, pool rooms, and bowling alleys.
   (4)   Art galleries.
   (5)   Auditoriums, armories, publicly owned recreation facilities.
   (6)   Automobile parking lots.
   (7)   Automobile parts and supplies sales, new.
   (8)   Automotive repair.
   (9)   Automobile sales provided it meets the following requirements:
   a.   All vehicles for sale shall be parked only on surfaces paved with
asphalt or concrete.
   b.   An indoor showroom that will accommodate at least two (2) vehicles
shall be built or provided.
   c.   The storage of inoperable vehicles for more than seven (7) days shall
be prohibited.
   d.   All vehicles for sale shall be separated from other vehicles for sale
by a distance not less that (4) feet.
   e.   All vehicles shall be setback five (5) feet from any right of way line.
   (10)   Automotive service stations.
   (11)   Bakeries, where the products are sold exclusively at retail on the
premises.
   (12)   Barber and beauty shops.
   (13)   Bicycle sales and repair shops.
   (14)   Bus terminals and railroad stations.
   (15)   Business colleges, barber and beauty schools, art schools, music and
dance studios, and similar organizations, but not vocational schools, all
without students in residence.
   (16)   Business office type.
   (17)   Car washes, detail shops.
   (18)   Child care institution.
   (19)   Churches.
   (20)   Clubs and lodges catering exclusively to member and their guests.
   (21)   Commercial and industrial trade schools.
   (22)   Community center.
   (23)   Convenience stores.
   (24)   Dry cleaning and laundry pickup stations and dry cleaning facilities.
   (25)   Electrical appliances and equipment, sales and repair, but excluding
open storage.
   (26)   Essential services 1 and 2.
   (27)   Farmers market.
   (28)   Feed, seed, and fertilizer sales, retail.
   (29)   Financial services.
   (30)   Florist shops, but not commercial greenhouses.
   (31)   Food stores, retail only.
   (32)   Funeral homes.
   (33)   Government buildings.
   (34)   Gunsmiths.
      Hospice and palliative care facility.
   (35)   Hospitals.
   (36)   Hotels, motels, boarding houses.
   (37)   Laundromats.
   (38)   Locksmiths.
   (39)   Massage therapy.
   (40)   Medical or professional services.
   (41)   Mixed uses.
   (42)   Mini-warehouses.
   (43)   Museums.
   (44)   Neighborhood and outdoor recreation.
   (45)   Newsstands, newspaper offices and printing facilities incidental to
such offices.
   (46)   Nursing homes.
   (47)   Residential care facilities.
   (48)   Office equipment and supplies, sales and service.
   (49)   Parks.
   (50)   Pawn shops.
   (51)   Photographic studios and camera supply stores.
   (52)   Plumbing, heating and refrigeration sales/service, but excluding open
storage.
   (53)   Public garages.
   (54)   Radio and television, electronics repair and sales.
   (55)   Restaurants, including drive through windows as an accessory use.
   (56)   Retail establishments such as department, clothing, fabric, shoe,
variety, notion, drug, hardware, furniture, appliance, music, art, antique,
jewelry, sporting goods, toy, hobby, book, and stationary stores, but not
excluding similar retail establishments.
   (57)   Retail printing, publishing and reproduction establishments.
   (58)   Service stations (See automotive service station).
   (59)   Shoe repair.
   (60)   Tailor, dressmaking and millinery shops.
   (61)   Taxi stands.
   (62)   Telecommunication offices.
   (63)   Theaters, indoor.
   (64)   Veterinary hospital or clinic.
   (b)   Uses permitted with special requirements:
   (1)   Bed and breakfast inns.
   (2)   Crematory or crematorium.
   (3)   Day care center.
   (4)   Kennels.
   (5)   Outdoor seasonal sales.
   (6)   Electronic gaming operations.
   (7)   Artisan food and beverage producer.
   (c)   Uses permitted with a conditional use permit:
   (1)   Automotive body repair.
   (2)   Bars.
   (3)   Modular home.
   (4)   Multi-family building.
   (5)   Planned unit development—business.
   (6)   Planned unit development—residential.
   (7)   Public and private elementary and secondary schools.
   (8)   Sign painting and fabrication shops.
   (9)   Single family dwellings, excluding manufactured houses.
   (d)   Permitted accessory structures and uses:
   (1)   Accessory uses and structures that are clearly related to and
incidental to the permitted principal use or structure on the lot.
   (2)   Day care home.
   (3)   Home occupations.
   (4)   Within the B-2 District all principal and accessory non-residential
uses shall be conducted wholly within enclosed buildings with the exception of
gasoline pumps, drive-through service, outdoor dining facilities associated
with a restaurant, incidental displays of produce and merchandise or published
materials, display of motor vehicles for sale, vending machinery, displays
associated with official festivals and similar incidental outdoor displays.
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 11/5/07; Ord. of 12/3/07; Ord. of 12/6/10; Ord. of
12/3/12; Ord. of 12/1/14; Ord. of 3/3/16)
Section 9-3056.2   Off-street parking and loading requirements.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be met for all uses as
required by Article F of this chapter. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3056.3   Sign requirements.
   See Article H of this chapter. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3056.4   Dimensional requirements.
   (a)   Minimum lot width: none. (Minimum frontage on a public street shall be
thirty-five (35) feet).
   (b)   Minimum building setback:
   (1)   Minimum front building setback—forty (40) feet.
   (2)   Minimum side building setback—ten (10) feet (twenty (20) feet for side
abutting a residential district). An average of ten (10) feet may meet the side
building setback requirements under the following requirements:
   a.   A conditional use permit is required.
   b.   Under no circumstances shall the principal building be any closer than
five (5) feet from the side property line.
   c.   An opaque, vegetative buffer is required along the side property line
where the averaging option is approved. However, if topography or other issues
make the buffer impractical, other options may be used.
   (3)   Minimum rear building setback—ten (10) feet twenty (20) feet for side
abutting a residential district).
   (c)   Maximum building height—fifty (50) feet.
   (d)   Minimum lot sizes and maximum lot coverages: Within the B-2 General
Business District, there is no minimum lot size and development activities can
cover one hundred percent (100%) of the total lot area not within the required
setbacks. However, if the development activity requires a sedimentation/erosion
control plan, the maximum permissible impervious surface coverage, as defined
by this chapter, shall not exceed thirty-six percent (36%) of the total lot
area, or twenty-four (24%) of the total lot area if the lot is located within a
WS-4 critical area or if the lot abuts a curb and gutter street system. (Ord.
of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3057   reserved.
Section 9-3058   Manufacturing District (M-1).
   Intent: This district is intended to establish and preserve areas for
industrial and related uses of such a nature that they do not create serious
problems of compatibility with other kinds of commercial uses which are most
appropriately located as neighbors of industrial uses or which are necessary to
service the immediate needs of people in these areas. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of
6/5/06; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3058.1   Permitted uses.
   (a)   Uses permitted by right:
   (1)   Automotive body repair.
   (2)   Automotive repair.
   (3)   Automotive service station.
   (4)   Essential Services - Class 1.
   (5)   Essential Services - Class 2.
   (6)   Essential Services - Class 3.
   (7)   Industrial/commercial trade school.
   (8)   Precision instrument manufacturing.
   (9)   Recycling centers.
   (10)   Recycling collection points.
   (11)   Recycling plant.
   (12)   Secondary schools.
   (13)   The manufacturing, processing, fabricating,  and/or wholesaling of
the following products: bedding, carpets, and pillows; clothing, including
hosiery; electric and electronic products; foods and food products, not
including slaughter houses; glass; household appliances; ice; leather goods,
not including the processing or storage of rawhides; machine tools; metals and
metal products; paints; paper products, not including the manufacturing or
processing of paper; plastics; rubber products, not including the manufacturing
or processing of rubber; textiles; wood and wood products, furniture, milk
distribution (non-bottling) facilities.
   (14)   Truck terminal.
   (15)   Upholstery shops.
   (16)   Veterinary hospital or clinic.
   (17)   Wholesale and warehousing establishments, but excluding the storage
of hazardous or offensive items materials such as uncured hides, explosives,
and nuclear waste products.
   (18)   Large brewery.
   (19)   Microbreweries.
   (20)   Distillery.
   (21)   Winery.
   (b)   Uses permitted with a conditional use permit:
   (1)   Agricultural industry.
   (2)   Any lawful retail, service, repair, or wholesale use not specifically
referred to in this section, provided no use shall be dangerous or detrimental
to the health, safety, welfare or general character of this zone or the town.
   (3)   Automotive wrecking yards and scrap metal dealers, provided the
premises are enclosed by a buffer.
   (4)   Business-office type.
   (5)   Essential services 3.
   (6)   Flea markets.
   (7)   Landfill.
   (8)   Lumberyards.
   (9)   Mobile/manufactured home sales lots.
   (10)   Marinas.
   (11)   Mixing plants for concrete or paving materials.
   (12)   Stone crushing, cutting, and polishing.
   (13)   Planned unit development—business.
   (14)   The manufacturing, processing, fabricating, and/or wholesaling of the
following products: animal feeds; building materials; gasoline, oil, or fuel
storage; pottery, porcelain and vitreous china; soap, detergent and washing
compounds.
   (15)   Tobacco processing and storage.
   (c)   Permitted accessory structures and uses:
   (1)   Accessory uses and structures that are clearly related to and
incidental to the permitted principal use or structure on the lot.
   (2)   Offices that are accessory to any permitted use of this district.
   (3)   Open storage as an accessory use.
   (d)   Uses permitted with special requirements:
   (1)   Kennels.
   (2)   Artisan food and beverage producer. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 6/5/06;
Ord. of 12/6/10; Ord. of 12/1/14; Ord. of 3/3/16)
Section 9-3058.2   Off-street parking and loading requirements.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be met for all uses as
required by Article F of this chapter. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3058.3   Sign requirements.
   See Article H of this chapter. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3058.4   Dimensional requirements.
   (a)   Minimum lot width: none. (Minimum frontage on a public street shall be
thirty-five (35) feet).
   (b)   Minimum building setback:
   (1)   Minimum front building setback—twenty-five (25) feet (fifty (50) feet
where abutting a residential district, excluding right-of-way).
   (2)   Minimum side building setback—ten (10) feet (fifty (50) feet for side
abutting a residential district). An average of ten (10) feet may meet the side
building setback requirements under the following requirements:
   a.   A conditional use permit is required.
   b.   Under no circumstances shall the principal building be any closer than
five (5) feet from the side property line.
   c.   An opaque, vegetative buffer is required along the side property line
where the averaging option is approved. However, if topography or other issues
make the buffer impractical, other options may be used.
   (3)   Minimum rear building setback—twenty (20) feet (fifty (50) feet for
side abutting a residential district).
   (c)   Maximum building height:
   (1)   Maximum building height—fifty (50) feet.
   (2)   Buildings exceeding fifty (50) feet in height are permitted upon
issuance of a conditional use permit.
   (d)   Minimum lot sizes and maximum lot coverages: Within the M-
1 Manufacturing District, there is no minimum lot size and development
activities can cover one hundred percent (100%) of the total lot area not
within the required setbacks. However, if the development activity requires a
sedimentation/erosion control plan, the maximum permissible impervious surface
coverage, as defined by this chapter, shall not exceed thirty-six percent (36%)
of the total lot area, or twenty-four (24%) of the total lot area if the lot is
located within a WS-4 critical area or if the lot abuts a curb and gutter
street system. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3059   Flood Plain Overlay District (FP).
   Intent: This district is intended to assist in protecting against extreme
hazard, loss of life and severe flood damage in Flood Plain areas. This overlay
district is established to be the flood hazard area shown on the U.S. Housing
and Urban Development FIA flood hazard boundary maps for the town. Uses in this
district are intended to be associated with open space, recreational, and
agricultural land uses and shall not hinder movement of floodwaters. (Ord. of
1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3059.1   Permitted uses.
   (a)   Uses permitted by right:
   (1)   Agricultural uses, including general farming, pasture, grazing,
outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, forestry, sod farming, and
wild crop harvesting but not agricultural industry.
   (2)   Non-structural industrial and commercial accessory uses, including
loading areas, parking areas, and private airport landing strips.
   (3)   Private and public recreational uses, including, golf courses, tennis
courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps,
swimming areas, parks, playgrounds, greenways, wildlife and nature preserves,
hiking trails, and equestrian trails.
   (4)   Residential non-structural accessory uses.
   (5)   Municipal, county, state and federal government uses, which due to the
nature of the services rendered, must have a specific location, that is stream
gauge station, sewerage pumping/lift station, etc.
   (6)   Essential services 1 and 2, provided that the location, design,
elevation and construction shall be in such a manner as to minimize or
eliminate damage by flooding.
   (b)   Uses permitted with a conditional use permit:
   (1)   Essential services 3.
   (2)   Marinas.
   (c)   Permitted accessory structures and uses: accessory uses permitted in
underlying zoning district(s). (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3059.2   Off-street parking and loading requirements.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be met for all uses as
required by Article F of this chapter. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3059.3   Sign requirements.
   See Article H of this chapter. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3059.4   Dimensional requirements.
   (a)   Minimum lot width: none or as required by underlying zoning district,
whichever is greater. (Minimum frontage on a public street shall be thirty-five
(35) feet.)
   (b)   Minimum building setback: setbacks shall conform with the requirements
of the underlying zoning district(s).
   (c)   Maximum building height: maximum building height shall be in
accordance with the underlying zoning district(s).
   (d)   Minimum lot sizes and maximum lot coverages: lot sizes and coverages
shall meet the underlying zoning district requirements. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord.
of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3060   Special requirements for certain uses.
   Sections
9-3060.01 through
9-3060.07 set forth special requirements for various uses. (Ord. of 12/6/10;
Ord. of 12/3/12)
Section 9-3060.01   Accessory dwellings.
   Accessory dwellings may be created on the same property as a single-family
dwelling as an accessory use, only if such units comply with following limits,
requirements, and conditions.
   (1)   An accessory dwelling must meet all standards of the minimum housing
code for independent living units.
   (2)   The principal use of the lot shall be a single-family dwelling.
Manufactured homes shall not be used as accessory dwellings.
   (3)   No more than one accessory dwelling shall be permitted on a single lot
in conjunction with the principal dwelling unit.
   (4)   The accessory dwelling shall not be served by a driveway separate from
that serving the principal dwelling unless the accessory dwelling is accessed
from a rear alley and the principal dwelling is accessed from a street.
   (5)   A detached accessory dwelling shall be housed in a building not
exceeding six hundred fifty (650) square feet of first floor area (maximum
footprint); the structure may be dwelling only or may combine dwelling with
garage, workshop, studio, or similar use. The accessory dwelling living area
shall not exceed six hundred fifty (650) square feet of floor area.
   (6)   A detached accessory dwelling shall be located in the established rear
yard and meet the setback standards applicable for accessory buildings.
   (7)   The maximum height for an accessory dwelling shall be twenty (20)
feet.
   (8)   An accessory dwelling must be registered with the Planning Director at
the time a certificate of occupancy is obtained. (Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3060.02   Crematory or crematorium.
   Crematory or crematorium are subject to the following requirements:
   (a)   Use: No crematory shall be established except as an accessory use or
structure to a North Carolina licensed funeral home in the B-2 General Business
District.
   (b)   License: Any funeral home operating a crematory shall have and
maintain a licensed crematory manager on staff, keep in force and effect all
other licenses required under the North Carolina Crematory Act, and provide
proof of continued re-licensing.
   (c)   Air Quality: Prior to issuance of a zoning permit, the applicant shall
provide a certification from the North Carolina Division of Air Quality that
the applicant complies with all air quality regulations or that the Division of
Air Quality does not require permit.
   (d)   Building: The maximum footprint of the crematory shall not exceed four
hundred (400) square feet. The exterior/veneer must be of similar material and
design as the principle structure.
   (e)   Size: Crematory operations shall not contain more than one (1)
cremation chamber.
   (f)   Location: No crematory shall be established on a funeral home lot
within two hundred (200) feet of any existing residential dwelling on adjacent
parcels or within 150 feet of any property line.
   (g)   Other: A crematory must comply with and be maintained in compliance
with all applicable public health and environmental laws and rules and meet all
of the standards established by the North Carolina Crematory Act, as amended or
superseded, and any additional rules and regulations issued by the North
Carolina State Board of Funeral Services. (Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3060.03   Day care homes and day care centers.
   All day care homes and day care centers shall meet the following standards:
   (1)   In single family residential districts, day care homes must be clearly
incidental to the residential use of the dwelling and must not change in the
essential residential character of the dwelling.
   (2)   Play space must be provided in accordance with the regulations of the
NC Department of Health and Human Services;
   (3)   The outdoor play space as required by the Department of Health and
Human Services must be enclosed on all sides by building, and/or permitted
types of walls or fences; it may not include driveways, parking areas or land
otherwise unsuited for children’s play space;
   (4)   A day care center shall provide a minimum twenty-five (25) square feet
of indoor space per child;
   (5)   A day care center shall provide a minimum seventy-five (75) square
feet of outdoor space per child;
   (6)   Play space may not be in the established front yard.
   (7)   Fences must comply with the fence regulations in Section
9-3042;
   (8)   Day care centers in a residential district on a site greater than
three (3) acres shall have frontage on a collector or thoroughfare street.
   (9)   A day center must meet a permitted lot type for the district in which
it is to be located.
   (10)   There is no limit on the hours of operation of a day care center, but
no outdoor play shall be permitted after sunset. (Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3060.04   Kennels.
   Kennels are subject to the following requirements:
   (1)   The minimum lot size for a kennel shall be as set forth in the
following:
 
Minimum Lot Size for Kennels
Number of Minimum Lot Size (Acres)
Animals
1 - 10    2
11 - 20   4
21 - 30   6
Notes:
1)   The minimum lot size may be waived by the Planning Department if the
kennel is entirely enclosed as to protect adjacent uses from noise, odors
and other objectionable characteristics.
2)   An additional 10 animals may be added for each additional acre of
land in excess of 6 acres.
 
   (2)   Outdoor kennels shall maintain a minimum setback of four hundred (400)
linear feet from any existing residential structure on an adjoining lot.
   (3)   All structures associated with an outdoor kennel shall maintain a
minimum setback of two hundred (200) feet from all lot lines.
   (4)   Indoor kennels shall maintain a minimum setback of one hundred (100)
linear feet from any residential structure on an adjoining lot.
   (5)   All structures associated with an indoor kennel shall maintain a
minimum setback of fifty (50) feet from all lot lines.
   (6)   The operator shall comply with requirements of the North Carolina
Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, Subchapter 52J (Animal Welfare
Section).
   (7)   The operator shall provide written evidence of compliance with county
and state standards. (Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3060.05   Outdoor seasonal sales.
   Outdoor seasonal sales are subject to the following conditions:
   (1)   Outdoor seasonal sales may be open for eight (8) weeks per calendar
year.
   (2)   The use may be located on a vacant lot or on a lot occupied by a
nonresidential use.
   (3)   Construction of a permanent building is not permitted.
   (4)   Storage of goods in or sale of goods from trailer(s) on the site is
prohibited.
   (5)   Parking may be provided and need not comply with Article F.
   (6)   The use, including all sale items, parking and maneuvering shall
observe a setback line of twenty (20) feet.
   (7)   Sale items shall not be located in the sight distance triangle as set
forth in 9-3038 Visibility at intersections.
   (8)   Any signage shall be in accordance with the sign requirements of the
underlying zoning district.
   (9)   The operator is responsible for the removal of any vestige of the
outdoor sale including signage.
   (10)   The owner of the property shall, if not the same as the outdoor
seasonal sales operator, give written permission for seasonal sales to the
operator.
   (11)   Stands shall be open on two (2) or more sides.
(Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3060.06   Bed and breakfast inns.
   (1)   The operators must be full-time residents of the premises.
   (2)   No more than four (4) bedrooms may be devoted to guest accommodations
   (3)   One non-illuminated sign, maximum of four (4) square feet, is
permitted.
   (4)   Minimum parking spaces required - two (2) spaces plus one (1) space
for each room devoted to guest accommodations. (Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3060.07   Electronic gaming operations.
   Electronic gaming operations are subject to the following requirements:
   (1)   Electronic gaming operations are allowed only in the B-2 General
Business District as a principle use.
Electronic gaming operations are not allowed as an accessory use in any zoning
district.
   (2)   No electronic gaming operation shall be located within one thousand
(1,000) feet of another electronic gaming operation;
   (3)   No electronic gaming operation shall be located within one thousand
(1,000) feet of any residential district, nursing home, retirement home,
church, child care center, school, park or playground.
   (4)   All distances related to electronic gaming operations shall be
measured as follows:
   a.   The distance for the separation from residential zoning districts and
protected uses shall be measured from the closest edge of the building in which
an electronic gaming operation is located to the nearest residential zoning
district or to the property line of each protected use.
   b.   The distance for separation between electronic gaming operations shall
be measured from the closest edges of the buildings in which an electronic
gaming operation is located.
   (5)   Any location for electronic gaming operations must meet the parking
requirement of the B-2 General Business District.
   (6)   Each electronic gaming operation shall have all required permits and
licenses and shall have paid all applicable fees set forth in the Town's fee
schedule. (Amendment of 12/3/12)
Section 9-3060.08   Artisan food and beverage producer.
   Artisan food and beverage producers are subject to the following
requirements:
   (1)   The total floor area shall not exceed four thousand (4,000) square
feet. The four thousand (4,000) square foot limitation is not applicable to the
M-1 Manufacturing District.
   (2)   Shall include a tasting room/tap room and may also include other
accessory uses such as a restaurant, retail, demonstration, education and
training areas or other use incidental to the artisan food and beverage
producer.
   (3)   All activities associated with the production, bottling, storage, and
sales shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure. No outdoor
storage of any kind, including but not limited to, raw materials, byproducts,
equipment and inventory shall be permitted.
   (4)   Must comply with all state and federal alcohol and beverage laws,
including G.S. Chapter 18B.
   (5)   A buffer, as outlined in Section
9-3046, is required where such use is adjacent to a residentially zoned area.
   (6)   Must comply with all other standards of the zoning district having
jurisdiction.
   (7)   Conditions within the building shall be controlled to minimize noise
and odor. (Ord. of 12/1/14; Ord. 3/3/16)
Section 9-3060.09   Restaurants in O-I District.
   Restaurants in the O-I District are subject to the following requirements:
   (1)   Outdoor storage of goods and materials used in assembly, fabrication,
or processing is prohibited.
   (2)   A buffer, as outlined in Section
9-3046, is required where such use is adjacent to a residentially zoned area.
   (3)   Must comply with all state and federal alcohol laws.
   (4)   Must comply with all other standards of the zoning district having
jurisdiction. (Ord. of 12/1/14)
Section 9-3060.10   Detached garages.
   (a)   General requirements: Shall apply to all detached garages located in
front or side yards.
   (1)   Garage shall not be used as a dwelling unit.
   (2)   Garage must meet all minimum setback requirements for the primary
structure in the applicable zoning district.
   (3)   The maximum wall height shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet.
   (4)   The footprint of any detached garage shall not exceed six hundred
seventy-six (676) square feet, or ten percent (10%) of the lot area up to one
thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet, whichever is greater.
   (5)   Garage shall be enclosed with an operable garage door to be maintained
in good working order.
   (6)   If garage door is on the front façade, the door shall be kept closed
when the house is unoccupied for more than a day.
   (7)   The outside walls of the garage shall not be clad with metal siding,
and the building shall be completely enclosed.
   (8)   Garage shall be constructed of materials similar to materials used in
the principal structure.
   (9)   A breezeway connection between a single- family dwelling and detached
garage is allowed provided the following design standards are met:
   a.   The breezeway must be physically attached to both buildings.
   b.   The breezeway must be at least six (6) feet in width and can be no more
than thirty (30) feet in length.
   c.   The breezeway must consist of a roof, with more than sixty percent
(60%) of the total perimeter enclosed by walls, doors or windows.
   d.   The breezeway height shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet, measured from
the average grade to the highest part of the structure.
   e.   Walkways are not permitted on the roof of a breezeway.
   (b)   Conditional use requirements:
   (1)   Proposed location of garage is completely or partially within front
yard.
   (2)   The materials used in the construction must meet or exceed the quality
and appearance of the principal residence.
   (3)   Shall only be considered for placement in the front yard when the
topography or other natural features make it impractical to locate the garage
in the side or rear yard.
   (4)   A minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of the principal structure
shall be visible from all viewpoints along the front property line.
   (5)   Shall only be allowed in a residential lot that has a natural ground
slope of twenty-five (25) degrees or greater, as measured from the center of
the front lot line to the center of the front facade of the principal building,
or in a residential lot where the only feasible driveway route to the principal
building would result in the driveway slope being greater than eighteen (18)
degrees due to topography and/or natural obstructions.
   (6)   The garage will not adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of
persons residing in the neighborhood and will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to property or public improvements in the neighborhood.
(Ord. of 6/29/15)
Section 9-3061   Animal keeping.
   (a)   Purpose and definitions.
   (1)   The purpose of this section is to regulate the keeping of a horse,
mule, goat, cattle, fowl and other birds that are not part of a bona fide
farming operation. The ordinance applies to properties located within the
corporate limits of the Town.
   (2)   "Fowl" and "birds" include the following: chickens, game hens, ducks,
swans, geese and other birds typically used as food. This definition for the
purpose of animal keeping does not include parrots, parakeets, and other non-
food birds.
   (b)   Prohibitions.
   (1)   Horses, mules, goats, cattle, all other types of livestock, fowl and
other birds shall not be permitted within the Town limits, except as provided
in Subsection (c) - Exceptions.
   (c)   Exceptions:
   (1)   Horses.
   a.   The keeping of horses is permitted provided the following conditions
are met:
   1.   Allowed only in the R-12 Residential Zoning District.
   2.   Minimum of three (3) acres of property is available for each horse
   3.   The part of the property where the horse is kept shall be completely
enclosed by fence.
   (2)   Chickens.
   a.   The keeping of chickens is permitted in the R-8, R-12, and R-12-
A Residential Districts, provided the following conditions are met:
   1.   Maximum number of chickens on the property - ten (10).
   2.   No roosters are allowed.
   3.   Placement of the pen shall be in the rear yard only.
   4.   No free range (chickens are penned all times).
   5.   Pens shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from all adjoining
residences.
   6.   Pens shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from all property lines.
   7.   Must comply with all applicable provisions of the Valdese Animal Code
(ex. cleanliness, odor).
   (d)   Keeping domestic pets. In all zones where dwelling units are allowed,
domestic animals are allowed to be kept as household pets. Up to an aggregate
of six (6) domestic animals per dwelling unit is permitted subject to
restrictions set forth in Sections 8.2008 through
8-2012, and Section
8-2022 of the Valdese Code of Ordinance. Birds (canary, parakeet, etc.);
amphibian/reptile (turtle, lizard, etc.); rodent (rat, hamster, gerbil, etc.);
and tropical fish are excluded from the numerical limitations. (Ord. of 4/4/16)
Section 9-3062 through section 9-3070 reserved.
ARTICLE F
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Section 9-3071   Parking space to be required and permanent.
   (a)   Off-street parking space shall be provided in accordance with this
Article in all districts, except the B-1 Central Business District, the
function of which makes it impractical to impose such requirements.
   (b)   The off-street parking space required by this division shall be
permanent space and shall not be used for any other purpose.
   (c)   Each parking space shall be:
   (1)   Angle parking: thirty (30) degree, forty-five (45) degree, sixty (60)
degree or ninety (90) degree: minimum nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet; or
   (2)   Parallel parking: minimum seven (7) feet by twenty-two (22) feet. On
State maintained roads, an eleven (11) foot lane width is recommended.
   (3)   The parking standards are for one vehicle, exclusive of adequate
egress and ingress, drives, maneuvering space and landscaping.
   (d)   Minimum aisle widths shall be according to the angle of parking as
follows:
 
Angle of Parking Minimum Width of Aisle
0 (parallel)     12 feet
30               12 feet
45)              12 feet
60               16 feet
90               24 feet
 
   (e)   Off-street parking spaces shall not be located in such a manner that
parked cars will extend onto a public street or sidewalk.
   (f)   Off-street parking areas shall not be permitted within the front yard
in the B-1 Zoning District.
   (g)   Off-street parking areas shall be setback at least ten (10) feet from
any public street.
   (h)   Required off-street parking spaces for any use shall be located no
more than four hundred (400) feet from the use they are intended to serve. This
standard does not apply to parking spaces for auditoriums, stadiums, assembly
halls, gymnasiums, hospitals and other places of assembly. (Ord. of 1/10/05;
Ord. of 6/5/06; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3072   Use of parking lots permitted.
   (a)   The required parking spaces for any number of separate uses may be
combined in one lot but the required space assigned to one use may not be
assigned to another use at the same time, except that one-half (½) of the
parking space required for churches, theaters, or assembly halls whose peak
attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use which will
be closed at nights or on Sundays.
   (b)   No portion of any street right-of-way shall be considered as
fulfilling or partially fulfilling the area requirements for off-street parking
required by the terms of this chapter.
   (c)   Parking in one zoning district in connection with the principle use in
another zoning district is permitted so long as all requirements of Article F,
Off- Street Parking are met.
   (d)   If parking areas are lighted, the lighting fixtures shall be so
installed as to protect the street and neighboring properties from direct glare
or hazardous interference of any kind. Light standards shall not exceed thirty
(30) feet in height and the light direction angle shall not exceed forty-five
(45) degrees from vertical. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 6/5/06; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3073   Enforcement.
   (a)   Each application for a zoning permit or certificate of occupancy shall
include information as to the location and dimensions of off-street parking
space and the means of ingress and egress between such space and a street. This
information shall be in sufficient detail to enable the Zoning Enforcement
Officer to determine whether or not the requirements of this chapter are met.
   (b)   The certificate of occupancy of the use of any structure or land where
off-street parking space is required shall be withheld by the zoning
enforcement officer until the provisions of this chapter are fully met. If at
any time such compliance ceases, any certificate of occupancy which has been
issued for the use of the property shall immediately become void and of no
effect. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 6/5/06; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3074   Schedule of parking spaces.
   Off-street parking spaces shall be provided and permanently maintained by
the owners and occupants of the following types of property uses as follows:
 
Use Classification Parking Space Requirement
Residential                           2 spaces for each dwelling unit
Commercial                            1 space for each 500 square feet of gross
                                      floor area
Industrial                            1space for each 500 square feet of gross
                                      floor area
Office                                1 space for each 500 square feet of gross
                                      floor area
Warehouse                             1 space for each 4,000 square feet of
                                      gross floor area
Civic (that is, churches, fraternal   1 space for each 500 square feet of gross
organizations, etc.)                  floor area
High schools or colleges and          1 space for each 10 fixed seats and 1
universities campuses (auditoriums,   space for each 10 moveable seats in the
stadiums, gymnasiums, assembly halls) largest assembly area
 
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 6/5/06; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3075   Required loading and unloading.
   (a)   Every building or structure used for business, trade, or industry
hereafter erected shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading and
unloading of vehicles off the street or public right-of-way. Such space shall
have access to an alley or street. For the purposes of this section, an off-
street loading space shall have a minimum dimension of twelve (12) feet by
forty (40) feet and overhead clearance of fourteen (14) feet in height above
the alley or street grade.
   (b)   Off-street loading and unloading shall be permanently maintained by
the owners and occupants of the following types of property uses on the basis
indicated:
   (1)   Retail operations: One (1) loading space for each five thousand
(5,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.
   (2)   Wholesale and industrial operations: One (1) loading space for each
ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3076   Parking lot design requirements.
   Off-street parking areas should be designed to create a safe and comfortable
passage for the pedestrians. All off-street parking lots, including exits,
entrances, drives and parking areas shall:
   (a)   Be designed to allow for traffic movement in accordance with generally
accepted geometric design principles.
   (b)   Have physical access to a public street.
   (c)   Be so designed that storm water runoff from the parking area does not
create erosion, flooding, or other nuisance condition or hazard, on the parking
area property or on adjoining properties or roadways. Wherever practicable,
runoff shall be directed into existing storm water conveyances, such as
ditches, curbs, and storm sewers. In no case shall runoff be directed onto
adjoining properties in locations that previously did not receive runoff.
   (d)   Off-street parking areas, loading, egress and ingress, and maneuvering
space shall be paved with asphalt or concrete. Any parking area not paved at
the time of adoption of this ordinance shall be allowed to continue as such
until an expansion of the building or parking area occurs. At such time, the
parking area must be paved and meet current landscaping requirements.
   (e)   Be maintained as long as the use which it serves exist. Each parking
space shall be marked and maintained.
   (f)   Unless otherwise required by these regulations, all off-street parking
with more than ten (10) automotive vehicles that adjoins any plot zoned or used
for single family residential purposes, shall be screened with landscaped
devices in accordance with 9-3077.5 to protect residences from light, glare,
noise and fumes.
(Ord. of 6/5/06; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3077   Landscaping of parking area.
   (a)   The landscaping requirements of this section shall apply to land,
public and private, designated as multi-family, recreational, institutional,
industrial or commercial land uses, which is required to have or provide forty
(40) or more parking spaces. All those multi-family, recreational,
institutional, industrial and commercial land uses which are required to have
one (1) to thirty-nine (39) spaces must comply with the street yard
requirements only. All parking areas, regardless of size shall meet buffer
requirements outlined in Section
9-3077(5).
   (b)   Requirements and specifications:
   (1)   Parking area landscaping requirements of this section are as follows:
   a.   Landscaping shall be placed in a manner which meets the intent of this
chapter and shall be maintained.
   b.   Any fraction of requirements shall be rounded up to the next whole
number.
   c.   Landscaping shall not obstruct the view of motorists using any street,
private driveway, parking aisles or the approach to any street intersection so
as to constitute a traffic hazard.
   d.   Credit for using existing trees on site greater than or equal to those
required by standards shall be two (2) trees for every one (1) tree retained.
   e.   When using an existing tree, the area under the dripline (maximum
extension of branches) of the tree must remain undisturbed. This includes
grading, fill, paving, etc.
   f.   If an existing tree dies, it must be replaced with two (2) trees during
the next planting season.
   g.   If any vegetation dies, replacement is required within the next
planting season.
   (2)   Landscaping requirements for interior areas of parking areas:
(Interior areas are defined as the areas within the property used for vehicular
storage, parking or movement).
   a.   Landscaped planting areas are to be located within or adjacent to the
parking area as tree islands, at the end of parking bays, inside medians, or
between rows of cars.
   b.   There shall be one (1) large shade tree for every two thousand (2,000)
square feet of total parking area.
   c.   There shall be one shrub for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of
total parking area. Shrubs must be eighteen (18) inches tall at planting and
reach a minimum height of thirty (30) inches in three (3) years.
   d.   All trees and shrubs are to be planted within a landscaped planting
area not less than one hundred sixty- two (162) square feet in area.
   e.   No vehicular parking space shall be further than fifty (50) feet from a
planting area.
   f.   No more than fifty percent (50%) of the trees and/or shrubs shall be
deciduous.
   (3)   Landscaping requirements for street yards of parking areas: (Street
yards are defined as the area between the public right-of-way and interior
area).
   a.   Street yards are required to be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width.
   b.   One (1) large shade tree is required every fifty (50) feet or one (1)
small tree is required every twenty- five (25) feet along the street frontage.
   c.   Shrub beds (fifty (50) square feet minimum and a minimum of ten (10)
shrubs per shrub bed) are required every forty (40) feet along the street
frontage. Berms may be used instead of shrubs with the following stipulations:
   1.   Berms must be the required height of shrubs with no more than a 3:
1 slope;
   2.   Shorter shrubs may be used in combination with berms as long as the
required total height is met;
   3.   Berms must be capped or topped with groundcover vegetation;
   4.   Berms shall be grassed;
   5.   Berms must occupy sixty percent (60%) of the frontage area;
   6.   Fences may be used in combination with berms as long as the fence is
compatible in materials and color to the building and is not more than forty
percent (40%) of the required height.
   (4)   Tree and shrub specifications:
   a.   "Tree" as used herein means any tree, evergreen or deciduous, whose
mature height of its species can be expected to exceed fifteen (15) feet for a
small tree and thirty-five (35) feet for a large tree (except in cases where
this would require the planting of incompatible species with the surrounding
environment, such as overhead utility lines, then acceptable species may be
used). The tree, existing or planted, shall be at least eight (8) feet in
height and six and one-quarter (6-1/4) inches in circumference (two (2) inches
in diameter) measured at one-half (1/2) foot above grade for newly planted
trees and measured at four (4) feet above grade for existing trees.
   b.   Each shrub shall attain a minimum of thirty (30) inches in height
within three (3) years of planting. All shrubs shall be a minimum of eighteen
(18) inches tall when planted. All shrubs planted on berms may have lesser
height provided the combined height of the berm and plantings after three (3)
years is at least thirty (30) inches in height.
   (5)   Abutting property landscaping requirements:
   a.   Any non-residential use located or developed on property abutting any
residential district, unless separated by a public street or rail right-of-way,
shall provide landscaping as outlined in Sections
9-3046,
9-3046.1 and
9-3046.2 Buffers. Landscaping shall be provided even if the abutting
residentially zoned property is vacant. A buffer shall be provided along the
full length of any common property line and shall be maintained as long as the
conditions requiring the screening exist.
   b.   Screening for any parking area regardless of use or zoning district
shall meet the requirements of Sections
9-3046,
9-3046.1, and
9-3046.2. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 6/5/06; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3078   Dumpsters/trash containers.
   Dumpsters and trash containers shall meet all the requirements of the solid
waste ordinance (Part 4, Chapter 2 of this code) as adopted by the town. (Ord.
of 1/10/05; Ord. of 6/5/06; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3079   Compliance with stormwater and erosion control standards.
   Parking areas constructed or improved under this article shall comply with
all applicable stormwater and erosion control standards adopted by the town.
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 6/5/06; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3080   reserved.
ARTICLE G
Manufactured Homes and Manufactured Home Parks
Section 9-3081   General provisions.
   Because of the use, transportability, and manner of construction of
manufactured homes and because of the susceptibility of the manufactured homes
for use in high density concentrations, it is necessary to regulate
manufactured homes and manufactured home parks to ensure that their occupants
have access to an appropriate, safe, sanitary and attractive living
environment. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3082   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this article, a “manufactured home” and “manufactured
home park” are defined as follows:
   (a)   Manufactured home: A structure designed for living or sleeping
purposes, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities.
   (1)   Class A Manufactured Home (multi- section/double-wide). A manufactured
home that meets or exceeds the construction standards established by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development that were in effect at the time of
construction and is a multi-section unit.
   (2)   Class B Manufactured Home (single-wide). Class B single-wide
manufactured home that meets or exceeds the construction standards established
by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development that were in effect at
the time of construction and is a single-wide unit.
   (b)   Manufactured home park: Any existing lot or parcel on which two (2) or
more manufactured homes are used, leased or rented or intended to be used,
leased or rented for occupancy. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3083   Location of manufactured homes.
   (a)   After the effective date of this chapter, no manufactured home shall
be permitted in any district for any use other than living or sleeping
purposes.
   (b)   Manufactured homes are permitted only in the R-8 District, and must
comply with each of the following:
   (1)   Individual manufactured homes are allowed by right in the R-
8 Residential District, provided they meet the minimum lot and setback
requirements of that district, and are placed on a permanent foundation.
   (2)   One (1) manufactured home may be parked or temporarily stored on any
lot outside of a manufactured home park for a period not exceeding seventy-two
(72) hours, provided no living quarters are maintained nor any business
conducted therein while such manufactured home is so parked or temporarily
stored.
   (3)   A temporary building, structure, including construction trailers for
office use are permitted in conjunction with any permitted construction;
provided permits for such use shall be issued for periods not to exceed twelve
(12) months but may be renewed for additional periods up to six (6) months if
necessary for the completion of the construction in any zoning district.
   (4)   Existing manufactured homes shall not be replaced with another
manufactured home unless it is located in the R-8 District. Class B
manufactured homes shall not replace existing manufactured homes. Manufactured
homes in the R-8 District may be replaced only by Class A manufactured homes.
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3084   Provisions for manufactured homes.
   (a)   Class B manufactured homes shall not be permitted in the town.
   (b)   Class A manufactured homes shall be permitted only in the R-
8 District. Only one Class A manufactured home shall be permitted on a lot
unless it replaces an existing manufactured home in a manufactured home park.
   (c)   Manufactured homes shall be subject to the following requirements:
   (1)   If municipal utilities are not available, the well (if applicable) and
septic tank (if applicable) must be approved by the Burke County Health
Department.
   (2)   Class A manufactured homes shall contain at least one thousand, one
hundred fifty (1,150) square feet of enclosed and heated living area.
   (3)   The pitch of the manufactured home roof shall have a minimum vertical
rise of at least three (3) feet for each twelve (12) feet of horizontal run,
and the roof shall be finished with a type of shingle that is commonly used in
standard residential construction. The roof shall be the original roof of the
structure as installed by the manufacturer.
   (4)   The exterior siding, for all manufactured homes, shall consist
predominantly of vinyl or aluminum horizontal lap siding (whose reflectively
does not exceed that of gloss white paint), wood or hardboard; and the exterior
siding shall be comparable in composition, appearance and durability to the
exterior siding commonly used in standard residential construction.
   (5)   Manufactured homes shall have at the front entrance either a deck or
porch with steps. All other entrances shall have permanent steps. The minimum
area for decks and porches shall be 100 square feet. Decks, porches and steps
must be built in compliance with the North Carolina Building Code.
   (6)   All manufactured homes shall be placed with the front of the home
running parallel to the street that provides access to manufactured home. On
cul-de-sacs, manufactured homes shall be sited with the front of the home
running parallel to the street providing access. Manufactured homes placed in
manufactured home parks may be placed perpendicular to interior private
streets.
   (7)   Manufactured homes shall have the entire perimeter of the home
enclosed from the ground to the bottom of the structure in compliance with the
following requirements:
   a.   The underpinning must consist of brick, masonry, or concrete block with
a stucco finish.
   b.   Products and materials manufactured for the purpose of underpinning
shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications.
   c.   The underskirting shall be vented in accordance with the North Carolina
Building Code.
   d.   The underskirting must be installed within thirty (30) days after the
final inspection date by the Burke County Building Inspections.
   (8)   The manufactured home’s footings shall meet the requirements set forth
in the North Carolina Building Code.
   (9)   The towing tongue, wheels, axles and transporting lights shall be
removed upon final placement of the manufactured home. If the tongue cannot be
removed, it must be underpinned and screened with shrubbery.
   (10)   The manufactured home shall have been constructed within ten (10)
years of the date of the permit application. Proof of the age of the home such
as a bill of sale, title, or certified appraisal must be provided at the time
the zoning permit is issued. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3085   Provisions for existing manufactured home parks.
   (a)   The creation of manufactured home parks after the adoption of this
chapter is not allowed in the town. Existing manufactured home parks at the
time of adoption of this chapter may remain subject to the requirements of this
section, but neither the size of the parcel on which the existing manufactured
home park is located nor the number of manufactured homes located in the
manufactured home park shall be increased.
   (b)   In manufactured home parks, manufactured homes may be replaced within
one hundred eighty (180) days of removal of the home by only Class A
manufactured homes that meet the provisions of Section
9-3084 and other applicable provisions.
   (c)   Manufactured homes, because of their use, transportability,
manufacture and manner of construction, location and susceptibility for use in
high density concentration both as units and persons, tend to place inhabitants
of manufactured homes in an unfavorable position to obtain services necessary
for a safe and healthful living environment. It is the purpose of this section
to provide protection for the public against unwise and hazardous existing
manufactured home parks and provide a reasonably safe and sound environment for
manufactured home park inhabitants and to:
   (1)   Promote public health, safety, welfare and orderly residential
development;
   (2)   Ensure that every individual manufactured home lot (stand) has safe
and efficient vehicular access for residents of the home, emergency vehicles,
utility and service vehicles and others needing access to the park;
   (3)   Provide adequate buffering and screening to ensure privacy and
protection for both the residents in the park and adjacent property owners;
   (4)   Provide sufficient open space for outdoor uses essential to the
manufactured home;
   (5)   Ensure the furnishing of adequate water supply and sewage disposal
systems;
   (6)   Provide an acceptable environment for small communities of
manufactured homes; and
   (7)   Provide a process by which existing manufactured home parks will be
improved to meet the minimum level of safety, sanitation, comfort and privacy.
   (d)   All persons operating a manufactured home park that existed at the
time of adoption of this chapter, must submit an improvement proposal for the
park (as provided herein) to be reviewed by the Planning Board and approved by
the Town Council. Upon approval of the improvement proposal by the Town
Council, alterations to the park as required may begin. The proposal shall
indicate the manner in which the requirements listed herein will be met.
   (1)   Phased schedule for improvements. The improvement proposal shall
conform to the improvement requirements listed herein within the following
phased time schedule.
   a.   Within six (6) months of notification, the property owner shall submit
and have approved an improvement proposal, including schematic plans, for
upgrading the park.
   b.   Within one (1) year of adoption of this chapter, all roads shall be
stabilized with packed gravel if not already paved.
   c.   Within three (3) years of adoption of this chapter, all other
requirements listed herein shall be complied with, including the paving of
roads
   (2)   Contents of the improvement proposal. Application to improve and
upgrade a manufactured home park shall be made to the Planning Director. The
application shall consist of schematic plans and documentation that include at
least the following:
   a.   Name of the manufactured home park, name and address of owner and
operator.
   b.   A manufactured home park design drawn onto a plat at a scale that can
be reasonably interpreted by the town.
   c.   Date, north arrow, and scale.
   d.   Boundaries of the manufactured home park property to include
intersections and adjacent property with the boundaries of the manufactured
home park property.
   e.   The location of the following utilities: sanitary sewers, storm sewers,
water distribution lines, natural gas, telephone and electric service,
illustrating connections to existing systems. Plans for the continued water
supply and/or sewage disposal must be accompanied by letters of approval by
appropriate Town, County and State authorities.
   f.   Existing streets in the park, right-of-way and proposed pavement
widths. If any street is proposed to intersect with a state maintained road,
the plat shall be accompanied by an application for driveway approval if
required by the North Carolina Department of Transportation.
   g.   Outline of all existing home spaces and buildings within the
manufactured home park property with lot numbers indicated.
   h.   Location of parking bays, walkways, service and accessory buildings,
utility easements, utility poles, and buffer and screening areas.
   i.   Method of sewage disposal in accordance with existing town, county and
state regulations.
   j.   Method of water supply in accordance with existing town, county and
state regulations.
   k.   Plan of electric lighting.
   l.   Development standards.
   (3)   Required improvements. The following improvements to the manufactured
home parks shall be completed within three (3) years of the date of adoption of
this chapter:
   a.   All manufactured homes that are placed in manufactured home parks shall
have the entire perimeter of each home enclosed from the ground to the bottom
of the structure with material manufactured for this purpose in accordance with
standards set by the state regulations for manufactured/mobile homes. Examples
of commonly recognized building materials suitable for use as underpinning
shall include, but not be limited to, the following list: brick masonry,
concrete block masonry covered with stucco; natural or synthetic stone masonry;
or vinyl. Assemblies, products and materials manufactured expressly for the
purpose of underpinning shall be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer’s specifications.
   b.   A densely planted buffer strip consisting of evergreen trees, at least
three (3) feet in height at planting, shall be planted along the rear and side
property lines of the manufactured home park. No such buffer shall extend into
a street right-of-way. The park owner and operator shall be responsible for
replacing dead or destroyed trees.
   c.   Each home space of the manufactured home park shall be at least eight
thousand (8,000) square feet. Areas used for interior streets shall not be used
in calculating the required minimum area for each home.
   d.   All manufactured homes manufactured prior to July 15, 1976 shall be
removed from the manufactured home park.
   e.   A minimum distance of twenty (20) feet shall be provided between each
manufactured home.
   f.   Manufactured homes shall have at the front entrance either a deck or
porch with steps. All other entrances shall have permanent steps. The minimum
area for decks and porches shall be one hundred (100) square feet. Decks,
porches, and steps must be built in compliance with the North Carolina Building
Code.
   g.   All interior streets shall be paved according to North Carolina
Department of Transportation specifications for a public street.
   h.   A paved turning circle shall be provided at the end of each dead end
street. The diameter of the paved area shall be at least eighty (80) feet.
   i.   Two (2) paved parking spaces shall be provided for each manufactured
home. Each parking space shall have a length of eighteen (18) feet and a width
of nine (9) feet.
   j.   An identification sign stating the name and address of the manufactured
home park shall be erected at the main entrance. Such sign shall not exceed
sixteen (16) square feet in surface area.
   k.   The owner or operator shall display house or lot numbers for each home
in the park. The house or lot number may be attached to the home or posted at
the front of the home. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3086 through section 9-3090 reserved.
ARTICLE H
Sign Regulations
Section 9-3091   Purpose.
   The purpose of this section is:
   (a)   To maintain public safety and traffic safety by ensuring that signs
are properly designed, constructed, installed, and maintained;
   (b)   To minimize the distractions and obstruction of view that contribute
to traffic hazards and endanger public safety;
   (c)   To protect existing development and promote high standards of quality
in new development by encouraging appropriately designed, placed, and sized
signage;
   (d)   To permit the effective use of signs as a means of commercial and
noncommercial communication without dominating the visual appearance of the
areas in which they are located; and
   (e)   To minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and
private property. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10; Ord. of 10/5/15)
Section 9-3092   Applicability.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to
construct, enlarge, move or replace any sign or cause the same to be done,
without first obtaining a sign permit for such sign from the town.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the above, changing or replacing the permanent copy on
an existing lawful sign shall not require a permit, provided the copy change
does not change the nature of the sign so as to render it in violation of this
chapter. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10; Ord. of 10/5/15)
Section 9-3093   General provisions.
   The following provisions shall apply to all signs:
   (a)   Construction standards. All signs shall be constructed and installed
in accordance with the applicable provisions of the North Carolina State
Building Code.
   (b)   Electrical standards. All illuminated signs shall be installed in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the North Carolina State
Electrical Code and all detached signs shall be illuminated by an underground
electrical source.
   (c)   Maintenance of signs. All signs shall be maintained in good structural
and aesthetic condition. Deficiencies such as chipped paint, broken plastic,
missing letters and exposed light bulbs shall be evidence of a lack of
maintenance.
   (d)   Content. Content of message, commercial or non-commercial, is not
regulated by this chapter.
   (e)   Obstruction. No sign shall be placed so as to obstruct the clear sight
triangle at a street intersection. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3094   District classification.
   For purposes of this article, zoning districts are classified as follows:
 
R-12 (Residential)         Residential
R-12A (Residential)        Residential
R-8 (Residential)          Residential
FP (Floodplain Overlay)    Mixed Use
O-I (Office-Institutional) Mixed Use
B-1 (Central Business)     Mixed Use
B-2 (General Business)     Commercial
M-1 (Manufacturing)        Commercial
 
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3095   Sign types.
   Sign types are defined as follows:
   (a)   Wall mounted signs. One or a combination of the wall sign types below
may be used on a building. Wall sign area is the total of the square footage of
all wall signs associated with a business or structure.
   (1)   A flush wall sign is mounted or applied directly to the building wall,
generally on the fascia. It may in no instance extend above the parapet; in the
residential and mixed use districts, it must be located below the parapet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/adeb133b442280ad8bc3431317823f426b5e2f33/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2869.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/adeb133b442280ad8bc3431317823f426b5e2f33/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2871.png]
   (2)   A hanging sign is also a wall sign. A hanging sign is suspended from a
simple bracket attached to a building wall and requires nine (9) or more feet
of vertical clearance from the ground. It is most appropriately used along
pedestrian-oriented streets to identify attached or closely spaced shops,
restaurants, and service businesses. Only one hanging sign is permitted per
building or business bay (in a multi-tenant building). The sign face area does
not include the area of the bracket. A hanging sign may project no more than
five (5) feet from the building wall. It may project up to five (5) feet over a
sidewalk in a town maintained right-of-way (or state right-of-way if
permitted). However, in any case the sign shall not be closer than three (3)
feet to a power or other utility line or the outside edge of street pavement.
   (3)   A canopy or awning sign is sign copy applied directly onto a canopy or
awning.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/adeb133b442280ad8bc3431317823f426b5e2f33/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2873.png]
   (b)   Ground mounted signs. Ground mounted signs are defined as follows:
   (1)   A monument sign is mounted generally flush with the ground plane. It
may not be mounted on a pole or pylon, nor raised by mounting on a man-made
berm, wall, or similar structure. Supporting elements may not exceed three (3)
feet in height and are included in measurement of sign height. All signs shall
be set back at least ten (10) feet from any property or right-of-way line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/adeb133b442280ad8bc3431317823f426b5e2f33/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2875.png]
   (2)   A raised sign may hang from a pole and beam frame as illustrated
below, or be placed within a frame mounted on up to two supporting poles. All
signs shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from any property or right-of-
way line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/adeb133b442280ad8bc3431317823f426b5e2f33/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2877.png]
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10; Ord. of 10/5/15)
Section 9-3096   Sign measurement.
   (a)   Sign face area: the area within a single, continuous perimeter
enclosing the characters, lettering, logos, illustrations, and ornamentation,
together with any material or color forming an integral part of the display or
used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed.
   (b)   Sign height: the distance from the ground plane beneath the sign to
the highest point of the sign’s frame. Ornamentation atop signs, such as small
caps and spires, are not included in the height measurement. (Ord. of 1/10/05;
Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3097   Permanent on-premise signs requiring a permit.
Section 9-3097.1   On-premise signs.
   On-premise signs are allowed, as indicated in the chart below:
 
                                                                                  ANY BUILDING TYPE IN A MIXED USE DISTRICT EXCEPT A SINGLE-FAMILY HOUSE  (B-1,
                                                                                  O-I, FP)
INSTITUTIONAL FACILITIES IN ANY DISTRICT                                          Wall Mounted Sign
Wall Mounted Sign                                                                 For single-story buildings, 1 square foot of sign surface area for every linear
1 square foot of sign surface area for every linear foot of building frontage up  foot of building frontage up to a maximum of 50 square feet
to a maximum of 75 square feet                                                    For multi-story buildings, 1.5 square feet of sign surface area for every
Ground Mounted Sign                                                               linear foot of building frontage up to a maximum of 75 square feet
(only monument style permitted)                                                   Ground Mounted Sign
Maximum number: 1 per street front                                                (only monument style permitted in B-1)
Maximum area: 50 square feet                                                      Maximum number: 1 per street front
Maximum height: 10 feet                                                           Maximum area: 32 square feet
Setback: Must be setback at least 10 feet from any right-of-way or property line. Maximum height: 8 feet
For the purpose of this section, institutional facilities include public schools, Setback: must be setback at least 10 feet from any right-of-way or property
libraries, and buildings operated by the Town of Valdese.                         line.
                                                                                  Note: Ground mounted signs are not permitted in the B-1 Central Business
                                                                                  District
   ANY BUILDING TYPE IN A COMMERCIAL DISTRICT EXCEPT SINGLE-FAMILY HOUSE (B-2, M-
1)
Wall Mounted Sign
1 wall sign shall be permitted for each principal building frontage or storefront
of an individual bay or store. Wall signs shall be limited to 1 square foot per   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ENTRANCE SIGN
linear foot of principal building front facade, not to exceed 120 square feet fro Maximum number:   1 per street front;
any single sign. Each secondary business is allowed secondary business sign       2 sign faces may be used with a wall, fence, or other architectural entrance
(defined in Section                                                               feature
9-3106), up to a maximum area of 60 square feet. Notwithstanding the above, the   Maximum area:    24 square feet
total area of all wall mounted signs shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the    Maximum height:   8 feet
applicable wall face area.                                                        (permitted for all-residential, mixed use, and  non-residential projects of 10
Ground Mounted Sign                                                               acres or more)
(only monument style permitted)                                                   Limited to name and/or logo
Maximum number: 1 per street front
Maximum area: 50 square feet
Maximum height: 12 feet
Setback: must be setback at least ten (10) feet from any right-of-way or property
line.
 
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10; Ord. of 10/5/15)
Section 9-3097.2   Permanent off-premise signs limited to non-commercial public
service directional signs.
   (a)   For the purpose of directing the public-at-large to non-commercial
community facilities of general interest, permanent off-premise directional
signs may be erected in addition to signs otherwise permitted in these
regulations.
   (b)   Non-commercial public service directional signs are permitted subject
to the following standards:
   (1)   The community facility is open to the general public and operated by a
non-commercial civic, charitable, religious, community, or similar
organization.
   (2)   No more than two (2) directional signs shall be erected for each
facility.
   (3)   Signs may not exceed four (4) square feet in area or five (5) feet in
height.
   (4)   Signs may be placed no more than one mile from the subject property.
   (5)   Along state roads, such signs shall be located outside of the right-
of-way or farther than eleven (11) feet from the edge of any public street,
whichever distance from edge of pavement is greater; signs shall not violate
the sight distance triangle requirements of this chapter.
   (6)   Along town maintained roads, such signs shall be located outside of
the right-of-way or farther than eleven (11) feet from the edge of any public
street, whichever distance from edge of pavement is greater; signs shall not
violate the sight distance triangle requirements of this chapter.
   (7)   No sign shall be placed on private property without the written
consent of the property owner on the permit application.
   (8)   Every non-commercial public service directional sign shall be
separated by a distance of four hundred (400) feet from any other such sign on
the same side of the street, and by a distance of two hundred (200) feet from
any other such sign on the opposite side of a street. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of
12/6/10)
Section 9-3097.3   Subdivision, multi-family, and manufactured home park signs.
   At any entrance to a residential subdivision, multi- family development or
manufactured home park, a maximum of two (2) signs identifying the subdivision,
development or park are permitted. The sign face area of each sign shall not
exceed sixteen (16) square feet. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3097.4   Electronic message signs.
   Electronic message signs are permitted as a component of otherwise permitted
on premise signage subject to the following regulations:
   (a)   Electronic message signs are prohibited in all zoning districts,
unless used in connection with the local government or public school
facilities.
   (b)   Graphic images are prohibited.
   (c)   Each message on the sign must be displayed for a minimum of eight (8)
seconds.
   (d)   The message must be complete during the duration of the display,
without continuation in content to the next image. Transitions from one (1)
static message to the next shall appear instantaneous without the appearance of
movement of any kind.
   (e)   Such displays shall contain static messages only, and shall not have
movement, or the appearance or optical illusion of movement, of any part of the
sign structure, design, or pictorial segment of the sign, including the
movement or appearance of movement of any illumination or the flashing,
scintillating or varying of light intensity.
   (f)   Each static message display shall be limited to one (1) monochrome
color display on a solid black background at any one (1) time have a medium
resolution true pixel pich of no greater than twenty (20) mm. Full color
display is permitted provided such signs have a high resolution true pitch of
ten (10) mm or less.
   (g)   The level of direct or indirect illumination on the vertical surface
of any electronic message sign shall not exceed three (3) foot candles for wall
mounted and two (2) foot candles for ground mounted signs.
   (h)   The electronic message sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet
or seventy (70) inches diagonally.
   (i)   Electronic message display signs must meet all other requirements for
on premise signs.
   (j)   Limited exceptions.
   (1)   Time, date and temperature (TDT) signs display area shall not exceed
five (5) square feet per face, and shall not be included in the allowable sign
area, provided it is collocated within an existing sign.
   (2)   Petroleum digital price signage.
   a.   The display area shall not exceed ten (10) square feet, and illuminated
numerals shall not exceed twelve (12) inches in height.
   b.   Signs shall be collocated on an approved ground mounted or pole mounted
sign.
   c.   The digital display area shall not be calculated as part of the total
allowable display area.
   d.   The sign may contain single-faced or double-faced display areas.
   (3)   Lottery signs shall be limited to a maximum of two (2) square feet and
subject to the requirements outlined in this section. Lottery signs shall not
be calculated as part of the allowable display area. (Ord. of 10/5/15)
Section 9-3098   Temporary signs requiring a permit.
   The following temporary signs shall be allowed subject to the standards
below, in lieu of on-site real estate or construction signs. Temporary planned
development signs, provided:
   (a)   Only one (1) primary sign and two (2) secondary signs shall be allowed
per street front of development.
   (b)   The maximum sign face area of a primary sign shall not exceed thirty-
two (32) square feet; height of ground mounted signs shall not exceed six (6)
feet.
   (c)   The maximum sign face area of secondary signs shall not exceed twelve
(12) square feet; height of ground mounted signs shall not exceed six (6) feet.
   (d)   Only one (1) permit shall be required for all temporary planned
development signs for each planned development. Permits shall be valid until a
project is completed or two (2) years, whichever comes first. Completion shall
be evidenced by the issuance of all certificates of occupancy for a development
by the Building Inspections Department. If a project is not completed in two
(2) years, a new permit must be obtained. However, in no instance shall more
than two (2) permits be issued for a development. Additional permits shall not
allow secondary signs. All secondary signs shall be removed when the first
permit issued expires.
   (e)   Temporary directional signs within a planned development, but not
visible from the road(s) fronting the overall development, shall be permitted
so long as such signs do not exceed twelve (12) square feet in sign area, six
(6) feet in height, and are removed upon completion of the portion of the
project to which the signs are giving direction. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/
6/10; Ord. of 10/5/15)
Section 9-3099   Temporary off-premise signs requiring approval.
   The following temporary off-premise signs are permitted subject to the
standards below.
   (a)   Temporary off-premise signs or banners for special community events,
open to the general public and sponsored by non-commercial civic, charitable,
community, or similar organizations, provided:
   (1)   At least five (5) business days before signs are to be posted, the
designated representative of the sponsoring group shall provide a sign
installation and removal plan for review by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, who
shall grant written permission for signs to be posted if the standards below
are met.
   (2)   Signs or banners shall be located outside of the public right-of-way
or farther than eleven (11) feet from the edge of any public street, whichever
distance from edge of pavement is greater; signs shall respect the sight
distance triangle.
   (3)   Signs or banners may be posted up to fourteen (14) days before the
event and must be removed within seven (7) days following the event.
   (4)   Every temporary off-premise sign or banner shall be separated by a
distance of four hundred (400) feet from any other such temporary off-premise
sign on the same side of a street, and by a distance of two hundred (200) feet
from any other sign on the opposite side of a street.
   (5)   Nothing in this provision shall be construed to authorize the posting
of such signs or banners upon trees, utility poles, traffic control signs,
lights or devices in any place or manner prohibited by the provisions herein,
nor on private property without written consent of the owner.
   (b)   Real estate signs not exceeding a total of two (2) square feet in sign
face area shall be permitted.
   (c)   Temporary cross-street banners for community events as may be approved
by the Town Manager and installed by town personnel, according to policies
established by the Town Council. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3100   Signs permitted without a permit.
   Notwithstanding the above, changing or replacing the permanent copy on a
lawful sign shall not require a permit provided the copy change does not change
the nature of the sign so as to render it in violation of this ordinance.
   (a)   The following types of signs are exempt from permit requirements and
allowed in all zones, but shall be in conformance with all other requirements
of this chapter.
   (1)   Historical markers erected by a government body, memorial signs,
plaques, or grave markers.
   (2)   Public interest signs.
   (3)   Public information kiosks on public or private property, subject to
design approval by the Town Council and written permission of the owner of
property upon which the kiosk is to be placed.
   (4)   On premises directional and instructional signs not exceeding six (6)
square feet in area, unless such sign is a monument sign, in which case it may
not exceed nine (9) square feet. Maximum height: four (4) feet.
   (5)   Identification signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, not of
a commercial nature and bearing only property identification numbers and names,
post office box numbers and names of occupants of the premises. Maximum height:
four (4) feet.
   (6)   Window signs shall be allowed on the inside or outside window glass of
non-residential properties provided that they cover an area not exceeding fifty
percent (50%) of the window or glass. Open/closed signs shall be included in
the total window sign area.
   (7)   Incidental signs used in conjunction with equipment or other
functional elements of a use or operation. These shall include, but are not
limited to, drive-thru window menu boards, signs of automatic teller machines,
gas pumps, express mail boxes, vending machines or newspaper delivery boxes.
   (8)   Official flags on permanent poles, emblems or insignia of government,
corporation, professional, fraternal, civic, religious organizations.
   (9)   Campaign or election signs provided that:
   a.   Each sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area or six (6)
feet in height.
   b.   All such signs shall be removed within seven (7) days after the
election for which they were made.
   c.   Signs may be erected no earlier than sixty (60) days prior to the
election date.
   (10)   Real estate signs, other than the temporary signs described in
Section
9-3098.
   a.   Signs advertising a single family home or lot, a duplex, triplex, or
quad, or an individual unit within an attached housing development shall not
exceed six (6) square feet. Maximum height: four (4) feet.
   b.   Signs advertising all other uses shall not exceed one (1) square foot
for every five (5) linear feet of frontage of the advertised property, up to a
maximum sign face area of thirty-two (32) square feet and maximum height of six
(6) feet.
   c.   Only one (1) sign per street front of the advertised property shall be
erected.
   d.   Properties having a continuous frontage in excess of eight hundred
fifty (850) linear feet may be allowed an additional sign so long as such sign
is no closer than eight hundred fifty (850) feet from another real estate sign
on the property.
   e.   Signs shall not be illuminated.
   f.   Signs shall be removed within seven (7) days after the sale is closed
or rent or lease transaction is finalized.
   (11)   Construction signs, other than temporary planned development signs,
Section
9-3098, provided:
   a.   Signs located on single family lots or duplex, triplex, or quad lots
shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area. Rider signs not exceeding two (2)
square feet in area shall be permitted in addition to the six (6) square feet.
Maximum height: four (4) feet.
   b.   Signs for all other uses shall not exceed one (1) square foot for every
five (5) linear feet of frontage of property under construction, up to a
maximum sign face area of thirty-two (32) square feet and a maximum height of
six (6) feet.
   c.   Signs are confined to the site of construction.
   d.   Only one (1) sign per street front of the property under construction
shall be erected.
   e.   Signs shall not be illuminated.
   f.   Signs shall be removed within seven (7) days after the completion of a
project.
   (12)   Temporary farm products signs provided:
   a.   Signs are located on the premises where the products are sold in
conjunction with a bona fide farm use.
   b.   Signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area or six (6)
feet in height.
   c.   Only one (1) sign shall be erected.
   d.   Signs shall be removed within seven (7) days of the termination of sale
activities.
   (13)   Temporary special event signs or banners for religious, charitable,
civic, fraternal, or similar organizations, provided:
   a.   No more than one (1) sign per street front shall be permitted per
event.
   b.   Signs shall be located on the property on which the event will occur.
   c.   Signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area or six (6)
feet in height.
   d.   Signs shall be erected no sooner than fourteen (14) days before and
removed seven (7) days after the event.
   (14)   Temporary banners in commercial and mixed use districts, provided:
   a.   Only one (1) banner per establishment shall be allowed at a time.
   b.   All banners shall be attached in total to a building wall or permanent
canopy extending from a building.
   c.   No paper banners shall be allowed.
   d.   Banners shall be erected for a period not to exceed two (2) weeks.
   e.   No more than six (6) such signs per establishment shall be erected
within a calendar year.
   f.   No banner shall extend above the second occupiable floor level of a
building.
   g.   Banners displayed at the time of adoption of this chapter are not
excluded from the provisions above.
   h.   All banners shall be considered temporary banners.
   (15)   Public service and advertising signs in association with athletic
fields. Signs may be attached to the interior face of any fence which encloses
or partially encloses an athletic playing field upon the property of a school
or public park subject to the following conditions:
   a.   No sign face area shall be visible from any public street or from any
abutting property in a residential or mixed use district.
   b.   No sign shall extend above the top of the enclosing fence.
   (16)   Corner directory signs provided:
   a.   Signs are owned by the town.
   b.   The town is responsible for the installation, maintenance and removal
of signpost and panels.
   c.   The town shall specify the size, material, color, letter height, and
similar criteria for each panel on the corner directory sign.
   d.   The town reserves the right to remove panels which are deteriorated or
damaged or when they may affect public safety, or which direct persons to uses
or businesses no longer in existence.
   e.   The town may collect fees for the installation and maintenance of the
sign panels.
   f.   The town shall determine when and where corner directory signs may be
placed.
   (17)   Open/closed signs:
   a.   Illuminated or non-illuminated.
   b.   Shall not exceed two (2) square feet in surface area. (Ord. of 1/10/05;
Ord. of 1/5/09; Ord. of 12/6/10; Ord. of 10/5/15)
Section 9-3101   Master signage programs.
   Master signage programs provide latitude to develop appropriate signage
designs for new or existing areas with special unifying features. Master
signage programs require approval by the Town Council following review and
recommendation by the town planning board. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3101.1   Planned development flexibility option.
   (a)   For the purpose of providing flexibility and incentives for
coordinated, well-designed sign systems for large-scale development, special
provisions varying the standards of this chapter may be approved by the Town
Council.
   (b)   The planned development flexibility option is initiated by the
developer by submission of a master sign program to the Planning Director, who
shall first place the request on the agenda of the Planning Board for a
recommendation, and then on the agenda of the Town Council for approval,
subject to the following:
   (1)   The development shall be a planned residential, nonresidential, or
mixed use development, ten (10) acres or greater in size; a hospital or other
large scale institutional complex; a large scale cultural, civic or
recreational facility; or a similar large scale development.
   (2)   A master sign program that includes the following information is
submitted:
   a.   Detailed designs of all proposed signs including the size, height,
copy, materials, and colors of such signs.
   b.   Proposed number and location of signs.
   c.   Sign illumination plans.
   d.   Plans for landscaping or architectural features to be used in
conjunction with such plans.
   (3)   The proposed signs meet the following criteria:
   a.   All signs are coordinated in terms of design features.
   b.   The maximum size of detached signs is not increased by more than
twenty-five (25%).
   c.   The number of detached signs along a street frontage does not exceed
three (3).
   d.   The maximum height of a detached sign does not exceed twelve (12) feet.
   e.   Multi-information directional signs are no greater than sixteen (16)
square feet and are located in the interior of a development.
   f.   Changeable copy highlighting special events on signs for cultural,
civic, or recreational facilities shall not exceed twenty-five (25%) of the
sign face area of a sign. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3102   Prohibited signs.
   The following signs are prohibited in all zoning districts:
   (a)   Signs extending into the public right-of-way, attached to utility
poles, street signs, or placed on Town owned or maintained property; other than
those signs approved by the Town of Valdese or the North Carolina Department of
Transportation may be removed;
   (b)   Roof signs;
   (c)   Portable signs;
   (d)   Flashing, fluttering, swinging, rotating and electronic scrolling
signs; provided, however, electronic time and/or temperature signs are
permitted;
   (e)   Signs that by their position, illumination, size, shape or color,
obstruct, impair, obscure, or interfere with traffic signs, signal devices, or
visibility at intersections (see Section
9-3038);
   (f)   Vehicular signs as defined in Article H of this chapter;
   (g)   Off-premise signs, including outdoor advertising signs. See Sections
9-3097.2 and
9-3099, special exceptions for certain non-commercial signs. (Example:
directional signs, real-estate directional signs, etc.). Town-owned directional
signs are not prohibited by this article;
   (h)   Obsolete signs: signs that do not comply with the provisions of this
chapter and identify or advertise a use which has ceased operation for one (1)
year or more. Obsolete signs shall be removed;
   (i)   Signs which use a series of two (2) or more signs placed in a line
parallel to a street or highway right- of-way, or similar fashion, all carrying
a single advertising message, part of which is contained on each sign;
   (j)   Other signs not expressly allowed by this chapter;
   (k)   Any sign that incorporates a television screen, a computer screen,
electronic images, or electronic characters that does not meet the standards
for electronic message display signs;
   (l)   Any illuminated tubing is not permitted, including but not limited to
those outlining property lines, open sales areas, rooflines, doors, windows,
landscaping, or the edges of wall, except for perimeter down-lighting that is
shielded to illuminate open sales areas but no land outside those areas; and
   (m)   Illuminated signs in any residential district, except as provided in
Section
9-3097.2(a); and
   (n)   Electronic message signs, unless expressly permitted by the ordinance.
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10; Ord. of 10/5/15)
Section 9-3103   Application and issuance of sign permits.
Section 9-3103.1   Application.
   Applications for permits, if required, shall contain or have attached the
following information:
   (a)   The street name and street number of the building, structure or lot on
which a sign is to be placed.
   (b)   Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the applicant, owner of the
property on which the sign is to be erected or affixed, the owner of the sign,
and the licensed contractor erecting or affixing the sign.
   (c)   If the applicant is not the owner or lessee of the lot on which the
sign will be located, written permission from the property owner or a
designated representative stating agreement that the sign may be erected on the
parcel for which the permit has been applied shall be required.
   (d)   A site or plat plan of the property involved, showing accurate
placement of the proposed sign, intended use(s) of the property, and zoning
district designation.
   (e)   Two (2) blueprints or inked, scaled drawings of the plans and
specifications of the sign to be erected or affixed as deemed necessary by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer. Such plans may include but shall not be limited to
details of dimensions, materials, copy, and size of the proposed sign. For wall
signs, dimensions of the building wall on which the sign is to be affixed and
the location and size of existing wall signs shall also be included.
   (f)   Address assignment. No permit for a sign shall be issued unless a
street address has been assigned according to the requirements of the town or
the Burke County 911 address ordinance, whichever is applicable.
   (g)   Other information as the Zoning Enforcement Officer may require to
determine full compliance with this and other applicable codes. (Ord. of 1/10/
05; Ord. of 12/6/10; Ord. of 10/5/15)
Section 9-3103.2   Issuance of permit.
   Upon the filing of an application for a sign permit, the Zoning Enforcement
Officer shall examine the plans and specifications, and, as deemed necessary,
may inspect the premises upon which the sign is proposed to be erected or
affixed. If the proposed sign is in compliance with all the requirements of
this chapter and other applicable codes, a permit will be issued. Any permit
issued in accordance with this section shall automatically become null and void
unless the work for which it was issued has visibly commenced within six (6)
months of the date of issue or if the work authorized by it is suspended or
abandoned for one year. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining a
building or electrical permit from the Building Inspection Department when
required by applicable local and state codes. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/
10)
Section 9-3103.3   Fees.
   To obtain a sign permit, all fees, in accordance with the requirements of
the permitting agency, shall be paid. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3103.4   Completion of construction.
   The permit holder shall notify the town upon completion of construction and
installation of any sign for which a permit is required. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord.
of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3104   Unlawful cutting of trees or shrubs.
   No person may, for the purpose of increasing or enhancing the visibility of
any sign, damage, trim, destroy or remove any trees, shrubs or other vegetation
located:
   (a)   Within the right-of-way of any public street or road, unless the work
is done pursuant to the express written authorization of the town or other
agency having jurisdiction over the streets.
   (b)   On property that is not under the ownership or control of the person
doing or responsible for such work, unless the work is done pursuant to the
express authorization of the person owning the property where such trees or
shrubs are located.
   (c)   In any areas where such trees or shrubs are required to remain under a
permit issued under this chapter. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3105   Nonconforming signs.
   Subject to the remaining restrictions of this section, nonconforming signs
that were otherwise lawful on the effective date of this article may be
continued provided they conform to the following provisions:
   (a)   No person may engage in any activity that causes an increase in the
extent of nonconformity of a nonconforming sign. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, no nonconforming sign may be enlarged or altered
in such a manner as to aggravate the nonconforming condition. Nor may
illumination be added to any nonconforming sign.
   (b)   A nonconforming sign may not be moved or replaced except to bring the
sign into complete conformity with this article.
   (c)   If a nonconforming sign is destroyed by natural causes, it may not
thereafter be repaired, reconstructed or replaced except in conformity with all
the provisions of this article, and the remnants of the former sign structure
shall be cleared from the land within thirty (30) days of destruction. For
purposes of this section, a nonconforming sign is "destroyed" if it is damaged
to the extent that the cost of repairing the sign to its former stature or
replacing it with an equivalent sign equals or exceeds the value (tax value if
listed for tax purposes) of the sign so damaged.
   (d)   The message of a nonconforming sign may be changed so long as this
does not create any new nonconformities (for example, by creating an off-
premise sign under circumstances where such a sign would not be allowed).
   (e)   If a nonconforming sign other than a billboard advertises a business,
service, commodity, accommodation, attraction or other enterprise or activity
that is no longer operating or being offered or conducted, that sign shall be
considered abandoned and shall be removed within thirty (30) days after such
abandonment by the sign owner, owner of the property where the sign is located
or other party having control over such sign.
   (f)   If a nonconforming billboard remains blank for a continuous period of
one hundred eighty (180) days, that billboard shall be deemed abandoned and
shall, within thirty (30) days after such abandonment, be removed by the sign
owner, owner of the property wherethe sign is located or other person having
control over such sign. For purposes of this section, a sign is "blank" if:
   (1)   It advertises a business, service, commodity, accommodation,
attraction or other enterprise or activity that is no longer operating or being
offered or conducted; or
   (2)   The message displayed becomes illegible in whole or substantial part;
or
   (3)   The advertising copy paid for by a party other than the sign owner or
promoting an interest other than the rental of the sign has been removed. (Ord.
of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3106   Sign definitions.
   For the regulation of signs according to this chapter, the following words
and phrases shall be defined as specified below.
   (a)   Amortization. A provision requiring nonconforming signs to either
become conforming or be removed within a set period of time, otherwise known as
the amortization period.
   (b)   Awning. A structure made of cloth, metal, or other material affixed to
a building in such a manner that the structure may be raised or retracted from
a building to a flat position against the building, but not a canopy.
   (c)   Building wall. The entire surface area, including windows and doors,
of an exterior wall of a building. For the purposes of this chapter, the area
of a wall will be calculated for only the first three (3) stories, or forty-
five (45) feet in height of a building, whichever is less.
   (d)   Campaign or election sign. A sign that advertises a candidate or issue
to be voted upon on a definite election day.
   (e)   Canopy. A permanent structure, not enclosed and not retractable,
attached or unattached to a building, for the purpose of providing shelter to
patrons or motor vehicles, or as a decorative feature on a building wall.
   (f)   Changeable copy. Copy that is or can be changed in the field, either
manually or through mechanical means; for example, reader boards with
changeable letters.
   (g)   Commercial message. A message placed or caused to be placed before the
public by a person or business enterprise directly involved in the manufacture
or sale of the products, property, accommodations, services, attractions, or
activities that are offered or exist for sale or for hire.
   (h)   Copy. Any words, letters, numbers, figures, characters, symbols,
logos, or insignia that are used on a sign display surface area.
   (i)   Farm product sales. Seasonal sale of farm products raised on the
premises where products are sold only as an accessory to an agricultural use.
   (j)   Grade. The height of the top of the curb, or if no curb exists, the
height of the edge of pavement in the lane of travel adjacent to the sign.
   (k)   Linear frontage. The length of a property abutting a public right-of-
way from one side lot line to another.
   (l)   Logo. A business trademark or symbol.
   (m)   Out parcel. A parcel of land associated with a shopping center or
multi-tenant development, which is designated on an approved site plan as a
location for a free standing structure with an intended use such as, but not
limited to, banks, savings and loans, dry cleaners, service stations, offices,
restaurants, retail establishments, or combination of uses thereof, and adjoins
the shopping center or multi-tenant development, or the parking and service
drives associated with it, on any side adjacent to a public right-of-way.
   (n)   Parapet. A low wall encircling the perimeter of a flat building roof,
generally used to screen roof- mounted mechanical equipment.
   (o)   Planned development. A tract of land under single, corporation,
partnership, or association ownership, planned and developed as an integral
unit in a single development operation or a definitely programmed series of
development operations and according to an approved development plan (according
to Article I).
   (p)   Premises. A parcel of real property with a separate and distinct
identifying number shown on a recorded plat, record of survey, parcel map,
subdivision map, or a parcel legally created or established pursuant to
applicable zoning. Out parcels of shopping centers shall be considered on the
premises of the shopping center for the purpose of this chapter.
   (q)   Roof line. The highest point of a flat roof or mansard roof, and the
lowest point of a pitched roof, excluding any minor projections or
ornamentation.
   (r)   Sight distance triangle.  The triangular area formed by the point of
intersection of two (2) street right-of-way lines and a point located along
each right-of-way line at a distance of thirty-five (35) feet from the point of
intersection.
   (s)   Sign. Any object, devise, structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract
attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product,
service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures,
designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. Signs do
not include the flag or emblem of any nation, organization of nations, state,
city, or any fraternal, religious, or civic organizations; works of art which
in no way identify an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event or location by any means; or scoreboards located on
athletic fields.
   (t)   Sign structure or support. Any structure that supports or is capable
of supporting a sign.
   (u)   Sign types. The following are types of signs included in this chapter.
   (1)   Banner. A sign intended to be hung, with message or symbol applied to
plastic or fabric of any kind, but excluding flags or emblems of any nation,
organization of nations, state, city, or any fraternal, religious, or civic
organization.
   (2)   Bulletin board. A sign used to announce meetings or programs to be
held on the premises of a church, school, auditorium, library, museum,
community recreation center, or similar noncommercial place of public assembly.
   (3)   Business sign.  A sign that directs attention to a business, to a
product sold, manufactured, or assembled, or to services or entertainment
offered upon the premises where the sign is displayed; but not a sign
pertaining to the preceding if such activity is only minor and incidental to
the principal use of the premises.
   (4)   Campaign or election sign. A sign that advertises a candidate or issue
to be voted upon on a definite election day.
   (5)   Canopy and awning signs. A sign attached to or painted or printed onto
a canopy or awning. The permitted size of a canopy or awning sign will be
calculated on the basis of the size of the building wall to which the canopy is
attached. It will, for measuring purposes, be considered a wall sign.
   (6)   Construction sign. A sign placed at a construction site identifying or
announcing the project or the name of the architect, engineer, contractor,
financier, or others involved in the development of the project.
   (7)   Detached sign. Any sign that is not affixed or attached to a building
and is securely and permanently mounted in the ground. Such sign may be a
ground mounted sign, or monument sign.
   (8)   Directional or instructional sign. An on-premises sign designed to
guide vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic by using such words as “Entrance,"
"Exit," "Parking," "One-Way," or similar direction or instruction, but not
including any advertising message. The name or logo of the business or use to
which the sign is giving direction may also be included on the sign.
   (9)   Directory sign. A sign that identifies multiple uses in a planned
development on a single sign; may be used for shopping centers, shopping
streets or arcades, office complexes, schools, churches, institutional or
business campuses, and similar large complexes which have a variety of tenants
and/or uses.
   (10)   Electronic message sign. A sign capable of displaying words, symbols,
figures or images that can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote
or automatic means. Electronic message signs may be part of wall-mounted signs,
ground mounted signs or window signs.
   (11)   Flag. A piece of durable fabric of distinctive design attached to a
permanent pole, that is used as a symbol or decorative feature.
   (12)   Flashing sign. A sign that uses an intermittent or flashing light
source to attract attention.
   (13)   Ground mounted sign. A sign that extends from the ground or which has
a support which places the bottom thereof less than three (3) feet from the
ground.
   (14)   Government sign. Any temporary or permanent sign erected and
maintained for any governmental purposes.
   (15)   Identification sign. A sign that displays only the name, address,
and/or crest, insignia, trademark, occupation or profession of an occupant, or
the name of any building on the premises.
   (16)   Incidental sign. A sign used in conjunction with equipment or other
functional elements of a use or operation. These shall include, but not be
limited to drive-through-window menu boards; signs on automatic teller
machines, gas pumps, or vending machines; or newspaper delivery boxes.
   (17)   Memorial sign or plaque. A sign designating the name of a building
and/or date of erection and other items such as architect, contractor, or
others involved in the building’s creation, cut into or attached to a building
surface.
   (18)   Monument sign. A monolithic sign in which the bottom of the sign is
flush with the ground.
   (19)   Nonconforming sign. Any sign that was lawfully erected in compliance
with applicable code provisions and maintained prior to the effective date of
this chapter, and which fails to conform to all applicable standards and
restrictions of this chapter.
   (20)   Off-premises sign. A sign that directs attention to a business,
commodity, or service, conducted, sold, or offered at a location other than the
premises on which the sign is erected.
   (21)   On-premises sign. A sign that directs attention to a business,
commodity, or service, that is conducted, sold, or offered on the premises on
which the sign is erected.
   (22)   Outdoor advertising sign. A type of sign, generally, but not always,
consisting of a rigidly assembled sign, display, or devise, usually free
standing, that is affixed to the ground or to a building, the primary purpose
of which is to display advertising posters. Such signs, commonly referred to as
"billboards," are generally designed so that the copy or poster on the sign can
be changed frequently and the advertising space is for lease.
   (23)   Planned development sign. A sign used in conjunction with an approved
planned residential, office, business, industrial, or mixed use development.
   (24)   Portable or movable sign. A sign that is not permanently attached to
the ground, a structure, or a building, and which can easily be moved from one
location or another, for example, a sign on wheels.
   (25)   Projecting sign. A sign that is affixed to a building and supported
only by the wall on which it is mounted; considered a wall sign for purposes of
this chapter.
   (26)   Public interest sign. A sign on private property that displays
information pertinent to the safety or legal responsibilities of the general
public such as warning and no trespassing signs.
   (27)   Real estate sign. A sign that is used to offer for sale, lease, or
rent the premises upon which such sign is placed.
   (28)   Primary sign. The main or principal sign located on the premises.
   (29)   Roof sign. A sign erected or maintained in whole or in part upon or
over the roof or parapet of a building.
   (30)   Secondary business identification sign. An auxiliary wall sign, the
purpose of which is to identify a business which is housed in the same
structure as the principal business, but which is clearly subordinate to, and
has separate ownership, management, and operation from, the principal business
which occupies the building.
   (31)   Secondary sign. A sign used in addition to a primary sign on a
premises.
   (32)   Temporary sign. A sign that is not permanently installed in the
ground or affixed to any structure or building, and which is erected for a
period of time as permitted in this chapter.
   (33)   Temporary planned development sign. A sign that pertains to the
development of a new commercial, residential, or mixed use development while it
is under construction.
   (34)   Vehicular sign. Signs on parked vehicles visible from the public
right-of-way where the primary purpose of the vehicle is to advertise a product
or to direct people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby
property. For the purposes of this chapter, vehicular signs shall not include
business logos, identification or advertising on vehicles primarily used for
other business purposes.
   (35)   Wall sign. Any sign directly attached to an exterior wall of a
building or dependent upon a building for its support. Signs directly painted
on walls shall be considered wall signs.
   (36)   Wall face area. The total square footage of a building front measured
by the building height multiplied by the linear width of the building or store
bay.
   (37)   Wall sign area.  The total square footage of all wall signs
associated with a business or structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/adeb133b442280ad8bc3431317823f426b5e2f33/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2879.png]
   (38)   Window sign. Any sign attached to or directly applied onto a window
or glass door of a building intended for viewing from the exterior of the
building. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 1/5/09; Ord. of 12/6/10; Ord. of 10/5/15)
Section 9-3107 through section 9-3110 reserved.
ARTICLE I
Planned Unit Developments
Section 9-3111   Planned Unit Development— Residential (PUD-R).
   (1)   Intent: The purpose of the Planned Unit Development—Residential is to
encourage the development of living environments, which meet the needs of the
people who live in them by providing certain development privileges in exchange
for preplanning and design considerations. The Planned Unit Development—
Residential provides flexibility in using new development concepts and in
introducing variety into neighborhoods by encouraging mixed uses, variable lot
size, and environmentally sensitive design, which promotes the conservation of
open space and ensures substantial compliance with the intent of the town
zoning ordinance. Furthermore, it is the purpose of this section to:
   (a)   Encourage development that enhances the quality of life while
protecting the health, safety and general welfare of residents;
   (b)   Encourage variety in housing opportunities;
   (c)   Encourage the development of a viable economic base;
   (d)   Encourage the development of land uses that will complement existing
adjacent land uses;
   (e)   Provide guidelines for development of planned unit developments.
   (2)   The Town Council may approve this form of development in the districts
that allow it as a conditional use, provided that the conditions specified in
this article are met. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 1/8/07; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3111.1   Permitted uses and requirements.
   (a)   Planned unit developments may be approved for any residential use or
combination of uses except the combination of residential and industrial.
   (b)   General requirements.
   (1)   At the time of application for a planned unit development, all land,
structures and other real property shall be in single or joint ownership of
whatever form, or the petitioner shall have the right to acquire ownership
under a valid option, and this information shall be included in the application
for a planned unit development.
   (2)   A residential planned unit development shall be located on a site
containing at least two (2) contiguous acres.
   (3)   If land or structures within a proposed PUD-R are to be sold to more
than one person, firm, corporation or other entity, then the proposed PUD-
R shall be subject to the town subdivision ordinance. Deviations from said
standards may be approved provided they are stated as part of the PUD-
R application requirements.
   (4)   A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the land area for the PUD-R shall be
common open/recreational space. This area shall be identified as open/
recreation space on the submitted plans, which shall be recorded in the office
of the Register of Deeds. In residential mixed use PUD-R’s, required open space
may not be part of any proposed or platted single-family residential lots.
   (5)   All new planned unit developments shall provide concrete sidewalks
along both sides of all existing and proposed public streets within the PUD-R.
Sidewalks shall only be required on the internal side of existing streets that
are on the perimeter of the PUD-R. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of 5 feet wide
and four inches thick. Sidewalks will not be required along alleys. All
pedestrian segments shall meet or exceed ADA standards and shall be constructed
of concrete.
   (6)   The design and layout of a PUD-R shall take into account the
relationship of the site of the surrounding areas. Additionally, the perimeter
of the PUD-R shall be so designed as to minimize any negative impact on
adjacent properties.
   (7)   Development of a PUD-R may be phased, in which case all the property
anticipated for the PUD-R development shall be submitted as part of the PUD-
R development plan showing a conceptual depiction of the eventual development
and approximate phase lines shown. During the phased development of a PUD-R,
proportional overall common open space required shall be incorporated into each
phase and be    dedicated and    installed or improved by the end of the
construction of each proposed phase.
   (8)   Following review of the proposed PUD-R, the Planning Board shall
recommend approval or denial of the application and accompanying PUD-R plans.
Planning Board may recommend to Town Council conditional approval with such
conditions as are necessary to ensure conformity to all applicable
requirements. If conditions are placed on the approval of the PUD-R, a revised
plan including the required changes must be submitted to the Town Council.
   (9)   In order for an application for a PUD-R to be approved, the Town
Council must find that the proposed development will be compatible with
comprehensive land use, and neighborhood development plans, and will not place
an excessive traffic load on local streets. In addition, Town Council must find
that the site can be developed according to a site plan that will be compatible
with existing neighborhood development, and that the site can be provided with
adequate utility services.
   (10)   Site development within the PUD-R shall conform to the schematic plan
and associated requirements of the conditional use permit approved by the Town
Council. Modification of the development plan may be made by the Town Council
subsequent to its
initial approval upon application by the owner of the property.
   (11)   Following approval by the Town Council of a PUD-R conditional use
permit, the property for which approval was granted shall be labeled “PUD-R” on
the official zoning map.
   (12)   Lot design and requirements. Clustering of structures on smaller lots
is encouraged. Lots in a PUD-R may be smaller than established in the zoning
ordinance provided that the overall average lot size and density of the entire
PUD-R meets zoning requirements and the proposed lot sizes are shown in the
PUD-R application. The following are the minimum building setbacks:
 
Lot Size         Setbacks from ROW and Parcel Line
                 Front:   25'
>=8,000 sq. feet Side:   10' (15' for side abutting a street ROW)
                 Rear:   25'
                 Front:   25'
<8,000 sq. feet  Side:   10' (15' for side abutting a street ROW)
                 Rear:   20'
 
   (c)   Application requirements. An application for a conditional use permit
to allow a PUD-R shall be accompanied by schematic plans showing the
information listed below. In addition, the Town Council may require additional
information necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (1)   Proposed location of buildings and their general exterior dimensions
of all non-single family structures;
   (2)   Proposed use of all the land within the area requested for a PUD-R, in
addition to the zoning designation and land use of adjacent properties;
   (3)   Dimensions between all buildings and from buildings to property lines;
   (4)   Traffic, parking and circulation plan, showing proposed locations and
arrangement of parking spaces and ingress and egress to and from adjacent
streets;
   (5)   Proposed location and material of any screening walls, fences, or
plantings;
   (6)   Proposed exterior design of buildings for all non-single family
structures;
   (7)   Schedule of number and size of dwelling units within the project;
   (8)   Proposed time schedule and staging, if any, for construction of the
project;
   (9)   Statement of intent, including plans for selling or renting the
property;
   (10)   Provision to assure maintenance of all common areas and open space;
Example: Property owners’ association, private conservancy, etc;
   (11)   Location of all common yards, open space and recreational areas;
   (12)   Street lighting, if any;
   (13)   Signage plan, if it will vary from base zoning ordinance (Section
9-3097);
   (14)   The location and size of all non-residential structures;
   (15)   If approved, prior to construction the following items must be
submitted to planning staff:
   a.   Professionally prepared plans of each phase with the items listed below
as a minimum must be submitted and approved by the Planning Board:
   1.   Existing site topographical conditions, showing contours at five (5)
foot intervals, if reasonably available, and location of significant
geographical features, including watercourses;
   2.   The location of drainage facilities/basins and other similar features;
   3.   A boundary survey;
   4.   Construction specifications for streets and pedestrian ways including
typical roadway sections showing locations of all utilities. These
specifications must be sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the State
of North Carolina;
   5.   Sealed engineering plans for water, sewer, storm drainage and erosion/
sedimentation;
   6.   Preliminary subdivision plat if the property is to be subdivided;
   7.   General concept landscape plans for open space, common areas, streets,
pedestrian ways and recreational facilities;
   8.   Location, arrangement and number of parking facilities and loading
areas;
   9.   Architectural concept plans of typical structures.
   b.   Should the Planning Board deny the application, the applicant may
appeal to the Town Council by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty
(30) days from receipt of the Planning Board’s denial of the application. (Ord.
of 1/10/05; Ord. of 1/8/07; Ord. of 12/6/10; Ord. of 11/7/16)
Section 9-3112   Planned Unit Development— Business (PUD-B).
   Intent: The purpose of the Planned Unit Develop- ment—Business is to
encourage the development of environments, which meet the needs of the people
who live or work in them by providing certain development privileges in
exchange for preplanning and design considerations. The Planned Unit
Development— Business provides flexibility in using new development concepts
and in introducing variety into neighborhoods by encouraging mixed uses,
variable lot size, and environmentally sensitive design which promotes the
conservation of open space. The Town Council may approve this form of
development in the districts that allow it as a conditional use, provided that
the conditions specified in this article are met. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/
6/10)
Section 9-3112.1   Permitted uses and requirements.
   (a)   Uses permitted within the PUD-B: uses permitted within the zoning
district for which the project site is located.
   (b)   Permitted building and lot types: building and lot types permitted
within the zoning district for which the project site is located.
   (c)   Permitted accessory structures and uses: accessory structures and uses
permitted within the zoning district for which the project site is located.
   (d)   General requirements:
   (1)   At the time of application for a planned unit development, all land,
structures and other real property shall be in single or joint ownership of
whatever form, or the petitioner shall have the right to acquire ownership
under a valid option, and this information shall be included in the submission
of an application for a planned unit development.
   (2)   The development shall be in full compliance with all density and lot
coverage limitations and requirements of the zoning district in which the
development is to be located.
   (3)   All new planned unit developments shall provide concrete sidewalks
along both sides of all existing and proposed public streets within the PUD-B.
Sidewalks shall only be required on the internal side of existing streets that
are on the perimeter of the PUD-B. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five (5)
feet wide and four (4) inches thick. Sidewalks will not be required along
alleys. All pedestrian segments shall meet or exceed ADA standards and shall be
constructed of concrete.
   (4)   The Town Council may require buffering around the proposed PUD-B.
   (5)   In approving an application for a PUD-B, the Town Council shall find
that the proposed development will be compatible with comprehensive, land use,
and neighborhood development plans, will not place an excessive traffic load on
local streets, that the site can be developed according to a site plan that
will be compatible with existing neighborhood development, and that the site
can be provided with adequate utility services.
   (6)   Site development within the PUD-B shall conform to the schematic plan
and associated requirements of the conditional use permit approved by the Town
Council. Modification of the development plan may be made by the Town Council
subsequent to their initial approval upon application by the owner of the
property.
   (7)   Following approval by the Town Council of a PUD-B conditional use
permit, the property for which approval was granted shall be labeled “PUD-B” on
the official zoning map.
   (e)   Application requirements: An application for a conditional use permit
to allow a PUD-B shall be accompanied by schematic plans showing the
information listed below. In addition, the Town Council may require additional
information necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (1)   Proposed location of buildings and their general exterior dimensions;
   (2)   Proposed use of all the land within the area requested for a PUD-B;
   (3)   Dimensions between all buildings and from buildings to property lines;
   (4)   Traffic, parking and circulation plan, showing proposed locations and
arrangement of parking spaces and ingress and egress to and from adjacent
streets;
   (5)   Proposed location and material of any screening walls, fences, or
plantings;
   (6)   Proposed exterior design of buildings;
   (7)   Schedule of number and size of dwelling units/buildings within the
project;
   (8)   Proposed time schedule and staging, if any, for construction of the
project. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3113 through section 9-3115 reserved.
ARTICLE J
Administration, Enforcement, and Penalties
Section 9-3116   Zoning Enforcement Officer.
   This chapter shall be administrated and enforced by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer who shall be appointed by the Town Manager and is hereby empowered:
   (a)   To issue a zoning permit when these regulations have been followed or,
to refuse to issue the same in the event of noncompliance. Written notice of
such refusal and reason therefore shall be given to the applicant.
   (b)   To collect the fees set forth herein for a zoning permit, variances,
appeals, rezonings, conditional use permits and subdivisions.
   (c)   To make and keep all records necessary and appropriate to the office,
including record of the issuance and denial of all zoning permits and of
receipt of complaints of violation of this chapter and action taken to the
same.
   (d)   To inspect any building and/or land to determine whether any
violations of this chapter have been committed or exist.
   (e)   To enforce this chapter and take all necessary steps to remedy any
condition found in violation by ordering in writing the discontinuance of
illegal uses or illegal work in progress and may institute injunction,
mandamus, or other necessary action.
   (f)   To keep the Board of Adjustment advised of all matters other than
routine duties pertaining to the enforcement of this chapter and to transmit
all applications and records pertaining to appeals, variances, or requests for
conditional use approval. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3117   Zoning permit required.
   Within the corporate limits of the town no building, sign or other structure
shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered before a zoning
permit has been issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer of the town. (Ord. of
1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3118   Application for a zoning permit.
   (a)   Each application for a zoning permit to the Zoning Enforcement Officer
of the town shall be accompanied by a fee, set by the Town Council, and a plan
in duplicate, drawn to scale, one (1) copy of which shall be returned to the
owner upon approval. The plan shall show the following:
   (1)   The actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon;
   (2)   The size and location of all buildings existing on the lot;
   (3)   The size and location of the proposed new construction;
   (4)   The existing and intended use of all parts of the land or building;
   (5)   Such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as
may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this chapter.
   (b)   Any zoning permit issued shall become invalid unless the work
authorized by it shall have been commenced within six (6) months of its date of
issue or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of
one (1) year. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3119   Certificate of occupancy required.
   No land within the corporate limits of the town shall be used or occupied
and no building within the corporate limits of the town shall hereafter be
erected, structurally altered, converted or changed in use until a certificate
of occupancy shall have been issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer stating
that the building or the proposed use thereof complies with the provisions of
this chapter. A certificate of occupancy either for the whole or a part of a
building shall be applied for coincident with the application for a zoning
permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the erection or
structural alteration of such building, or part, shall have been completed in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. A temporary certificate of
occupancy may be issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer for a period not
exceeding six (6) months during alterations or construction for partial
occupancy of a building pending its completion, or for bazaars, carnivals, and
revivals, provided that such temporary permit shall require such conditions and
safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public. A record
of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the Zoning
Enforcement Officer and copies shall be furnished on request to any person
requesting it. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3120   Penalties for violations.
   (a)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished for each offense by a fine
not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200) or by imprisonment not to exceed
thirty (30) days.
   (b)   In addition to the penalty in Subsection
9-3120(a) above, a violation of this chapter shall also be a civil offense and
shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of fifty dollars
($50) per day that the violation continues. Any person violating this chapter
shall be issued a written citation. The penalty shall be paid to the town
within seventy-two (72) hours from the time of issuance of the written
citation.
   (c)   Each day’s continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct
offense.
   (d)   In addition to the penalties imposed under Subsections
9-3120(a) and
9-3120(b) above, the provisions of this chapter may also be enforced through
equitable remedies issued by a court of competent jurisdiction including
injunction and order of abatement.
   (e)   This chapter may be enforced by any one, all or a combination of the
remedies authorized herein. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3121   Remedies.
   (a)   In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation
of this chapter, the Zoning Enforcement Officer or any other appropriate town
authority or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to
other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action
in proceeding to prevent the violation.
   (b)   In case any sign shall be installed, erected or constructed in
violation of any of the terms of this chapter, the Zoning Enforcement Officer
shall notify by personal notice or registered mail the owner or lessee thereof
to alter such sign so as to comply with this chapter and to secure the
necessary permit there for or to remove the sign. If such an order is not
complied with within ten (10) days, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall remove
the sign at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof. In the event that such
sign should become insecure, or in danger of falling, the person maintaining
the same shall, upon written notice from the Zoning Enforcement Officer,
forthwith, in case of immediate danger, and in any case, within ten (10) days
secure it in a manner approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. (Ord. of 1/
10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3122 through section 9-3125 reserved.
ARTICLE K
Planning Board
Section 9-3126   Establishment of the Planning Board.
   A Planning Board is hereby established as provided in G.S. 160A-361. Said
Board shall consist of five (5) regular members and two (2) alternate members
appointed by the Town Council, for overlapping terms of three (3) years.
Initial appointment of the members shall be as follows: one regular (1) member
and one (1) alternate member for a term of three (3) years, two (2) regular
members and one alternate member for a term of two (2) years, and two regular
(2) members for a term of one (1) year. Alternate members of the Planning Board
shall be called on to attend only those meetings and hearings at which one or
more regular members are absent or are unable to participate in hearing a case
because of financial or other interest. Except at the election of the Chair,
Vice-Chair and Secretary, at no time shall more than five (5) members
participate officially in any meeting or hearing. Any vacancies in the
membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the
initial appointments. Members shall serve without pay but may be reimbursed for
any expenses incurred while representing the Board. The members appointed to
the Board shall be residents and citizens of the town. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord.
of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3127   Proceedings and duties of the Planning Board.
   (a)   The Planning Board shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman from its
members who shall serve for one (1) year or until re-elected or until their
successors are elected. The Board shall appoint a secretary, who may be a
municipal officer or an employee of the town. The Planning Board shall adopt
rules of procedure in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and in
G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 19. Meetings of the Planning Board shall be held
once a month or at the call of the Chairman. All meetings of the Planning Board
shall be open to the public.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the Planning Board, in general:
   (1)   To acquire and maintain in current form such basic information and
materials as are necessary to an understanding of past trends, present
conditions and forces at work to cause changes in those conditions;
   (2)   To prepare and from time to time amend and revise a comprehensive and
coordinated plan for the physical development of the area;
   (3)   To establish principles and policies for guiding action in the
development of the area;
   (4)   To prepare and recommend to the Town Council ordinances providing
orderly development along the lines indicated by the comprehensive plan;
   (5)   To determine whether specific proposed developments conform to the
principles and requirements of the comprehensive plan for the growth and
improvement of the area;
   (6)   To keep the Town Council and general public informed and advised as to
those matters;
   (7)   To perform any other duties which may lawfully be assigned to it.
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3128 through 9-3130 reserved.
ARTICLE L
Board of Adjustment
Section 9-3131   Establishment of the Board of Adjustment.
   A Board of Adjustment is hereby established as provided in G.S. 160A-388.
The Planning Board shall function as the Board of Adjustment as provided in
G.S. 160A-388. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 6/26/06; Ord. of 12/6/10; Ord. of 6/
30/14)
Section 9-3132   Jurisdiction and decision of the Board of Adjustment.
   (a)   The concurring vote of four-fifths (4/5) of the members of the Board
of Adjustment shall be necessary to grant a variance. A majority of the members
shall be required to decide any other quasi-judicial matter or to determine an
appeal made in the nature of certiorari. For the purposes of this subsection,
vacant positions on the Board and members who are disqualified from voting on a
quasi-judicial matter shall not be considered members of the board for
calculation of the requisite majority if there are no qualified alternates
available to take the place of such members.
   (b)   The Board of Adjustment shall determine contested facts and make its
decision within a reasonable time. Every quasi-judicial decision shall be based
upon competent, material, and substantial evidence in the record. Each quasi-
judicial decision shall be reduced to writing and reflect the Board's
determination of contested facts and their application to the applicable
standards. The written decision shall be signed by the Chair or other duly
authorized member of the Board. A quasi-judicial decision is effective upon
filing the written decision with the Clerk to the Board or such other office or
official. The decision of the Board shall be delivered by personal delivery,
electronic mail, or by first-class mail to the applicant, property owner, and
to any person who has submitted a written request for a copy, prior to the date
the decision becomes effective. The person required to provide notice shall
certify that proper notice has been made.
   (c)   In accordance with G.S. 160A-388(el) no member of the Board of
Adjustment shall participate or vote in any quasi-judicial matter in a manner
that would violate affected persons’ constitutional rights to an impartial
decision maker. If an objection is raised to a member’s participation and that
member does not recuse himself or herself, the remaining members shall by
majority vote rule on the objection. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 6/26/06; Ord. of
12/6/10; Ord. of 6/30/14)
Section 9-3133   Proceedings of the Board of Adjustment.
   (a)   The Board of Adjustment shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman
from its members who shall serve for one (1) year or until re-elected or until
their successors are elected. The Board shall appoint a secretary, who may be a
municipal officer or an employee of the town. The Board shall adopt rules of
procedure in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and in G.S. Chapter
160A, Article 19. Meetings of the Board shall be held once a month or at the
call of the Chairman. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.
   (b)   The Chair of the Board or any member acting as Chair and the Clerk to
the Board are authorized to administer oaths to witnesses in any matter coming
before the Board. Any person who, while under oath during a proceeding before
the Board of Adjustment, willfully swears falsely is guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor.
   (c)   The Board of Adjustment through the Chair, or in the Chair's absence
anyone acting as Chair, may subpoena witnesses and compel the production of
evidence. To request issuance of a subpoena, persons withstanding under G.S.
160A-393(d) may make a written request to the Chair explaining why it is
necessary for certain witnesses or evidence to be compelled. The Chair shall
issue requested subpoenas he or she determines to be relevant, reasonable in
nature and scope, and not oppressive. The Chair shall rule on any motion to
quash or modify a subpoena. Decisions regarding subpoenas made by the Chair may
be appealed to the full Board of Adjustment. If a person fails or refuses to
obey a subpoena issued pursuant to this subsection, the Board of Adjustment or
the party seeking the subpoena may apply to the General Court of Justice for an
order requiring that its subpoena be obeyed, and the court shall have
jurisdiction to issue these orders after notice to all proper parties. (Ord. of
1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10; Ord. of 6/30/14)
Section 9-3134   Appeals, hearings and notice.
   (a)   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals from decisions
of the Zoning Administrator. As used in this section, the term decision
includes any final and binding order, requirement, or determination of the
Zoning Administrator. The Board of Adjustment may hear appeals arising out of
the Zoning Ordinance pursuant to all of the following:
   (1)   Any person who has standing under G.S. 160A-393(d) or the Town may
appeal a decision to the Board of Adjustment. An appeal is taken by filing a
notice of appeal with the Town Clerk. The notice of appeal shall state the
grounds for the appeal.
   (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall give written notice to the owner of the
property that is the subject of the decision and to the party who sought the
decision, if different from the owner. The written notice shall be delivered by
personal delivery, electronic mail, or by first-class mail.
   (3)   The owner or other party shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of
the written notice within which to file an appeal. Any other person
withstanding to appeal shall have thirty (30) days from receipt from any source
of actual or constructive notice of the decision within which to file an
appeal.
   (4)   It shall be conclusively presumed that all persons withstanding to
appeal have constructive notice of the decision from the date a sign containing
the words "Zoning Decision" or "Subdivision Decision" in letters at least six
(6) inches high and identifying the means to contact an official for
information about the decision is prominently posted on the property that is
the subject of the decision, provided the sign remains on the property for at
least ten (10) days. Posting of signs is not the only form of constructive
notice. Any such posting shall be the responsibility of the landowner or
applicant. Verification of the posting shall be provided to the Zoning
Administrator. Absent an ordinance provision to the contrary, posting of signs
shall not be required.
   (5)   The Zoning Administrator shall transmit to the Board of Adjustment all
documents and exhibits constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from is taken. The Zoning Administrator shall also provide a copy of the record
to the appellant and to the owner of the property that is the subject of the
appeal if the appellant is not the owner.
   (6)   An appeal of a notice of violation or other enforcement order stays
enforcement of the action appealed from unless the Zoning Administrator
certifies to the Board of Adjustment after notice of appeal has been filed that
because of the facts stated in an affidavit, a stay would cause imminent peril
to life or property or because the violation is transitory in nature, a stay
would seriously interfere with enforcement of the ordinance. In that case,
enforcement proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order,
which may be granted by a court. If enforcement proceedings are not stayed, the
appellant may file with the Zoning Administrator a request for an expedited
hearing of the appeal, and the Board of Adjustment shall meet to hear the
appeal within fifteen (15) days after such a request is filed. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, appeals of decisions granting a permit or otherwise affirming
that a proposed use of property is consistent with the ordinance shall not stay
the further review of an application for permits or permissions to use such
property; in these situations the appellant may request and the Board may grant
a stay of a final decision of permit applications or building permits affected
by the issue being appealed.
   (7)   Subject to the provisions of subdivision (6) of this subsection, the
Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide the appeal within a reasonable time.
   (8)   The Zoning Administrator shall be present at the hearing as a witness.
The appellant shall not be limited at the hearing to matters stated in the
notice of appeal. If any party or the Town would be unduly prejudiced by the
presentation of matters not presented in the notice of appeal, the Board shall
continue the hearing. The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the decision appealed from and shall make any order,
requirement, decision, or determination that ought to be made. To this end, the
Board shall have all the powers of the Zoning Administrator.
   (b)   Notice of hearings conducted pursuant to this section shall be mailed
to the person or entity whose appeal, application, or request is the subject of
the hearing; to the owner of the property that is the subject of the hearing if
the owner did not initiate the hearing; to the owners of all parcels of land
abutting the parcel of land that is the subject of the hearing. In the absence
of evidence to the contrary, the Town may rely on the county tax listing to
determine owners of property entitled to mailed notice. The notice must be
deposited in the mail at least ten (10) days, but not more than twenty- five
(25) days, prior to the date of the hearing. Within that same time period, the
Town shall also prominently post a notice of the hearing on the site that is
the subject of the hearing or on an adjacent street or highway right-of-way.
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10; Ord. of 6/30/14)
Section 9-3135   Stay of proceedings.
   An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the Zoning Enforcement Officer certifies to the Board of
Adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in his opinion cause
imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board
of Adjustment or by a court of record on application, on notice to the Zoning
Enforcement Officer and on due cause shown. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3136   Fees for variances and appeals.
   A fee, set by the Town Council, shall be paid to the Town Clerk of the town
for each application for a variance or appeal to cover the necessary
administrative costs and advertising. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3137   Powers and duties of the Board of Adjustment.
   The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers and duties:
   (a)   Administrative review.  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer in the enforcement of this chapter.
   (b)   Variances. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances
from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest
where, owning to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of
the chapter will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so
that the spirit of the chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare
secured, and substantial justice done. The existence of a non- conforming use
of neighboring land, buildings, or structures in the same district or of
permitted or non- conforming uses in other districts shall not constitute a
reason for the requested variance. Such variance may be granted in an
individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the Board of
Adjustment that the following conditions exist:
   (1)   There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the
particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or
topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the same
district.
   (2)   Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the applicant any
special privileges denied to other residents in the district in which the
property is located.
   (3)   A literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other residents of the
district in which the property is located.
   (4)   The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent
of this chapter and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general
welfare.
   (5)   The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the
applicant.
   (6)   The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible
the legal use of the land, building or structures.
   (7)   The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, building or
structure which is not permitted by right or by special exception in the
district involved. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10; Ord. of 6/30/14)
Section 9-3138   Appeals from the Board of Adjustment.
   Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by a decision of the
Board, may within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision in the
office of the Town Clerk, but not thereafter, present to the Superior Court of
Burke County a petition duly verified, setting forth that such decision is
illegal in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of illegality, whereupon
such decision of said Board shall be subject to review by certiorari as
provided by law. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3139 through section 9-3140 reserved.
ARTICLE M
Amendments
Section 9-3141   Procedure for amendments.
   The Town Council may amend, supplement or change the text regulations and
zoning district lines according to the following procedures:
   (a)   Initiation of amendments. Proposed changes or amendments may be
initiated by the Town Council, Planning Board, Board of Adjustment, or by one
or more owners or lessees of property within the area proposed to be changed or
affected.
   (b)   Petition. A petition for any change or amendment shall contain a
description and/or statement of the present and proposed zoning regulation or
district boundary to be applied and the names and addresses of the owner or
owners of the property. Such petition shall be filed with the Zoning
Enforcement Officer not later than three (3) weeks prior to the meeting at
which the petition is to be considered.
   (c)   Fee. A fee, set by the Town Council, shall be paid to the Town Clerk
of the town for each petition for an amendment to cover the costs of
advertising and other administrative expenses involved. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord.
of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3142   Action by the Planning Board.
   The Planning Board shall consider and make recommendations to the Town
Council concerning each proposed zoning amendment. The Planning Board, at its
own discretion, may hold a public hearing if deemed necessary by the Planning
Board. Otherwise, the Planning Board will send its recommendation directly to
the Town Council who shall hold a public hearing for every proposed zoning
amendment. The Planning Board shall advise and comment on whether the proposed
amendment is consistent with any land development plan that has been adopted
and any other officially adopted plan that is applicable. The Planning Board
shall provide a written recommendation to the Town Council that addresses plan
consistency and other matters deemed appropriate by the Planning Board. Any
comment by the Planning Board that a proposed text or map amendment is
inconsistent with any officially adopted plans shall not preclude consideration
or approval of the proposed amendment by Town Council. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord.
of 6/26/06; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3143   Town Council consideration.
   The Town Council shall consider changes and amendments to this chapter as
often as necessary, provided, however, that should the Town Council deny a
request for a zoning amendment, it shall not thereafter accept any other
petition for the same change of zoning district affecting the same property, or
any portion thereof, until the expiration of one (1) year from the date of such
previous denial. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3144   Required notifications.
   (a)   Legal notice of public hearing. No amendment shall be adopted by the
Town Council until after public notice and hearing. In accordance with G.S.
160A-364, notice of public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the town at least once each week for two (2) successive weeks
prior to the hearing. The first notice shall appear in the newspaper at least
ten (10) days but not more than twenty-five (25) days prior to the hearing.
   (b)   Mail notice requirements. In accordance with G.S. 160A-384, whenever
the amendment involves a change in the zoning classification of a parcel of
land, the owner of that parcel of land as shown on the county tax listing, and
the owners of all parcels of land abutting or within one hundred (100) linear
feet of that parcel of land as shown on the county tax listing, shall be mailed
a notice of the proposed reclassification and a notice of the public hearing
required in Section
9-3144(a). Such notice shall be sent by first class mail to the last address
listed for such owners on the county tax listing. The person responsible for
making the mailed notice shall certify to the Town Council that such notice was
indeed prepared and mailed. In accordance with G.S. 160A-384(c), whenever an
amendment involves a change in the zoning classification of a parcel of land,
the town shall prominently post a notice of the public hearing in the site
proposed for rezoning or on an adjacent right-of-way. When multiple parcels are
included within a proposed zoning map amendment, the town shall post sufficient
notices to provide reasonable notice to interested persons.
   (c)   Substitute notice.
   (1)   In accordance with G.S. 160A-384(b)(3), (4) and (5) individual mailed
notices may be waived in lieu of a substitute notice if the amendment meets at
least one of the following criteria:
   a.   If the zoning reclassification directly involves more than fifty (50)
properties, owned by a total of at least fifty (50) different owners;
   b.   If the proposal involves an amendment to the text of this chapter such
that it changes the permitted, conditional, or accessory uses of a zoning
district;
   c.   If the town is adopting a water supply watershed protection program as
required by G.S. 143-214.5.
   (2)   Notice requirements for amendments meeting any of the three criteria
of Section
9-3144(c)(1) above are as follows:
   a.   Notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the town at least once each week for two (2) consecutive
weeks prior to the hearing. The notice must include a map no less than one-half
the size of the newspaper page. The map must show the boundaries of the area
affected by the proposed amendment;
   b.   The town must notify by first class mail any property owner who resides
outside the town’s zoning jurisdiction or outside the circulation area of the
newspaper in which the notice is published. The notice must be mailed to the
last address listed for such owners on the most recent county tax listing.
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 6/26/06; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3145   Town Council action.
   Before taking such lawful action as it may deem advisable, the Town Council
shall consider the Planning Board’s recommendations on each proposed zoning
amendment. If no recommendations are received from the Planning Board within
thirty (30) days after their meeting, the proposed amendment shall be deemed to
have been approved by the Planning Board. Prior to adopting or rejecting any
zoning amendment, Town Council shall adopt a statement describing whether its
action is consistent with the adopted land use plan and explaining why the
Council considers its action to be reasonable and in the public interest (G.S.
160A-383). In accordance with G.S. 160A-381(d) and 160A-75, a council member
shall not vote on any zoning map or text amendment where the outcome of the
matter being considered is reasonably likely to have a direct, substantial and
readily identifiable impact on the member. Under no circumstances shall the
Town Council adopt such amendments that would cause this chapter to violate the
watershed protection rules as adopted by the North Carolina Environmental
Management Commission. Amendments affecting the watershed protection portions
of this chapter shall be filed with the North Carolina Division of
Environmental Management, the North Carolina Division of Environmental Health,
and the North Carolina Division of Community Assistance. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord.
of 6/26/06; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3146   Protest petitions.
   (a)   General. A protest petition may be presented against any proposed
amendment. To qualify as a protest petition under this section must be signed
by the owners of either (i) twenty percent (20%) or more of the area included
in the proposed change or (ii) five percent (5%) of a one hundred (100)-foot-
wide buffer extending along the entire boundary of each discrete or separate
area proposed to be rezoned. A street right-of-way shall not be considered in
the computing of the one hundred (100)-foot buffer area as long as that street
right-of-way is one hundred (100) feet or less. When less than an entire parcel
of land is subject to the proposed zoning map amendment, the one hundred (100)-
foot buffer shall be measured from the property line of that parcel (G.S. 385
(a)). In the case of a valid protest petition, the amendment shall not become
effective except by favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the
Town Council.
   (b)   Petition requirements. No protest petition against any change in or
amendment to this chapter or zoning map shall be valid unless presented in the
form of a written petition actually bearing the signatures of the requisite
number of property owners and stating that the signers do indeed protest the
proposed amendment or change. Furthermore, the protest petition must be
received by the Town Clerk in sufficient time to allow the Town at least two
(2) normal working days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays,
before the date established for a public hearing on the proposed change or
amendment in order to determine the sufficiency and accuracy of the petition.
(G.S. 160A-387). A person who has signed a protest petition may withdraw his or
her name from the petition at any time prior to the vote on the proposed zoning
amendment (G.S. 160A-386). Only those protest petitions that meet the
qualifying standards set by G.S. 160A-385 at the time of the vote shall trigger
the three-fourths (3/4) majority.
   (c)   Petition applicability. The foregoing provisions about protest
petitions shall not be applicable to any amendment, which initially zones a
property added to the territorial coverage of the ordinance because of
annexation or other means.
   (d)   Voting calculations. In accordance with G.S. 160A-385(a), vacant
positions on the Town Council and members who are excused from voting shall not
be used in the calculation of the three-fourths (3/4) majority.
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 6/26/06; Ord. of 12/6/10)
State law reference: Planning agency to certify ordinance to City Council, see
G.S. 160A-387
Section 9-3147 through section 9-3150 reserved.
ARTICLE N
Watershed Protection
Section 9-3151   Authority and enactment.
   The state legislature has, in G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 19, Planning and
Regulation of Development; and in G.S. Chapter 143, Article 21, Watershed
Protection Rules, delegated the responsibility or directed local governmental
units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare of its citizenry. The town does hereby ordain and enact into
law the following articles as the “Watershed Protection Ordinance of Valdese,
North Carolina.” (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3152   Jurisdiction.
   The provisions of this article shall apply within the overlay zones
designated as a Public Water Supply Watershed as defined and established on the
“Official Zoning Map of Valdese, North Carolina” (“the Zoning Map”), such
overlay zones being adopted simultaneously herewith. The zoning map and all
explanatory matter contained thereon accompany and are hereby made a part of
this article. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3153   Exceptions to applicability.
   (a)   Development activities that do not require a sedimentation/erosion
control plan are exempt from the requirements of this article.
   (b)   Existing development, as defined in this article, is not subject to
the requirements of this article. Existing development is defined as those
projects that are built or those projects that at a minimum have established a
vested right under North Carolina zoning law as of the effective date of this
chapter based on at least one of the following criteria:
   (1)   Having expended substantial resources (time, labor, money) based on a
good faith reliance upon having received a valid local government approval to
proceed with the project;
   (2)   Having an outstanding valid building permit as authorized by G.S.
153A-344.1 and G.S. 160A-385.1; or
   (3)   Having an approved site specific or phased development plan as
authorized by G.S. 153A-344.1 and G.S. 160A-385.1.
   (c)   Expansions to structures classified as existing development must meet
the requirements of this chapter; however, the built-upon area of the existing
development is not required to be included in the density calculations.    
(d)   Reconstruction of buildings or built-upon areas. Any existing building or
built-upon area not in conformance with the restrictions of this chapter that
has been damaged or removed may be repaired and/or reconstructed, except that
there are no restrictions on single-family residential redevelopment, provided:
   (1)   Repair or reconstruction is initiated within twelve (12) months and
completed within two (2) years of such damage.
   (2)   The total amount of space devoted to built-upon area may not be
increased unless stormwater control that equals or exceeds the previous
development is provided.
   (e)   If a non-conforming lot of record is not contiguous to any other lot
owned by the same party, then that lot of record shall not be subject to the
development restrictions of this chapter if it is developed for single family
purposes (and zoned for this use). (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3154   Cluster or planned unit development.
   Cluster or planned unit development is allowed in all watershed areas under
the following conditions:
   (a)   Development activities shall comply with the respective requirements
of Article D and Article I of this chapter.
   (b)   All built-upon areas shall be designed and located to minimize
stormwater runoff impact to the receiving waters and minimize concentrated
stormwater flow.
   (c)   The remainder of the tract shall remain in a vegetated or natural
state. The title to the open space area shall be conveyed to an incorporated
homeowners association for management; to a local government for preservation
as a park or open space; or to a conservation organization for preservation in
a permanent easement. Where a property association is not incorporated, a
maintenance agreement shall be filed with the deeds. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of
12/6/10)
Section 9-3155   Buffer areas required.
   (a)   A minimum one hundred (100) foot vegetative buffer is required for all
new development activities that exceed the low density option; otherwise a
minimum thirty (30) foot vegetative buffer for development activities in the
protected area is required along all perennial waters, and a minimum fifty (50)
foot vegetative buffer for development activities in the critical area is
required along all perennial waters indicated in the most recent versions of
USGS 1:24,000 (seven and one-half (7.5) minute) scale topographic maps or as
determined by local studies. Artificial streambank stabilization is permitted.
   (b)   No new development is allowed in the buffer except for water dependent
structures and public projects such as road crossings and greenways and their
appurtenances where no practical alternative exists. These activities should
minimize built-upon surface area, direct runoff away from the surface waters
and maximize the utilization of stormwater best management practices. (Ord. of
1/10/05; Ord. of 1/8/07; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3156   Watershed Administrator and duties thereof.
   (a)   The Watershed Administrator shall be the same as the Zoning
Enforcement Officer as described in this chapter.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the Watershed Administrator to administer and
enforce the provisions of this article as follows:
   (1)   The Watershed Administrator shall issue zoning permits and
certificates of occupancy as provided in this chapter. A record of all permits
shall be kept on file and shall be available for public inspection during
regular office hours of the Administrator.
   (2)   The Watershed Administrator shall serve as staff to the Planning
Board, Board of Adjustment, and Town Council.
   (3)   The Watershed Administrator shall keep records of all amendments to
the local water supply watershed protection ordinance and shall provide copies
of all amendments upon adoption to the Division of Water Quality.
   (4)   The Watershed Administrator is granted the authority to administer and
enforce the provisions of this article, exercising in the fulfillment of his
responsibility the full zoning and police power of the town. The Watershed
Administrator, or his duly authorized representative, may enter any building,
structure, or premises, as provided by law, to perform any duty imposed upon
him by this article.
   (5)   The Watershed Administrator shall keep a record of variances to the
local water supply watershed protection ordinance. This record shall be
submitted each calendar year to the Division of Water Quality on or before
January 1st of the following calendar year and shall provide a description of
each project receiving a variance and the reasons for granting the variance.
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3157   Appeal from the Watershed Administrator.
   (a)   Any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
Watershed Administrator may be appealed to and decided by the Board of
Adjustment.
   (b)   An appeal from a decision of the Watershed Administrator must be
submitted to the Board of Adjustment within thirty (30) days from the date the
order, interpretation, decision or determination is made. All appeals must be
made in writing stating the reasons for appeal. Following submission of an
appeal, the Watershed Administrator shall transmit to the Board all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
   (c)   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed,
unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board after
the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in
the certificate, a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the Board or by a court of record on
application of notice of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and upon due
cause shown.
   (d)   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give
notice thereof to the parties and shall decide the same within a reasonable
time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney.
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3158   Establishment of a Watershed Review Board.
   There shall be and hereby is created the Watershed Review Board consisting
of the same membership as the Town Council. Terms for members of the Watershed
Review Board shall coincide with the membership terms for the Town Council.
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3159   Powers and duties of the Watershed Review Board and Board of
Adjustment.
   (a)   The Board of Adjustment shall be responsible for reviewing and hearing
all major and minor watershed variance cases, and shall proceed as provided in
Article XI of the this chapter for zoning variances when reviewing all
watershed variance cases.
   (b)   If the application calls for the granting of a major watershed
variance, and if the Board of Adjustment decides in favor or granting the major
watershed variance, the Board shall prepare a preliminary record of the hearing
with all deliberate speed. The preliminary record of the hearing shall include:
   (1)   The variance applications;
   (2)   The hearing notices;
   (3)   The evidence presented;
   (4)   Motions, offers of proof, objections to evidence, and rulings on them;
   (5)   Proposed findings and exceptions;
   (6)   The proposed decision, including all conditions proposed to be added
to the permit.
   (c)   The preliminary record shall be sent to the Environmental Management
Commission (EMC) for its review as follows:
   (1)   If the EMC concludes from the preliminary record that the variance
qualifies as a major variance and that (1) the property owner can secure no
reasonable return from, nor make any practical use of the property unless the
proposed variance is granted, and (2) the variance, if granted, will not result
in a serious threat to the water supply, then the EMC shall approve the
variance as proposed or approve the proposed variance with conditions and
stipulations. The EMC shall prepare a decision and send it to the Board of
Adjustment. If the EMC approves the variance as proposed, the Board of
Adjustment shall prepare a final decision granting the proposed variance. If
the EMC approves the variance with conditions and stipulations, the Board of
Adjustment shall prepare a final decision, including such conditions and
stipulations, granting the proposed variance.
   (2)   If the EMC concludes from the preliminary record that the variance
qualifies as a major variance and that (1) the property owner can secure a
reasonable return from or make a practical use of the property without the
variance or (2) the variance, if granted, will result in a serious threat to
the water supply, then the EMC shall deny approval of the variance as proposed.
The EMC shall prepare a commission decision and send it to the Board of
Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment shall prepare a final decision denying the
variance as proposed.
   (d)   Written notification shall be given to local governments having
jurisdiction and any entity using the water supply for consumption where a
variance is being considered. The local government and entity shall have a
reasonable comment period prior to review by the Board of Adjustment.
   (e)   Approval of all development with densities greater than that specified
in Article E of this chapter shall be the authority of the Town Council/
Watershed Review Board. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3160   Appeals from the Town Council or Board of Adjustment.
   Appeals from the Town Council or Board of Adjustment must be filed with the
Superior Court within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision. The
decisions by the Superior Court will be in the manner of certiorari. (Ord. of
1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3161   High density development standards.
   The Town Council may approve high density development proposals consistent
with the following standards:
   (a)   WS-IV-Critical Areas—Where new development requires a sedimentation/
erosion control plan and exceeds either two (2) dwelling units per acre, or
twenty-four (24%) built-upon area, engineered storm- water controls shall be
used to control runoff from the first inch of rainfall and development shall
not exceed fifty (50%) built-upon area.
   (b)   WS-IV-Protected Areas—Where new development requires a sedimentation/
erosion control plan and exceeds either two (2) dwelling units per acre, or
twenty-four (24%) built-upon area (or three (3) dwelling units per acre or
thirty-six percent (36%) built-upon area for projects without curb and gutter
street system), engineered stormwater controls shall be used to control runoff
from the first inch of rainfall and development shall not exceed seventy (70%)
built-upon area. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3162   High density development permit application.
   (a)   A high density development permit shall be required for new
development exceeding the density requirements specified in Article E of this
chapter.
   (b)   Application for a high density development permit shall be addressed
and submitted to the Town Council through the Watershed Administrator.
Application for a high density development permit shall be made on the proper
form and shall include the following information:
   (1)   A completed high density development permit application signed by the
owner of the property. The signature of the consulting engineer or other agent
will be accepted on the application only if accompanied by a letter of
authorization;
   (2)   Ten (10) reproducible copies of the development plan including
detailed information concerning built-upon area;
   (3)   Ten (10) reproducible copies of the plans and specifications of the
stormwater control structure consistent with Section
9-3163;
   (4)   When required by law, written verification that a soil erosion and
sedimentation control plan has been approved by the appropriate state or local
agency;
   (5)   Permit application fees consistent with Section
9-3165;
   (c)   Prior to taking final action on any application, the Board or the
Watershed Administrator may provide an opportunity to public agencies affected
by the development proposal to review and make recommendations on the
application. However, failure of the agencies to submit their comments and
recommendations shall not delay the Board’s action within the prescribed time
limit.
   (d)   Public hearing. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Town
Council shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be published
in a newspaper of general circulation at least seven (7) days prior to the date
of the hearing. The notice shall state the location of the building, lot or
tract in question, the intended use of the property, the need for engineered
stormwater controls and the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the
applicant or designated representative thereof shall appear for the purposes of
offering testimony and recommendations concerning the application. The Board
shall also allot reasonable time for the expression of views by any member of
the public attending the meeting in person or represented by an attorney
provided the testimony bears on the findings the Board must make.
   (e)   Conditions for a high density development permit.
   (1)   The Town Council shall issue a high density development permit within
sixty-five (65) days of its first consideration upon finding that the proposal
is consistent with the applicable standards set forth in the watershed
protection ordinance and the following conditions are met:
   a.   The use will not endanger the public health or safety if located where
proposed and developed according to the plan as submitted and approved;
   b.   The use minimizes impacts to water quality through the best management
practices, cluster development, and/or maximum setbacks from perennial waters;
   c.   The use is vital to the continued growth and economic development of
the town.
   d.   The use is consistent with the officially adopted land development
plans for the town.
   (2)   If the Town Council finds that any one of the above conditions is not
met, the Board shall deny the application.
   (f)   In addition to any other requirements provided by this chapter, the
Board may designate additional permit conditions and requirements to assure
that the use will be harmonious with the area in which it is proposed to be
located and with the spirit of this chapter. All additional conditions shall be
entered in the minutes of the meeting, at which the permit is granted, on all
plans and on the permit certificate. All conditions so imposed shall run with
the land and shall be binding upon the applicant and the applicant’s heirs,
successors or assigns during the continuation of the permitted use.
   (g)   The Board shall issue a written ruling and make copies available at
the office of the Watershed Administrator and the Town Clerk. If the Board
approves the application based on its findings, such approval shall be
indicated on the permit and all copies of the site plan and all copies of the
plans and specifications of the stormwater control structure(s). A high density
development permit shall be issued after the applicant posts a performance bond
or other acceptable security as required in Section
9-3164(b)(1) and executes an operation and maintenance agreement as required in
Section
9-3164(c). A copy of the permit and one copy of each set of plans shall be kept
on file at the Watershed Administrator’s office. The original permit and one
copy of each set of plans shall be delivered to the applicant either by
personal service or registered mail, return receipt requested. (Ord. of 1/10/
05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3163   Stormwater control structures.
   (a)   All stormwater control structures shall be designed by a North
Carolina registered professional engineer.
   (b)   All stormwater controls shall use wet detention ponds as a primary
treatment system unless alternative stormwater management measures, as outlined
in Section
9-3163(c), are used. Wet detention ponds shall be designed for specific
pollutant removal according to modeling techniques approved by the North
Carolina Division of Environmental Management. Specific requirements for these
systems shall be in accordance with the following design criteria:
   (1)   Wet detention ponds shall be designed to remove eighty-five percent
(85%) of total suspended solids in the permanent pool and storage run-off from
a one-inch rainfall from the site above the permanent pool;
   (2)   The designed run-off storage volume shall be above the permanent pool;
   (3)   The discharge rate from these systems following the one-inch rainfall
design storm shall be such that the run-off does not draw down to the permanent
pool level in less than two (2) days and that the pond is drawn down to the
permanent pool level within at least five (5) days;
   (4)   The mean permanent pool depth shall be a minimum of three (3) feet;
   (5)   The inlet structure shall be designed to minimize turbulence using
baffles or other appropriate design features;
   (6)   Vegetative filters shall be constructed for the overflow and discharge
of all stormwater wet detention ponds and shall be at least thirty (30) feet in
length. The slope and width of the vegetative filter shall be determined so as
to provide a non-erosive velocity of flow through the filter for a ten (10)-
year, twenty-four (24) hour storm with a ten (10) year, one (1) hour intensity
with a slope of five percent (5%) or less. Vegetation in the filter shall be
natural vegetation, grasses or artificially planted wetland vegetation
appropriate for the site characteristics; and
   (7)   All stormwater control structures shall be enclosed by a fence with a
minimum height of six (6) feet.
   (c)   Alternative stormwater management systems, consisting of one treatment
option or a combination of treatment options, may be used. The design criteria
for approval shall be eighty-five percent (85%) average annual removal of total
suspended solids. Also, the discharge rate shall meet one of the following
criteria:
   (1)   The discharge rate following the one-inch design storm shall be such
that the runoff draws down to the pre-storm design stage within five (5) days,
but not less than two (2) days; or
   (2)   The post development peak discharge rate shall equal the
predevelopment rate for the one-year, 24-hour storm.
   (d)   In addition to the vegetative filters required in Section
9-3163(b)(6), all land areas outside of the pond shall be provided with a
ground cover sufficient to restrain erosion within thirty (30) days after any
land disturbance. Upon completion of the stormwater control structure, a
permanent ground cover shall be established and maintained as part of the
maintenance agreement described in Section
9-3164(c).
   (e)   An easement in the property containing the stormwater control
structure allowing the town to perform inspections, maintenance, repairs,
reconstruction, and any other acts which may be required in order for the town
to carry out the provisions of this article, along with any easements necessary
for general access to the stormwater control structure shall be prepared
consistent with Section
9-3167(a) and (b) and recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of Burke
County. The area in which this easement is granted shall include the detention
pond, vegetative filters, all pipes and water control structures, berms, dikes,
etc., and sufficient area to perform inspections, maintenance, repairs and
reconstruction.
   (f)   Qualifying areas of the stormwater control structure may be considered
pervious when computing total built-upon area. However, if the structure is
used to compute the percentage built-upon area for one site, it shall not be
used to compute the built-upon area for any other site or area. (Ord. of 1/10/
05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3164   Posting of financial security required.
   (a)   All new stormwater control structures shall be conditioned on the
posting of adequate financial assurance for the purpose of maintenance,
reconstruction, or repairs necessary for adequate performance of the stormwater
control structures.
   (b)   Financial assurance shall be in the form of the following:
   (1)   Security performance bond or other security. The permit applicant
shall obtain either a performance bond from a surety bonding company authorized
to do business in North Carolina, an irrevocable letter of credit or other
instrument readily convertible into cash at face value payable to the town or
placed in escrow with a financial institution designated as an official
depository of the town. The bond or other instrument shall be in an amount
equal to one and one-quarter (1.25) times the total cost of the stormwater
control structure, as estimated by the applicant and approved by the town. The
total cost of the stormwater control structure shall include the value of all
materials such as piping and other structures; seeding and soil stabilization;
design and engineering; and, grading, excavation, fill, etc. The costs shall
not be prorated as part of a larger project, but rather under the assumption of
an independent mobilization.
   (2)   Cash or equivalent security deposited after the release of the
performance bond. Consistent with Section
9-3167(c)(1), the permit applicant shall deposit with the town either cash or
other instrument approved by the Town Attorney that is readily convertible into
cash at face value. The cash or security shall be in an amount equal to fifteen
percent (15%) of the total cost of the stormwater control structure or the
estimated cost of maintaining the stormwater control structure over a ten (10)
year period, whichever is greater. The estimated cost of maintaining the
stormwater control structure shall be consistent with the approved operation
and maintenance plan or manual provided by the developer under Section
9-3165(a).
   (c)   Consistent with Section
9-3162, the permit applicant shall enter into a binding operation and
maintenance agreement between the town and all interests in the development.
Said agreement shall require the owning entity to maintain, repair and, if
necessary, reconstruct the stormwater control structure in accordance with the
operation and management plan or manual provided by the developer. The
operation and maintenance agreement shall be filed with the County Register of
Deeds by the Watershed Administrator.
   (d)   Default under the performance bond or other security. Upon default of
the permit applicant to complete and/or maintain the stormwater control
structure as specifically provided in the performance bond or other security,
the town may obtain and use all or any portion of the funds necessary to
complete the improvements based on an engineering estimate. The town shall
return any funds not spent in completing the improvements to the owning entity.
   (e)   Default under the cash security. Upon default of the owning entity to
maintain, repair and, if necessary, reconstruct the stormwater control
structure in accordance with the operation and maintenance agreement, the town
shall obtain and use all or any portion of the cash security to make necessary
improvements based on an engineering estimate. Such expenditure of funds shall
only be made after exhausting all other reasonable remedies seeking the owning
entity to comply with the terms and conditions of the operation and maintenance
agreement. The town shall not return any of the deposited cash funds. (Ord. of
1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3165   Maintenance and upkeep.
   (a)   An operation and maintenance plan or manual shall be provided by the
developer for each storm water control structure, indicating what operation and
maintenance actions are needed, what specific quantitative criteria will be
used for determining when those actions are to be taken and, consistent with
the operation and maintenance agreement, who is responsible for those actions.
The plan shall clearly indicate the steps that will be taken for restoring a
stormwater control structure to design specifications if a failure occurs.
   (b)   Landscaping and grounds management shall be the responsibility of the
owning entity. However, vegetation shall not be established or allowed to
mature to the extent that the integrity of the control structure is diminished
or threatened, or to the extent of interfering with any easement to the
stormwater control structure.
   (c)   Except for general landscaping and grounds management, the owning
entity shall notify the Watershed Administrator prior to any repair or
reconstruction of the stormwater control structure. All improvements shall be
made consistent with the approved plans and specifications of the stormwater
control structure and the operation and maintenance plan or manual. After
notification by the owning entity, the Town Engineer shall inspect the
completed improvements and shall inform the owning entity of any required
additions, changes or modifications and of the time period to complete said
improvements.
   (d)   Amendments to the plans and specifications of the stormwater control
structure and/or the operation and maintenance plan or manual shall be approved
by the Town Council. Proposed changes shall be prepared by a North Carolina
registered professional engineer and submitted to and reviewed by the Watershed
Administrator prior to consideration by the Town Council.
   (1)   If the Town Council approves the proposed changes, the owning entity
of the stormwater control structure shall file sealed copies of the revisions
with the office of the Watershed Administrator.
   (2)   If the Town Council disapprove the changes, the proposal may be
revised and resubmitted to the Town Council as a new proposal. If the proposal
has not been revised and is essentially the same as that already reviewed, it
shall be returned to the applicant.
   (e)   If the Town Council finds that the operation and maintenance plan or
manual is inadequate for any reason, the Board shall notify the owning entity
of any required changes and shall prepare and file copies of the revised
agreement with the County Register of Deeds, the office of the Watershed
Administrator and the owning entity. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3166   Application and inspection fees.
   (a)   Processing and inspection fees shall be submitted in the form of a
check or money order made payable to the town. Applications shall be returned
if not accompanied by the required fee.
   (b)   A permit and inspection fee schedule, as approved by the town, shall
be posted in the office of the Watershed Administrator.
   (c)   Inspection fees shall be valid for sixty (60) days. An inspection fee
shall be required when improvements are made to the stormwater control
structure consistent with Section
9-3165(c), except in the case when a similar fee has been paid within the last
sixty (60) days. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3167   Inspections and release of the performance bond.
   (a)   The stormwater control structure shall be inspected by the town, after
the owning entity notifies the Watershed Administrator that all work has been
completed. At this inspection, the owning entity shall provide:
   (1)   The survey plat showing the stormwater control structure and related
easement(s), and the signed easement(s) ready for filing with the Burke County
Register of Deeds;
   (2)   A certification sealed by an engineer or landscape architect (to the
extent that general statutes allow) stating that the stormwater control
structure is complete and consistent with the approved plans and
specifications.
   (b)   The Watershed Administrator shall present the materials submitted by
the developer and the inspection report and recommendations to the Town Council
at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
   (1)   If the Town Council approve the inspection report and accepts the
certification and deed of easement, the Town shall file the easement with the
Burke County Register of Deeds, release up to seventy-five percent (75%) of the
value of the performance bond or other security and direct the Burke County
Buildings Inspections Department to issue a certificate of occupancy for the
stormwater control structure.
   (2)   If deficiencies are found, the town shall direct that improvements and
inspections be made and documents corrected and submitted to the town.
   (c)   No sooner than one (1) year after date of filing of the deed of
easement, and maintenance agreement, the developer may petition the town to
release the remaining value of the performance bond or other security. Upon
receipt of said petition, the town shall inspect the stormwater control
structure to determine whether the controls are performing as designed and
intended. The Watershed Administrator shall present the petition and findings
to the Town Council.
   (1)   If the Town Council approve the report and accepts the petition, the
developer shall deposit with the town a cash amount equal to that described in
Section
9-3164(b)(2), after which the Town Council shall release the performance bond
or other security.
   (2)   If the Town Council does not accept the report and rejects the
petition, the town shall provide the developer with instructions to correct any
deficiencies and all steps necessary for the release of the performance bond or
other security.
   (d)   A certificate of occupancy from the Burke County Buildings Inspections
Department shall not be issued for any building within the permitted
development until the Town Council has approved the stormwater control
structure, as provided in Section
9-3167(b).
   (e)   All stormwater control structures shall be inspected at least on an
annual basis to determine whether the controls are performing as designed and
intended. Records of inspection shall be maintained on forms approved or
supplied by the North Carolina Division of Environmental Management. Annual
inspections shall begin within one (1) year of filing date of the deed for the
stormwater control structure.
   (f)   In the event the Watershed Administrator discovers the need for
corrective action or improvements, the Watershed Administrator shall notify the
owning entity of the needed improvements and the date by which the corrective
action is to be completed. All improvements shall be made consistent with the
plans and specifications of the stormwater control structure and the operation
and maintenance plan or manual. After notification by the owning entity, the
town shall inspect and approve the completed improvements. (Ord. of 1/10/05;
Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3168   Remedies.
   (a)   If any subdivision, development and/or land use is found to be in
violation of this article, the town may, in addition to all other remedies
available either in law or in equity, institute a civil penalty in the amount
of fifty dollars ($50), institute actions or proceedings to restrain, correct,
or abate the violations; to prevent occupancy of the building, structure, or
land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about the
premises. In addition, the North Carolina Environmental Management Commission
may assess civil penalties in accordance with G.S. 143-215.6A. Each day the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (b)   If the Watershed Administrator finds that any of the provisions of
this chapter are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person
responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation, and
ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of
the illegal use of land, buildings or structures; removal of illegal buildings
or structures, or of additions, alterations or structural changes thereto;
discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any action
authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of
its provisions. If a ruling of the Watershed Administrator is questioned, the
aggrieved party or parties may appeal such ruling to the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3169   Sanctions.
   In addition to the remedies described in Section
9-3168 of this chapter and consistent with G.S. 160A-175, the Town Council may
seek enforcement of this chapter by assessing a civil penalty to be recovered
by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not
pay the penalty in a prescribed period of time after being cited for violation
of the chapter. Such violation may be enforced by an appropriate equitable
remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction. The court may issue an
injunction and order of abatement commanding the defendant to correct the
unlawful condition upon or cease the unlawful use of the property. The action
shall be governed in all respects by the laws and rules governing civil
proceedings, including the rules of civil procedure in general and Rule 65 in
particular. If the defendant fails or refuses to comply with an injunction or
with an order of abatement within the time allowed by the court, the defendant
may be cited for contempt and the town may execute the order of abatement. The
town shall have a lien on the property for the cost of executing an order
ofabatement in the nature of a mechanic’s and materialman’s lien. The defendant
may secure cancellation of an order of abatement by paying all costs of the
proceedings and posting a bond for compliance with the order. The bond shall be
given with sureties approved by the Clerk of Superior Court in an amount
approved by the judge before whom the matter is heard and shall be conditioned
on the defendant’s full compliance with the terms of the order of abatement
within a time fixed by the judge. Cancellation of an order of abatement shall
not suspend or cancel an injunction issued in conjunction therewith.
Enforcement of this chapter may be by any one, all or a combination of the
remedies authorized in this chapter. Each day’s continuing violation shall be a
separate and distinct offense. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3170   Criminal penalties.
   Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with G.S. 14-
4. The maximum fine for each offense shall not exceed five hundred dollars
($500). Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3171 through section 9-3180 reserved.
ARTICLE O
Legal Status Provisions
Section 9-3181   Conflict with other regulations.
   (a)   Whenever the regulations of this chapter require a greater width or
size of yards, or other open space, or require a lower height of buildings, or
require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other more
restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statutes, the
regulations and requirements of this chapter shall govern.
   (b)   Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive
standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such statute
shall govern. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3182   Repeal of existing zoning ordinance.
   All zoning ordinances or parts of same now in effect in the town are hereby
repealed; provided, however, that all suits at law or in equity and/or all
prosecutions resulting from the violation of any zoning ordinance heretofore in
effect, which are now pending in any of the courts of this state or of the
United States, shall not be abated or abandoned by reason of the adoption of
this chapter but shall be prosecuted to their finality the same as if this
chapter had not been adopted; any and all violations of existing zoning
ordinances, prosecutions for which have not yet been instituted, may be
hereafter filed and prosecuted; and nothing in this chapter shall be so
construed as to abandon, abate, or dismiss any litigation or prosecution now
pending, and/or which may have heretofore been instituted or prosecuted. (Ord.
of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3183   Validity.
   Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to
be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity
of the chapter as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared
to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3184   Enactment.
   The Mayor and Town do hereby ordain and enact into law these articles and
sections on this 10th day of January, 2005. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3185 through section 9-3194 reserved.
ARTICLE P
Telecommunications Tower Ordinance
Section 9-3195   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
   (a)   Alternative tower structure. Alternative tower structure shall mean
clock towers, sculptures, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-
design mounting structures that conceal the presence of antennas or towers and
are architecturally compatible with the area.
   (b)   Pre-existing towers and antennas. Pre-existing towers and antennas
shall mean any tower or antenna on which a permit has been properly issued
prior to the effective date of this chapter.
   (c)   Telecommunications tower. Telecommunications tower shall mean any
structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of
supporting one (1) or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers,
guy towers or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, personal communications service towers (PCS), microwave
towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower
structures, and the like. This definition does not include any structure
erected solely for a residential, non-commercial individual use, such as
television antennas, satellite dishes or amateur radio antennas. (Ord. of 1/10/
05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3196   General guidelines and requirements.
   (a)   Purpose; goals. The purpose of this article is to establish general
guidelines for the siting of towers and antennas. The goals of this article are
to: (i) encourage the location of towers in non-residential/non-historical
areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout the community, (ii)
enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide
such services to the community quickly, effectively and efficiently; (iii)
encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sites, (iv)
encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible,
in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal, and (v)
encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that
minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas.
   (b)   Principal use.   Telecommunication towers shall be considered
principal uses. Alternative tower structures may be considered principal or
accessory uses. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower
or antenna complies with district development regulations, including, but not
limited to, setback requirements, lot size and coverage requirements, and other
such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though
the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lots. (Ord.
of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
Section 9-3197   Administrative approved uses.
   The following uses may be approved by the Zoning Administrator after
conducting an administrative review:
   (a)   Installing an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower
(such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, utility pole or other free-
standing, non- residential structure) in any zoning district that is more than
fifty (50) feet in height, so long as such addition does not add more than
twenty (20) feet to the height of the existing structure;
   (b)   Installing an antenna on an existing non- residential structure other
than a tower (such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, utility pole
or other free-standing, non-residential structure) in any commercial or
industrial zoning district that is less than fifty (50) feet in height so long
as such addition does not add more than twenty (20) feet to the height of the
existing structure;.
   (c)   Installing an antenna on an existing tower of any height, including a
pre-existing tower and further including the placement of additional buildings
or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna, so long as
the addition of said antenna adds no more than twenty (20) feet to the height
of said existing tower;
   (d)   Locating any alternative tower structure in any zoning district if, in
the judgment of the Zoning Administrator, it is in conformity with the goals
set forth in Section
9-3196(a) of this article;
   (e)   Replacing an existing tower which adds no more than twenty (20) feet
to the overall height of the existing structure.
   (f)   Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional
buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or
antenna, in the B-2 General Business District and the M-1 General Manufacturing
District provided that such towers and antennas shall be located within seven
hundred fifty (750) feet of the Interstate 40 right-of-way and provided that
the following requirements are also met:
   (1)   Evidence must be provided which establishes that the communications
tower is structurally designed to support at least one (1) additional user and
the application includes a statement that the owner of the tower is willing to
permit other user(s) to attach communication facilities, on a commercially
reasonable basis, which do not interfere with the primary purpose of the tower.
The tower owner may require that such other users agree to negotiate regarding
reasonable compensation for any liability which may result from such
attachment. The site plan shall show a location for at least one equipment
building in addition to that proposed for use by the applicant. Priority for
co- location on the proposed tower shall be given to antennas that will serve a
public safety need for the community.
   (2)   In order to provide spatial separation and create a visual block from
adjacent properties and streets, a buffer shall be installed around the outside
of all improvements on the site, including the tower and guy anchors, any
ground buildings or equipment, and security fencing. The tower’s guy anchors
may be screened or fenced separately in order to comply with the requirements
of this subsection. Buffering shall be required as stated in Section
9-3046.
   (3)   The base of the tower and each guy anchor shall be surrounded by a
security fence or wall at least eight (8) feet in height unless the tower and
all guy anchors are mounted entirely on a building over eight (8) feet in
height. The tower’s guy anchors may be screened or fenced separately in order
to comply with the requirements of this subsection.
   (4)   No outside storage shall be allowed on any telecommunication facility
site.
   (5)   Associated buildings shall not be used as a place of employment for
any worker. This provision does not prohibit the periodic maintenance or
periodic monitoring of equipment and instruments.
   (6)   The telecommunications tower shall meet all applicable Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) standards and shall not restrict or interfere
with air traffic or air travel from or to any existing or proposed airport. Any
lighting shall not project onto surrounding residential property.
   (7)   The minimum lot size requirement shall be in accordance with the
zoning district where the tower is proposed to be located or the setback
requirements of subsection (11), whichever is greater.
   (8)   The color of the tower shall be neutral, except to the extent required
by federal law, so as to minimize its visual impact.
   (9)   In order to protect the public from unnecessary exposure to
electromagnetic radiation, the tower owner shall provide documentation, such as
a signed affidavit, indicating that the power density levels do not exceed
levels certified by the FCC.
   (10)   No commercial advertising shall be allowed on the facility’s site.
   (11)   Setback of the base of the tower from all adjacent property lines
shall be one (1) foot for each foot in height. To encourage shared use of
towers, applications for towers which will operate with more than one user
immediately upon completion may have a ten percent (10%) reduction in the
required setbacks, but in no case shall the setback be less than those required
for the underlying zoning district. Also, to encourage the construction of
monopole structures, monopole towers may have a sixty (60%) reduction in the
required setbacks. In no case shall the setback be less than those required for
the underlying zoning district. To encourage location of towers in existing
forested areas with a minimum depth of sixty-five (65) feet, the tower may have
a twenty (20%) reduction in the required setbacks. In no case shall the setback
be less than those required for the underlying zoning district. These reduced
setbacks shall not be cumulative. Said setback reductions shall only be allowed
upon a professional engineering certification which states that the structures
construction will cause the tower to crumble inward so that in the event of
collapse no damage to structures on adjacent zoning lots will result.
   (12)   Notice shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator when the tower
is placed out of service. Towers which are not used for a period of six (6)
months or more shall be removed by the owner within one hundred twenty (120)
days of receipt of notification to that effect.
   (13)   Monopole construction for all new telecommunication towers shall be
required. Stealth technology and application is encouraged to be consistent
with the surrounding area.
   (14)   A telecommunications tower shall not exceed the maximum height of one
hundred ninety-nine (199) feet above ground level.
   (g)   Locating a telecommunication tower on town owned property in any
zoning district anywhere in the town limits as a principal or accessory use if,
in the judgment of the Zoning Administrator, it is in conformity with goals set
forth in Section
9-3196(a) of this article. (Ord. of 1/10/05; Ord. of 12/6/10)
ARTICLE Q
Flood Damage Prevention
Section 9-3201   Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and
objectives.
Section 9-3201.1   Statutory authorization.
   The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has in Part 6, Article 21 of
Chapter 143; Parts 3, 5, and 8 of Article 19 of Chapter 160A; and Article 8 of
Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes, delegated to local
governmental units the responsibility to adopt regulations designed to promote
the public health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore, the Town Council of
the Town of Valdese, North Carolina, does ordain as follows.
(Ord. of 8/6/07)
Section 9-3201.2   Findings of fact.
   (1)   The flood prone areas within the jurisdiction the town are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (2)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities and by the
occupancy in flood prone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or other hazards.
(Ord. of 8/6/07)
Section 9-3201.3   Statement of purpose.
   It is the purpose of this article to promote public health, safety, and
general welfare and to public and private losses due to flood conditions within
flood prone areas by provisions designed to:
   (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in damaging increases
in erosion, flood heights or velocities;
   (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (3)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   (4)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development that may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
   (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands. (Ord. of 8/6/07)
Section 9-3201.4   Objectives.
   The objectives of this article are to:
   (1)   Protect human life, safety, and health;
   (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (4)   Minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;
   (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e. water and gas
mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets, and bridges) that
are located in flood prone areas;
   (6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas; and
   (7)   Ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a special
flood hazard area. (Ord. of 8/6/07)
Section 9-3202   Definitions.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this article its most reasonable application.
   Accessory structure (appurtenant structure).  A structure located on the
same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and storage
sheds are common urban accessory structures. Pole barns, hay sheds and the like
qualify as accessory structures on farms, and may or may not be located on the
same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.
   Addition (to an existing building).  An extension or increase in the floor
area or height of a building or structure.
   Appeal. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this article.
   Area of shallow flooding.  A designated zone AO on a community’s flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths determined to be from one (1)
to three (3) feet. These areas are located where a clearly defined channel does
not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and
where velocity flow may be evident.
   Area of Special Flood Hazard.  See Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
   Basement.  Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   Base flood.  The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
   Base flood elevation (BFE).A determination of the water surface elevations
of the base flood as published in the flood insurance study. When the BFE has
not been provided in a “special flood hazard area”, it may be obtained from
engineering studies available from a federal, state, or other source using FEMA
approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when combined with the
“freeboard”, establishes the regulatory flood protection elevation”.
   Building.  See Structure.
   Chemical storage facility.  A building, portion of a building, or exterior
area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or chemically
reactive products.
   Development.  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   Disposal.  As defined in G.S. 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit,
injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste into or on
any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the solid
waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into
any waters, including groundwaters.
   Elevated building.  A non-basement building which has its lowest elevated
floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers,
pilings, or columns.
   Encroachment.  The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or
alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   Existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision.  A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was
completed before the initial effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
   Flood  or flooding.  A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
   (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   Flood insurance.  The insurance coverage provided under the National Flood
Insurance Program.
   Flood insurance rate map (FIRM).  An official map of a community, issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the special flood hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are delineated.
   Flood insurance study (FIS).An examination, evaluation, and determination of
flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate), flood
hazard risk zones, and other flood data in a community issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The flood insurance study report includes flood
insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), if
published.
   Flood prone area.  See Floodplain.
   Flood zone.  A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or
flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the
area.
   Floodplain.   Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source.
   Floodplain Administrator.  The individual appointed to administer and
enforce the floodplain management regulations.
   Floodplain development permit.  Any type of permit that is required in
conformance with the provisions of this article, prior to the commencement of
any development activity.
   Floodplain management.  The operation of an overall program of corrective
and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations, and open space plans.
   Floodplain management regulations.  This article and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power. This term
describes federal, state or local regulations, in any combination thereof,
which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
   Floodproofing.  Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities,
structures, and their contents.
   Floodway.  The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot.
   Freeboard.  The height added to the base flood elevation (BFE) to account
for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater
that the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions,
such as wave action, blockage of bridge openings, and the hydrological effect
of urbanization of the watershed. The base flood elevation plus the freeboard
establishes the “regulatory flood protection elevation”.
   Functionally dependent facility.  A facility which cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water, limited to a
docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term does not include long-term
storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
   Hazardous waste management facility.  As defined in G.S. 130A, Article 9, a
facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment, recycling,
recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste.
   Highest adjacent grade (HAG).  The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls of the
structure.
   Historic structure.  Any structure that is:
   (a)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
   (b)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district
or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
   (c)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks in
communities with a “certified local government (CLG) program”; or
   (d)   Certified as contributing to the historical significance of a historic
district designated by a community with a “certified local government (CLG)
program”.
   Certified local government (CLG) programs are approved by the U.S.
Department of the Interior in cooperation with the North Carolina Department of
Cultural Resources through the State Historic Preservation Officer as having
met the requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 as
amended in 1980.
   Lowest adjacent grade (LAG).  The elevation of the ground, sidewalk or patio
slab immediately next to the building, or deck support, after completion of the
building.
   Lowest floor.  Lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other than
a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such
an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this article.
   Manufactured home.  A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
manufactured home does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
   Manufactured home park or subdivision.  A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   Market value.The building value, not including the land value and that of
any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. Market value may be
established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated
for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash value); or
adjusted tax assessed values.
   Mean sea level.  For purposes of this article, the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) as corrected in 1988, or other vertical control datum used as a
reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain, to which
base flood elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are referenced. Refer to each FIRM
panel to determine datum used.
   New construction.  Structures for which the “start of
construction” commenced on or after the effective date of the initial
floodplain management regulations and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
   Non-encroachment area.  The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1)
foot as designated in the flood insurance study report.
   Post-FIRM.  Construction or other development for which the “start of
construction” occurred on or after the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map.
   Pre-FIRM.  Construction or other development for which the “start of
construction” occurred before the effective date of the initial flood insurance
rate map.
   Principally above ground.  That at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the
actual cash value of the structure is above ground.
   Public safety and/or nuisance.  Anything which is injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
   Recreational vehicle (RV).  A vehicle, which is:
   (a)   Built on a single chassis;
   (b)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   (c)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   (d)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   Reference level.  The top of the lowest floor for structures within special
flood hazard areas designated as zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99 or AO.
   Regulatory flood protection elevation.  The “base flood elevation”  plus the
“freeboard”. In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations (BFEs)
have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus two (2) feet of
freeboard. In special flood hazard areas  where no BFE has been established,
this elevation shall be at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade.
   Remedy a violation.  To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state and community floodplain management regulations, or, if
this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the
ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   Riverine.  Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
   Salvage yard.  Any non-residential property used for the storage,
collection, and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and including but not
limited to vehicles, appliances and related machinery.
   Solid waste disposal facility.  Any facility involved in the disposal of
solid waste, as defined in G.S. 130A-290(a)(35).
   Solid waste disposal site.  As defined in G.S. 130A-290(a)(36), any place at
which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill, or any
other method.
   Special flood hazard area (SFHA).The land in the floodplain subject to a one
percent (1%) or greater chance of being flooded in any given year, as
determined in Section
9-3203.2 of this article.
   Start of construction.  Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other
improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   Structure.  A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a gas,
liquid, or liquefied gas storage tank that is principally above ground.
   Substantial damage.Damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any
one (1)-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred. See definition of substantial
improvement.
   Substantial improvement.  Any combination of repairs, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place
during any one (1)-year period for which the cost equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the “start of
construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include either:
   (a)   Any correction of existing violations of state or community health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the
community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
   (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic
structure.
   Variance.  A grant of relief from the requirements of this article.
   Violation.The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in Section
9-3204 and Section
9-3205 is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
   Water Surface Elevation (WSE).  The height, in relation to mean sea level,
of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal
or riverine areas.
   Watercourse.  A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur. (Ord. of 8/6/07)
Section 9-3203   General provisions.
Section 9-3203.1   Lands to which article applies.
   This article shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction of the town and within the jurisdiction of any other community
whose governing body agrees, by resolution, to such applicability. (Ord. of 8/
6/07)
Section 9-3203.2   Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas.
   (a)   The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the
Cooperating Technical State (CTS) agreement between the State of North Carolina
and FEMA in its flood insurance study (FIS) and its accompanying flood
insurance rate maps (FIRM), for Burke County dated September 5, 2007 which are
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article.
   (b)   The initial flood insurances rate maps are as follows for the
jurisdictional areas at the initial date:
   (1)   Town of Valdese, dated July 3, 1986.
   (2)   Burke County Unincorporated Area, dated June 17, 1991. (Ord. of 8/6/
07)
Section 9-3203.3   Establishment of floodplain development permit.
   A Floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development
activities within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with the
provisions of Section
9-3203.2 of this article. (Ord. of 8/6/07)
Section 9-3203.4   Compliance.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this
article and other applicable regulations. (Ord. of 8/6/07)
Section 9-3203.5   Abrogation and greater restrictions.
   This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and
another ordinance conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. of 8/6/07)
Section 9-3203.6   Interpretation.
   In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall
be:
   (a)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (b)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (c)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes. (Ord. of 8/6/07)
Section 9-3203.7   Warning and disclaimer of liability.
   The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land
outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will
be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability
on the part of the town or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. of 8/6/07)
Section 9-3203.8   Penalties for violation.
   Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished for each offense
by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisonment not to
exceed thirty (30) days, or both. In addition to the misdemeanor penalty, a
violation of this article shall also be a civil offense and shall subject the
offender to a civil penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) each day
such violation continues. Each day’s continuing violation shall be considered a
separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the town from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. of 8/6/07)
Section 9-3204   Administration.
Section 9-3204.1   Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
   The Town Planning Director or his designee, hereinafter referred to as the
“Floodplain Administrator”, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the
provisions of this article. (Ord. of 8/6/07)
Section 9-3204.2   Floodplain development application, permit and certification
requirements.
   (1)   Application requirements. Application for a floodplain development
permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development
activities located within special flood hazard areas. The following items shall
be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply for a floodplain
development permit:
   (a)   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:
   1.   The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of
development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and
other development;
   2.   The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated on the FIRM
or other flood map as determined in Section
9-3203.2, or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard
area;
   3.   Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as
determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in Section
9-3203.2;
   4.   The boundary of the floodway(s) or non-encroachment area(s) as
determined in Section
9-3203.2;
   5.   The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in Sections
9-3203.2,
9-3204.3, or
9-3205.4;
   6.   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development;
   (b)   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a
special flood hazard area including but not limited to:
   1.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed reference level
(including basement) of all structures;
   2.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure in zone AE, A or AO will be flood-proofed; and
   3.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed utility
systems will be elevated or floodproofed;
   (c)   If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65) with
supporting data and an operational plan that includes, but is not limited to,
installation, exercise, and maintenance of floodproofing measures.
   (d)   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of the
proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this article are met.
These details include but are not limited to:
   1.   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill, solid
foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation on
columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls);
   2.   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood
forces on walls in accordance with Section
9-3205.2 (4)(c) when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in zones A, AO,
AE, and A1-30;
   (e)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor.
   (f)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
   (g)   Certification that all other local, state and federal permits required
prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received.
   (h)   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or temporary
structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of Section
9-3205.2, subsections (6) and (7) of this article are met.
   (i)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation, when
applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on
plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation.
   (2)   Permit requirements. The floodplain development permit shall include,
but not be limited to:
   (a)   A description of the development to be permitted under the floodplain
development permit.
   (b)   The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed
development in accordance with available data specified in Section
9-3203.2.
   (c)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the reference
level and all attendant utilities.
   (d)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the protection
of all public utilities.
   (e)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines.
   (f)   A statement that no fill material or other development shall encroach
into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any watercourse, as applicable.
   (g)   The flood openings requirements, if in zones A, AO, AE or A1-30.
   (3)   Certification requirements.
   (a)   Elevation certificates.
   1.   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required prior to the
actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder
to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the elevation of
the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder prior to the
beginning of construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to
make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development
permit.
   2.   A final as-built elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required
after construction is completed and prior to certificate of compliance/
occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built construction of the
elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and
prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy issuance. In some instances,
another certification may be required to certify corrected as-built
construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required
corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate of
compliance/occupancy.
   (b)   Floodproofing certificate. If non-residential floodproofing is used to
meet the regulatory flood protection elevation requirements, a floodproofing
certificate (FEMA Form 81-65), with supporting data, an operational plan, and
an inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start of
any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to
the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the floodproofed design
elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to
mean sea level. Flood proofing certification shall be prepared by or under the
direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by
same. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data, the
operational plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit
approval. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required
corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit. Failure to
construct in accordance with the certified design shall be cause to withhold
the issuance of a certificate of compliance/occupancy.
   (c)   If a manufactured home is placed within zone A, AO, AE, or A1-30 and
the elevation of the chassis is more than thirty-six (36) inches in height
above grade, an engineered foundation certification is required in accordance
with the provisions of Section
9-3205.2(3)(b).
   (d)   If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a description of the
extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; a professional engineer’s
certified report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying
capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream
and downstream; and a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior
to issuance of a floodplain development permit.
   (e)   Certification exemptions. The following structures, if located within
zone A, AO, AE or A1-30, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing
certification requirements specified in items (a) and (b) of this subsection:
   1.   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of Section
9-3205.2 (6)(a);
   2.   Temporary structures meeting requirements of Section
9-3205.2 (7); and
   3.   Accessory structures less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet
meeting requirements of Section
9-3205.2 (8). (Ord. of 8/6/07)
Section 9-3204.3   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the
following duties:
   (1)   Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for
all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that the
requirements of this article have been satisfied.
   (2)   Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits (wetlands,
endangered species, erosion and sedimentation control, riparian buffers,
mining, etc.) May be required.
   (3)   Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina Department of Crime
Control and Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State Coordinator
for the National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration or relocation
of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
   (4)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained.
   (5)   Prevent encroachments into floodways and non-encroachment areas unless
the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of Section
9-3205.6 are met.
   (6)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and
substantially improved structures, in accordance with Section
9-3204.2 (3).
   (7)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which all
new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been floodproofed,
in accordance with the provisions of Section
9-3204.2 (3).
   (8)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all public
utilities in accordance with the provisions of Section
9-3204.2 (3).
   (9)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of Section
9-3204.2 (3) and Section
9-3205.2 (2).
   (10)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries
of the special flood hazard areas, floodways, or non-encroachment areas (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article.
   (11)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with Section
9-3203.2, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation (BFE)
data, along with floodway data or non-encroachment area data available from a
federal, state, or other source, including data developed pursuant to Section
9-3205.4 5 (2)(b), in order to administer the provisions of this article.
   (12)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway or
non-encroachment area data has been provided in accordance with Section
9-3203.2, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or non-
encroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other source in
order to administer the provisions of this article.
   (13)   When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a structure or
the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a special flood hazard area is above
the base flood elevation, advise the property owner of the option to apply for
a letter of map amendment (LOMA) from FEMA. Maintain a copy of the letter of
map amendment (LOMA) issued by FEMA in the floodplain development permit file.
   (14)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration
of this article and make these records available for public inspection,
recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, as
amended.
   (15)   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to
a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain Administrator shall
make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the
work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the
terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain Administrator has
a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
   (16)   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part
thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation
of this article, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be
immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to
the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the
specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the
condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work
order constitutes a misdemeanor.
   (17)   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain
Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the
revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development
permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may
also be revoked.
   (18)   Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard areas
within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator and each
member of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
   (19)   Follow through with corrective procedures of Section
9-3204.4.
   (20)   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance
requests.
   (21)   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to, the
FIS Report, FIRM and other official flood maps and studies adopted in
accordance with Section
9-3203.2 of this article, including any revisions thereto including letters of
map change, issued by FEMA. Notify state and FEMA of mapping needs.
   (22)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including letters of
map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) and letters of map revision (LOMR). (Ord.
of 8/6/07)
Section 9-3204.4   Corrective procedures.
   (1)   Violations to be corrected. When the Floodplain Administrator finds
violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to
notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or
occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such
notification.
   (2)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner of
a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the
Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or
registered mail to the owner’s last known address or by personal service,
stating:
   (a)   That the building or property is in violation of the floodplain
management regulations;
   (b)   That a hearing will be held before the Floodplain Administrator at a
designated place and time, not later than ten (10) days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
   (c)   That following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue an
order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as
applicable.
   (3)   Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to
the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that the
building or development is in violation of the flood damage prevention
ordinance, they shall issue an order in writing to the owner, requiring the
owner to remedy the violation within a specified time period, not less than
sixty (60) calendar days, nor more than 180 (one hundred eighty) calendar days.
Where the Floodplain Administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life
or other property, they may order that corrective action be taken in such
lesser period as may be feasible.
   (4)   Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action
may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of
appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the clerk within ten (10)
days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the
order of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The local governing body
shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and
affirm, or revoke the order.
   (5)   Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property
fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has
been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an
appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished at the
discretion of the court. (Ord. of 8/6/07)
Section 9-3204.5   Variance procedures.
   (1)   The Board of Adjustment as established by the town, hereinafter
referred to as the “appeal board”, shall hear and decide requests for variances
from the requirements of this article.
   (2)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal
such decision to the court, as provided in Chapter 7A of the North Carolina
General Statutes.
   (3)   Variances may be issued for:
   (a)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
   (b)   Functionally dependent facilities if determined to meet the definition
as stated in Section
9-3202 of this article, provided provisions of Section
9-3204.5 (9)(b), (c), and (e) have been satisfied, and such facilities are
protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and
create no additional threats to public safety.
   (c)   Any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements of
this section.
   (4)   In passing upon variances, the appeal board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this article and:
   (a)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
   (b)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
   (c)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
   (d)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
   (e)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined
under Section
9-3202 of this article as a functionally dependent facility, where applicable;
   (f)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or
erosion damage, for the proposed use;
   (g)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
   (h)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
   (i)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
   (j)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site; and
   (k)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
   (5)   A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be
submitted with the application for a variance.
   (6)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of
this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this
article.
   (7)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction
below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property, and that
the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood
elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance
coverage. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance.
   (8)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
the State of North Carolina upon request.
   (9)   Conditions for variances.
   (a)   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the
structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or
ordinances.
   (b)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or non-
encroachment area if the variance would result in any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge.
   (c)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   (d)   Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit approval.
   (e)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
   1.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
   2.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship; and
   3.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary
public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public,
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (10)   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or
sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical
storage facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas provided that
all of the following conditions are met.
   (a)   The use serves a critical need in the community.
   (b)   No feasible location exists for the use outside the special flood
hazard area.
   (c)   The reference level of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to at
least the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   (d)   The use complies with all other applicable federal, state and local
laws.
   (e)   The town has notified the Secretary of the North Carolina Department
of Crime Control and Public Safety of its intention to grant a variance at
least thirty (30) calendar days prior to granting the variance. (Ord. of 8/6/
07)
Section 9-3205   Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
Section 9-3205.1   General standards.
   In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required:
   (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement of the structure.
   (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
   (3)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
   (4)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding to the regulatory flood protection elevation. These
include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/
kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable
boxes, hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches.
   (5)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (6)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.
   (7)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (8)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a
structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this article, shall
meet the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this article.
   (9)   Nothing in this article shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or
replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this
ordinance and located totally or partially within the floodway, non-
encroachment area, or stream setback, provided there is no additional
encroachment below the regulatory flood protection elevation in the floodway,
non-encroachment area, or stream setback, and provided that such repair,
reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements of this
article.
   (10)   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not
be permitted, except by variance as specified in Section
9-3204.5(10). A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an
allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater
treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the
structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory
flood protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of
Section
9-3204.2(3).
   (11)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (12)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   (13)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (14)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
   (15)   When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area,
the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and
substantial improvements.
   (16)   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a
flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for
the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood
elevation shall apply. (Ord. of 8/6/07)
Section 9-3205.2   Specific standards.
   In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data has
been provided, as set forth in Section
9-3203.2, Section
9-3205.4, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of Section
9-3205.1, are required:
   (1)   Residential construction.  New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall
have the reference
level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation, as defined in Section
9-3202 of this article.
   (2)   Non-residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure
shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in Section
9-3202  of this article. Structures located in A, AE, AO, and A1-30 zones may
be floodproofed to the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of
elevation provided that all areas of the structure, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, below the regulatory flood protection
elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water, using structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. For AO zones,
the floodproofing elevation shall be in accordance with Section
9-3205.7(2). A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be
provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in Section
9-3204.2 (3), along with the operational and maintenance plans.
   (3)   Manufactured homes.
   (a)   New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that the
reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation, as defined in Section
9-3202 of this article.
   (b)   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either
by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most
current edition of the State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured
Homes adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to G.S. 143-143.15.
Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis
thirty-six (36) inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall
be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation
of the chassis is above thirty-six (36) inches in height, an engineering
certification is required.
   (c)   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the
requirements of Section
9-3205.2(4).
   (d)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all residents
of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged manufactured home
parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This plan shall be
filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the local emergency
management coordinator.
   (4)   Elevated buildings. Fully enclosed area, of new construction and
substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor:
   (a)   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only be
used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of
maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the
enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles
(garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior
door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion
of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms,
except to enclose storage areas;
   (b)   Shall be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least to
the regulatory flood protection elevation;
   (c)   Shall include, in zones A, AO, AE, and A1-30, flood openings to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed
the following minimum design criteria:
   1.   A minimum of two (2) flood openings on different sides of each enclosed
area subject to flooding;
   2.   The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one (1)
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
   3.   If a building has more than one (1) enclosed area, each enclosed area
must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and exit;
   4.   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher than one
(1) foot above the adjacent grade;
   5.   Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions; and
   6.   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered enclosures for
regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood openings. Masonry or
wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure
and requires flood openings as outlined above.
   (5)   Additions/improvements.
   (a)   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the addition
and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to the
existing structure are:
   1.   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements must be
designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more non-conforming than
the existing structure.
   2.   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the addition
and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new construction.
   (b)   Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications to the
existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall shall require
only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.
   (c)   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
   1.   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements only
must comply with the standards for new construction.
   2.   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the addition
and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new construction.
   (6)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall either:
   (a)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed
and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if
it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently attached additions); or
   (b)   Meet all the requirements for new construction.
   (7)   Temporary non-residential structures. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure
(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash flood or other type of flood warning
notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing to the
Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:
   (a)   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be permitted.
Time specified may not exceed three (3) months, renewable up to one (1) year;
   (b)   The name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible for
the removal of the temporary structure;
   (c)   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be removed
(i.e., minimum of seventy-two (72) hours before landfall of a hurricane or
immediately upon flood warning notification);
   (d)   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity
responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
   (e)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside the
special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will be moved.
   (8)   Accessory structures. When accessory structures (sheds, detached
garages, etc.) are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, the
following criteria shall be met:
   (a)   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation (including
working, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas);
   (b)   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
   (c)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
   (d)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
   (e)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with the
provisions of Section
9-3205.1(1);
   (f)   All service facilities such as electrical shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of Section
9-3205.1(4); and
   (g)   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces shall be provided below regulatory flood protection elevation in
conformance with the provisions of Section
9-3205.2 (4)(c).
   An accessory structure with a footprint less than one hundred fifty (150)
square feet that satisfies the criteria outlined above does not require an
elevation or floodproofing certificate. Elevation or floodproofing
certifications are required for all other accessory structures in accordance
with Section
9-3204.2(3).
(Ord. of 8/6/07)
Section 9-3205.3 reserved.
Section 9-3205.4   Standards for floodplains without established base flood
elevations.
   Within the special flood hazard areas designated as approximate zone A and
established in Section
9-3203.2, where no base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA,
the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of Section
9-3205.1 shall apply:
   (1)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements or new development shall be permitted within a distance of twenty
(20) feet each side from top of bank or five (5) times the width of the stream,
whichever is greater, unless certification with supporting technical data by a
registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such
encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   (2)   The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood protection elevation
shall be determined based on the following criteria:
   (a)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is available from other sources,
all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas shall also
comply with all applicable provisions of this article and shall be elevated or
floodproofed in accordance with standards in Sections
9-3205.1 and
9-3205.2.
   (b)   When floodway data is available from a federal, state, or other
source, all new construction and substantial improvements within floodway areas
shall also comply with the requirements of Sections 9-2305.2 and
9-3205.6.
   (c)   All subdivision, manufactured home park and other development
proposals shall provide base flood elevation (BFE) data if development is
greater than five (5) acres or has more than fifty (50) lots/manufactured home
sites. Such base flood elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference in
accordance with Section
9-3203.2, and utilized in implementing this article. However, this requirement
may be waived if the development ensures all building envelopes exclude any
special flood hazard areas.
   (d)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a federal,
state, or other source as outlined above, the reference level shall be elevated
or floodproofed (nonresidential) to or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation, as defined in Section
9-3202. All other applicable provisions of Section
9-3205.2 shall also apply. (Ord. of 8/6/07)
Section 9-3205.5   Standards for riverine floodplains with bfe but without
established floodways or non-encroachment areas.
   Along rivers and streams where BFE data is provided by FEMA or is available
from another source but neither floodway nor non-encroachment areas are
identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the FIS report,
the following requirements shall apply to all development within such areas:
   (1)   Standards of 9-3205.1 and 9-3205.2; and
   (2)   Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment area is designated, no
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or
other development, shall be permitted unless certification with supporting
technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the
community. (Ord. of 8/6/07)
Section 9-3205.6   Floodways and non-encroachment areas.
   Areas designated as floodways or non-encroachment areas Are located within
the special flood hazard areas established in 9-3203.2. The floodways and non-
encroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity of
floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and potential
projectiles. The following provisions, in addition to standards outlined in 9-
3205.1 and 9-3205.2, shall apply to all development within such areas:
   (1)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless:
   (a)   It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not result in
any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood, based
on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard
engineering practice according to FEMA guidelines and presented to the
Floodplain Administrator prior to issuance of floodplain development permit, or
   (b)   A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) has been approved by
FEMA. A letter of map revision (LOMR) must also be obtained upon completion of
the proposed encroachment.
   (2)   If Section
9-3205.6(1) is satisfied, all development shall comply with all applicable
flood hazard reduction provisions of this article.
   (3)   No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except replacement
manufactured homes in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision,
provided the following provisions are met:
   (a)   The anchoring and the elevation standards of Section
9-3205.2(3); and
   (b)   The no encroachment standard of Section
9-3205.6(1). (Ord. of 8/6/07)
Section 9-3205.7   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (zone AO).
   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in Section
9-3203.2, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have
special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3)
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. In addition to Section
9-3205.1 and Section
9-3205.2, all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
following requirements:
   (1)    The reference level shall be elevated at least as high as the depth
number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), in feet, plus a
freeboard of two (2 ) feet, above the highest adjacent grade; or at least four
(4) feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
   (2)   Non-residential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be floodproofed
to the same level as required in Section
9-3205.7(1) so that the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below that level shall be watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy. Certification is required in accordance with Section
9-3204.2(3) and Section
9-3205.2(2).
   (3)   Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes,
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. (Ord. of 8/6/07)
Section 9-3206   Legal status provisions.
Section 9-3206.1   Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing flood
damage prevention ordinance.
   This article in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the provisions
of the flood damage
prevention ordinance enacted May 4, 1987 as amended, and it is not the
intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue to enforce without
interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights and liabilities
that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be enforced. The enactment of
this article shall not affect any action, suit or proceeding instituted or
pending. All provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance of the Town of
Valdese enacted on May 4, 1987, as amended, which are not reenacted herein are
repealed.
(Ord. of 8/6/07)
Section 9-3206.2   Effect upon outstanding floodplain development permits.
   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size, or designated use of any development or any part thereof
for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain
Administrator or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of
this article; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such
outstanding permit within a period of six (6) months subsequent to the date of
issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this article. (Ord. of 8/6/07)
Section 9-3206.3   Effective date.
   This article shall become effective August 6, 2007.
(Ord. of 8/6/07)
ARTICLE R
Phase II Stormwater
Section 9-3301   General provisions.
Section 9-3301.1   Title.
   This article shall be officially known as "The Phase II Stormwater
Ordinance." It is referred to herein as "this article." (Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3301.2   Authority.
   The Town of Valdese (hereinafter referred to as the Town) is authorized to
adopt this article pursuant to North Carolina law, including but not limited to
Article 14, Section 5 of the Constitution of North Carolina; City Charter; G.S.
143-214.7 and rules promulgated by the Environmental Management Commission
thereunder; Session Law 2006-246; Chapter 160A, §§ 174, 185. (Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3301.3   Findings.
   It is hereby determined that:
   (1)   Development and redevelopment alter the hydrologic response of local
watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, soil
erosion, stream channel erosion, nonpoint and point source pollution, and
sediment transport and deposition, as well as reducing groundwater recharge;
   (2)   These changes in stormwater runoff contribute to increased quantities
of water-borne pollutants and alterations in hydrology that are harmful to
public health and safety as well as to the natural environment; and
   (3)   These effects can be managed and minimized by applying proper design
and well-planned controls to manage stormwater runoff from development sites.
   (4)   Further, the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 ("Clean Water
Act") and federal Phase II Stormwater Rules promulgated under it, as well as
rules of the North Carolina Environmental Management Commission promulgated in
response to federal Phase II requirements, compel certain urbanized areas,
including this jurisdiction, to adopt minimum stormwater controls such as those
included in this article.
   (5)   Therefore, the Town establishes this set of water quality and quantity
regulations to meet the requirements of state and federal law regarding control
of stormwater runoff and discharge. (Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3301.4   Purpose.
   (a)   General. The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and
enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by
establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects
of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint and point source
pollution associated with new development and redevelopment as well as illicit
discharges into municipal stormwater systems. It has been determined that
proper management of construction-related and post-development stormwater
runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure;
safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare; and protect water and
aquatic resources.
   (b)   Specific. This article seeks to meet its general purpose through the
following specific objectives and means:
   (1)   Establishing decision-making processes for development that protects
the integrity of watersheds and preserves the health of water resources;
   (2)   Requiring that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-
development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as
practicable for the applicable design storm to reduce flooding, streambank
erosion, nonpoint and point source pollution and increases in stream
temperature, and to maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic
habitats;
   (3)   Establishing minimum post-development stormwater management standards
and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff
quantity and quality;
   (4)   Establishing design and review criteria for the construction,
function, and use of structural stormwater BMPs that may be used to meet the
minimum post-development stormwater management standards;
   (5)   Encouraging the use of better management and site design practices,
such as the use of vegetated conveyances for stormwater and the preservation of
greenspace, riparian buffers and other conservation areas to the maximum extent
practicable;
   (6)   Establishing provisions for the long-term responsibility for and
maintenance of structural and nonstructural stormwater BMPs to ensure that they
continue to function as designed, are maintained appropriately, and pose no
threat to public safety;
   (7)   Establishing administrative procedures for the submission, review,
approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, for the inspection of
approved projects, and to assure appropriate long-term maintenance.
   (8)   Controlling illicit discharges into the municipal separate stormwater
system. (Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3301.5   Applicability and jurisdiction.
   (a)   General. Beginning with and subsequent to its effective date, this
article shall be applicable to all development and redevelopment, including,
but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and
grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (b) of this section,
Exemptions.
   (b)   Exemptions.
   (1)   Development that cumulatively disturbs less than one (1) acre and is
not part of a larger common plan of development or sale is exempt from the
provisions of this article.
   (2)   Redevelopment that cumulatively disturbs less than one (1) acre and is
not part of a larger common plan of development or sale is exempt from the
provisions of this article.
   (3)   Development and redevelopment that disturb less than one (1) acre are
not exempt if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development
or sale, even though multiple, separate or distinct activities take place at
different times on different schedules.
   (4)   Activities that are exempt from permit requirements of Section 404 of
the Federal Clean Water Act as specified in 40 CFR 232 (primarily, ongoing
farming and forestry activities) are exempt from the provisions of this
article.
   (c)   No development or redevelopment until compliance and permit. No
development or redevelopment shall occur except in compliance with the
provisions of this article or unless exempted. No development for which a
permit is required pursuant to this article shall occur except in compliance
with the provisions, conditions, and limitations of the permit.
   (d)   Map.
   (1)   The provisions of this article shall apply within the areas designated
on the map titled "Town of Valdese Zoning Map." The Zoning Map and all
explanatory matter contained thereon accompanies and is hereby made a part of
this article.
   (2)   The Zoning Map shall be kept on file by the Valdese Planning Director
and shall be updated to take into account changes in the land area covered by
this article. In the event of a dispute, the applicability of this article to a
particular area of land or BMP shall be determined by reference to the North
Carolina Statutes, the North Carolina Administrative Code, and local zoning and
jurisdictional boundary ordinances. (Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3301.6   Interpretation.
   (a)   Meaning and intent. All provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions
contained in this article, shall be construed according to the general and
specific purposes set forth in Section
9-3301.4, Purpose. If a different or more specific meaning is given for a term
defined elsewhere in the Town's Code of Ordinances, the meaning and application
of the term in this article shall control for purposes of application of this
article.
   (b)   Text controls in event of conflict. In the event of a conflict or
inconsistency between the text of this article and any heading, caption,
figure, illustration, table, or map, the text shall control.
   (c)   Authority for interpretation. The Stormwater Administrator has
authority to determine the interpretation of this article. Any person may
request an interpretation by submitting a written request to the Stormwater
Administrator, who shall respond in writing within thirty (30) days. The
Stormwater Administrator shall keep on file a record of all written
interpretations of this article.
   (d)   References to statutes, regulations, and documents. Whenever reference
is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, manual (including the
Design Manual), or document, it shall be construed as a reference to the most
recent edition of such that has been finalized and published with due provision
for notice and comment, unless otherwise specifically stated.
   (e)   Computation of time. The time in which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If a deadline
or required date of action falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by
the Town, the deadline or required date of action shall be the next day that is
not a Saturday, Sunday or holiday observed by the Town. References to days are
calendar days unless otherwise stated.
   (f)   Delegation of authority. Any act authorized by this article to be
carried out by the Stormwater Administrator of the Town may be carried out by
his or her designee.
   (g)   Usage.
   (1)   Mandatory and discretionary terms. The words "shall," "must," and
"will" are mandatory in nature, establishing an obligation or duty to comply
with the particular provision. The words "may" and "should" are permissive in
nature.
   (2)   Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary,
conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: The word "and" indicates that all
connected items, conditions, provisions and events apply. The word "or"
indicates that one (1) or more of the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events apply.
   (3)   Tense, plurals, and gender. Words used in the present tense include
the future tense. Words used in the singular number include the plural number
and the plural number includes the singular number, unless the context of the
particular usage clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the masculine
gender include the feminine gender, and vice versa.
   (h)   Measurement and computation. Lot area refers to the amount of
horizontal land area contained inside the lot lines of a lot or site. (Ord. of
9/3/13)
Section 9-3301.7   Design Manual.
   (a)   Reference to Design Manual.
   (1)   The Stormwater Administrator shall use the policy, criteria, and
information, including technical specifications and standards, in the Design
Manual as the basis for decisions about stormwater permits and about the
design, implementation and performance of structural and non-structural
stormwater BMPs.
   (2)   The Design Manual includes a list of acceptable stormwater treatment
practices, including specific design criteria for each stormwater practice.
Stormwater treatment practices that are designed, constructed, and maintained
in accordance with these design and sizing criteria will be presumed to meet
the minimum water quality performance standards of the Phase II laws.
   (b)   Relationship of Design Manual to other laws and regulations. If the
specifications or guidelines of the Design Manual are more restrictive or apply
a higher standard than other laws or regulations, that fact shall not prevent
application of the specifications or guidelines in the Design Manual.
   (c)   Changes to standards and specifications. If the standards,
specifications, guidelines, policies, criteria, or other information in the
Design Manual are amended subsequent to the submittal of an application for
approval pursuant to this article but prior to approval, the new information
shall control and shall be utilized in reviewing the application and in
implementing this article with regard to the application. (Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3301.8   Relationship to other laws, regulations and private
agreements.
   (a)   Conflict of laws. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any
other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements
of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance,
rule, regulation or other provision of law. Where any provision of this article
imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule,
regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive
or imposes higher protective standards for human or environmental health,
safety, and welfare shall control.
   (b)   Private agreements. This article is not intended to revoke or repeal
any easement, covenant, or other private agreement. However, where the
regulations of this article are more restrictive or impose higher standards or
requirements than such an easement, covenant, or other private agreement, the
requirements of this article shall govern. Nothing in this article shall modify
or repeal any private covenant or deed restriction, but such covenant or
restriction shall not legitimize any failure to comply with this article. In no
case shall the Town be obligated to enforce the provisions of any easements,
covenants, or agreements between private parties. (Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3301.9   Severability.
   If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or
clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any
section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. (Ord. of
9/3/13)
Section 9-3301.10   Effective date and transitional provisions.
   (a)   Effective date. This article shall take effect on _______________
   (b)   Final approvals, complete applications.
   (1)   All development and redevelopment projects for which complete and full
applications were submitted and approved by the Town prior to the effective
date of this article and which remain valid, unexpired, unrevoked and not
otherwise terminated at the time of development or redevelopment shall be
exempt from complying with all provisions of this article dealing with the
control and/or management of post-construction runoff, but shall be required to
comply with all other applicable provisions, including but not limited to
illicit discharge provisions.
   (2)   A phased development plan shall be deemed approved prior to the
effective date of this article if it has been approved by all necessary
government units, it remains valid, unexpired, unrevoked and not otherwise
terminated, and it shows:
   a.   For the initial or first phase of development, the type and intensity
of use for a specific parcel or parcels, including at a minimum, the boundaries
of the project and a subdivision plan that has been approved.
   b.   For any subsequent phase of development, sufficient detail so that
implementation of the requirements of this article to that phase of development
would require a material change in that phase of the plan.
   (c)   Violations continue. Any violation of provisions existing on the
effective date of this article shall continue to be a violation under this
article and be subject to penalties and enforcement under this article unless
the use, development, construction, or other activity complies with the
provisions of this article. (Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3302   Administration and procedures.
Section 9-3302.1   Review and decision-making entities.
   (a)   Stormwater Administrator.
   (1)   Designation. A Stormwater Administrator shall be designated by the
Town Manager to administer and enforce this article.
   (2)   Powers and duties. In addition to the powers and duties that may be
conferred by other provisions of the Town Code of Ordinances, Land Development
Code, and other laws, the Stormwater Administrator shall have the following
powers and duties under this article:
   a.   To review and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove
applications for approval of plans pursuant to this article.
   b.   To make determinations and render interpretations of this article.
   c.   To establish application requirements and schedules for submittal and
review of applications and appeals. To enforce the provisions of this article
in accordance with its enforcement provisions.
   d.   To maintain records, maps, forms and other official materials as relate
to the adoption, amendment, enforcement, and administration of this article.
   e.   To provide expertise and technical assistance to the Town of Valdese
Planning Board (hereinafter referred to as the Planning Board) or Town Council,
upon request.
   f.   To designate appropriate other person(s) who shall carry out the powers
and duties of the Stormwater Administrator.
   g.   To take any other action necessary to administer the provisions of this
article. (Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3302.2   Review procedures.
   (a)   Permit required; must apply for permit. A stormwater permit is
required for all development and redevelopment unless exempt pursuant to this
article. A permit may only be issued subsequent to a properly submitted and
reviewed permit application, pursuant to this section.
   (b)   Effect of permit.
   (1)   A stormwater permit shall govern the design, installation, and
construction of stormwater management and control practices on the site,
including structural BMPs and elements of site design for stormwater management
other than structural BMPs.
   (2)   The permit is intended to provide a mechanism for the review,
approval, and inspection of the approach to be used for the management and
control of stormwater for the development or redevelopment site consistent with
the requirements of this article, whether the approach consists of structural
BMPs or other techniques such as low-impact or low-density design. The permit
does not continue in existence indefinitely after the completion of the
project; rather, compliance after project construction is assured by the
maintenance provisions of this article.
   (c)   Authority to file applications. All applications required pursuant to
this Code shall be submitted to the Stormwater Administrator by the land owner
or the land owner's duly authorized agent.
   (d)   Establishment of application requirements, schedule, and fees.
   (1)   Application contents and form. The Stormwater Administrator shall
establish requirements for the content and form of all applications and shall
amend and update those requirements from time to time. At a minimum, the
stormwater permit application shall describe in detail how post-development
stormwater runoff will be controlled and managed, the design of all stormwater
facilities and practices, and how the proposed project will meet the
requirements of this article.
   (2)   Submission schedule. The Stormwater Administrator shall establish a
submission schedule for applications. The schedule shall establish deadlines by
which complete applications must be submitted for the purpose of ensuring that
there is adequate time to review applications, and that the various stages in
the review process are accommodated.
   (3)   Permit review fees. The Town Council shall establish permit review
fees as well as policies regarding refund of any fees upon withdrawal of an
application, and may amend and update the fees and policies from time to time.
   (e)   Submittal of complete application.
   (1)   Applications shall be submitted to the Stormwater Administrator
pursuant to the application submittal schedule in the form established by the
Stormwater Administrator, along with the appropriate fee established pursuant
to this section.
   (2)   An application shall be considered as timely submitted only when it
contains all elements of a complete application pursuant to this article, along
with the appropriate fee. If the Stormwater Administrator finds that an
application is incomplete, the applicant shall be notified of the deficient
elements and shall be provided with an opportunity to submit a complete
application. However, the submittal of an incomplete application shall not
suffice to meet a deadline contained in the submission schedule established
above.
   (f)   Review. Within fifteen (15) working days after a complete application
is submitted, the Stormwater Administrator shall review the application and
determine whether the application complies with the standards of this article.
   (1)   Approval. If the Stormwater Administrator finds that the application
complies with the standards of this article, the Stormwater Administrator shall
approve the application. The Stormwater Administrator may impose conditions of
approval as needed to ensure compliance with this article. The conditions shall
be included as part of the approval.
   (2)   Fails to comply. If the Stormwater Administrator finds that the
application fails to comply with the standards of this article, the Stormwater
Administrator shall notify the applicant and shall indicate how the application
fails to comply. The applicant shall have an opportunity to submit a revised
application.
   (3)   Revision and subsequent review.
   a.   A complete revised application shall be reviewed by the Stormwater
Administrator within fifteen (15) working days after its re-submittal and shall
be approved, approved with conditions or disapproved.
   b.   If a revised application is not re-submitted within thirty (30)
calendar days from the date the applicant was notified, the application shall
be considered withdrawn, and a new submittal for the same or substantially the
same project shall be required along with the appropriate fee for a new
submittal.
   c.   One (1) re-submittal of a revised application may be submitted without
payment of an additional permit review fee. Any re-submittal after the first
re-submittal shall be accompanied by a permit review fee, as established
pursuant to this article. (Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3302.3   Applications for approval.
   (a)   Concept plan and consultation meeting.
   (1)   Before a stormwater management permit application is deemed complete,
the Stormwater Administrator or developer may request a consultation on a
concept plan for the post-construction stormwater management system to be
utilized in the proposed development project. This consultation meeting should
take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early
step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the
post-construction stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed
project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and
potential approaches to stormwater management designs before formal site design
engineering is commenced. Local watershed plans, the Future Land Use and
Transportation Plan, and other relevant resource protection plans should be
consulted in the discussion of the concept plan.
   (2)   To accomplish this goal, the following information should be included
in the concept plan, which should be submitted in advance of the meeting:
   a.   Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and
proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and
proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant
soils from soil surveys (if available); boundaries of existing predominant
vegetation; proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing
and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces.
   b.   Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of natural
resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the
commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of
soil conditions, forest cover, geologic features, topography, wetlands, and
native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of
other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as lakes, ponds,
floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well
setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to
environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or
constraints for development and stormwater management.
   c.   Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept
plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including:
preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls;
low-impact design elements; location of existing and proposed conveyance
systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location
of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream
properties and drainages; and preliminary location of any proposed stream
channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings.
   (b)   Stormwater management permit application.
   (1)   The stormwater management permit application shall detail how post-
development stormwater runoff will be controlled and managed and how the
proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including Section
9-3303, Standards. All such plans shall be prepared by a qualified registered
North Carolina professional engineer, surveyor, soil scientist or landscape
architect, and the engineer, surveyor, soil scientist or landscape architect
shall perform services only in their area of competence, and shall verify that
the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meets the
submittal requirements for complete applications, that the designs and plans
are sufficient to comply with applicable standards and policies found in the
Design Manual, and that the designs and plans ensure compliance with this
article.
   (2)   The submittal shall include all of the information required in the
submittal checklist established by the Stormwater Administrator. Incomplete
submittals shall be treated pursuant to Section
9-3302.2(e).
   (c)   As-built plans and final approval.
   (1)   Upon completion of a project, and before a permanent certificate of
occupancy shall be granted, the applicant shall certify that the completed
project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plans and
designs, and shall submit actual "as-built" plans for all stormwater management
facilities or practices after final construction is completed.
   (2)   The plans shall show the final design specifications for all
stormwater management facilities and practices and the field location, size,
depth, and planted vegetation of all measures, controls, and devices, as
installed. The designer of the stormwater management measures and plans shall
certify, under seal, that the as-built stormwater measures, controls, and
devices are in compliance with the approved stormwater management plans and
designs and with the requirements of this article. A final inspection and
approval by the Stormwater Administrator shall occur before the release of any
performance securities.
   (d)   Other permits. No permanent certificate of compliance or occupancy
shall be issued by the Planning and Development Department without final as-
built plans and a final inspection and approval by the Stormwater
Administrator, except where multiple units are served by the stormwater
practice or facilities, in which case the Planning and Development Director may
elect to withhold a percentage of permits or certificates of occupancy until
as-built plans are submitted and final inspection and approval has occurred.
(Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3302.4   Approvals.
   (a)   Effect of approval. Approval authorizes the applicant to go forward
with only the specific plans and activities authorized in the permit. The
approval shall not be construed to exempt the applicant from obtaining other
applicable approvals from local, state, and federal authorities.
   (b)   Time limit/expiration.
   (1)   An approved plan shall become null and void if the applicant fails to
make substantial progress on the site within one (1) year after the date of
approval. The Stormwater Administrator may grant a single, one (1)-year
extension of this time limit, for good cause shown, upon receiving a written
request from the applicant before the expiration of the approved plan.
   (2)   In granting an extension, the Stormwater Administrator may require
compliance with standards adopted since the original application was submitted
unless there has been substantial reliance on the original permit and the
change in standards would infringe the applicant's vested rights. (Ord. of 9/3/
13)
Section 9-3302.5   Appeals.
   (a)   Right of appeal. Any aggrieved person affected by any decision, order,
requirement, or determination relating to the interpretation or application of
this article made by the Stormwater Administrator, may file an appeal to the
Planning Board within thirty (30) days.
   (b)   Filing of appeal and procedures.
   (1)   Appeals shall be taken within the specified time period by filing a
written notice of appeal specifying the grounds for appeal. The Stormwater
Administrator shall transmit to the Planning Board all documents constituting
the record on which the decision appealed from was taken.
   (2)   The hearing conducted by the Planning Board shall be conducted in the
nature of a quasi-judicial proceeding with all findings of fact supported by
competent, material evidence.
   (c)   Review by Superior Court. Every decision of the Planning Board shall
be subject to Superior Court review by proceedings in the nature of certiorari.
Petition for review by the Superior Court shall be filed with the Clerk of
Superior Court of Burke County within thirty (30) days of the final decision.
(Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3003   Standards.
Section 9-3303.1   General standards.
   All development and redevelopment to which this article applies shall comply
with the standards of this section. (Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3303.2   Development standards for low-density projects.
   Low-density projects shall comply with each of the following standards:
   (a)   Stormwater runoff from the development shall be transported from the
development by vegetated conveyances to the maximum extent practicable.
   (b)   All built-upon area shall be at a minimum of thirty (30) feet landward
of all perennial and intermittent surface waters. A perennial or intermittent
surface water shall be deemed present if the feature is approximately shown on
either the most recent version of the soil survey map prepared by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA) or the most recent version of the 1:24,000 scale (7.5 minute) quadrangle
topographic maps prepared by the United States Geologic Survey (USGS). An
exception to this requirement may be allowed when surface waters are not
present in accordance with the provisions of 15A NCAC 2B .0233 (3)(a) or
similar site-specific determination made using Division-approved methodology.
   (c)   The approval of the stormwater permit shall require an enforceable
restriction on property usage that runs with the land, such as a recorded deed
restriction or protective covenants, to ensure that future development and
redevelopment maintains the site consistent with the approved project plans.
(Ord. 9/3/13)
Section 9-3303.3   Development standards for high-density projects.
   High-density projects shall implement stormwater control measures that
comply with each of the following standards:
   (a)   The measures shall control and treat stormwater runoff from the first
inch of rain. Runoff volume drawdown time shall be a minimum of forty- eight
(48) hours, but not more than one hundred twenty (120) hours.
   (b)   Must discharge the storage volume at a rate equal to or less than the
predevelopment discharge rate for the one (1)-year, twenty-four (24)-hour
storm.
   (c)   All structural stormwater treatment systems used to meet these
requirements shall be designed to have a minimum of eighty-five percent (85%)
average annual removal for total suspended solids (TSS).
   (d)   General engineering design criteria for all projects shall be in
accordance with 15A NCAC 2H .1008(c), as explained in the Design Manual.
   (e)   All built-upon area shall be at a minimum of thirty (30) feet landward
of all perennial and intermittent surface waters. A surface water shall be
deemed present if the feature is approximately shown on either the most recent
version of the soil survey map prepared by the Natural Resources Conservation
Service of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) or the most
recent version of the 1:24,000 scale (7.5 minute) quadrangle topographic maps
prepared by the United States Geologic Survey (USGS). An exception to this
requirement may be allowed when surface waters are not present in accordance
with the provisions of 15A NCAC 2B .0233 (3)(a) or similar site-specific
determination made using Division-approved methodology.
   (f)   The approval of the stormwater permit shall require an enforceable
restriction on property usage that runs with the land, such as recorded deed
restrictions or protective covenants, to ensure that future development and
redevelopment maintains the site consistent with the approved project plans.
(Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3303.4   Standards for stormwater control measures.
   (a)   Evaluation according to contents of Design Manual. All stormwater
control measures and stormwater treatment practices (also referred to as Best
Management Practices, or BMPs) required under this article shall be evaluated
by the Stormwater Administrator according to the policies, criteria, and
information, including technical specifications and standards and the specific
design criteria for each stormwater practice, in the Design Manual. The
Stormwater Administrator shall determine whether proposed BMPs will be adequate
to meet the requirements of this article.
   (b)   Determination of adequacy; presumptions and alternatives. Stormwater
treatment practices that are designed, constructed, and maintained in
accordance with the criteria and specifications in the Design Manual will be
presumed to meet the minimum water quality and quantity performance standards
of this article. Whenever an applicant proposes to utilize a practice or
practices not designed and constructed in accordance with the criteria and
specifications in the Design Manual, the applicant shall have the burden of
demonstrating that the practice(s) will satisfy the minimum water quality and
quantity performance standards of this article. The Stormwater Administrator
may require the applicant to provide the documentation, calculations, and
examples necessary for the Stormwater Administrator to determine whether such
an affirmative showing is made.
   (c)   Separation from seasonal high water table. For BMPs that require a
separation from the seasonal high-water table, the separation shall be provided
by at least twelve (12) inches of naturally occurring soil above the seasonal
high-water table. (Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3303.5   Variances.
   (a)   Any person may petition the Planning Board for a variance granting
permission to use the person's land in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
article. To qualify for a variance, the petitioner must show all of the
following:
   (1)   Unnecessary hardships would result from strict application of this
article.
   (2)   The hardships result from conditions that are peculiar to the
property, such as the location, size, or topography of the property.
   (3)   The hardships did not result from actions taken by the petitioner.
   (4)   The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and
intent of this article; will secure public safety and welfare; and will
preserve substantial justice.
   (b)   The Town may impose reasonable and appropriate conditions and
safeguards upon any variance it grants.
   (c)   Statutory exceptions. Notwithstanding subdivision (a) of this section,
exceptions from the thirty (30)-foot landward location of built-upon area
requirement as well as the deed restrictions and protective covenants
requirements shall be granted in any of the following instances:
   (1)   When there is a lack of practical alternatives for a road crossing,
railroad crossing, bridge, airport facility, or utility crossing as long as it
is located, designed, constructed, and maintained to minimize disturbance,
provide maximum nutrient removal, protect against erosion and sedimentation,
have the least adverse effects on aquatic life and habitat, and protect water
quality to the maximum extent practicable through the use of BMPs.
   (2)   When there is a lack of practical alternatives for a stormwater
management facility; a stormwater management pond; or a utility, including, but
not limited to, water, sewer, or gas construction and maintenance corridor, as
long as it is located fiftten (15) feet landward of all perennial and
intermittent surface waters and as long as it is located, designed,
constructed, and maintained to minimize disturbance, provide maximum nutrient
removal, protect against erosion and sedimentation, have the least adverse
effects on aquatic life and habitat, and protect water quality to the maximum
extent practicable through the use of BMPs.
   (3)   A lack of practical alternatives may be shown by demonstrating that,
considering the potential for a reduction in size, configuration, or density of
the proposed activity and all alternative designs, the basic project purpose
cannot be practically accomplished in a manner which would avoid or result in
less adverse impact to surface waters. (Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3304   Maintenance.
Section 9-3304.1   General standards for maintenance.
   (a)   Function of BMPs as intended. The owner of each structural BMP
installed pursuant to this article shall maintain and operate it so as to
preserve and continue its function in controlling stormwater quality and
quantity at the degree or amount of function for which the structural BMP was
designed.
   (b)   Annual maintenance inspection and report.
   (1)   The person responsible for maintenance of any structural BMP installed
pursuant to this article shall submit to the Stormwater Administrator an
inspection report from one (1) of the following persons performing services
only in their area of competence: a qualified registered North Carolina
professional engineer, surveyor, landscape architect, soil scientist, aquatic
biologist, or person certified by the North Carolina Cooperative Extension
Service for stormwater treatment practice inspection and maintenance. The
inspection report shall contain all of the following:
   a.   The name and address of the land owner;
   b.   The recorded book and page number of the lot of each structural BMP;
   c.   A statement that an inspection was made of all structural BMPs;
   d.   The date the inspection was made;
   e.   A statement that all inspected structural BMPs are performing properly
and are in compliance with the terms and conditions of the approved maintenance
agreement required by this article; and
   f.   The original signature and seal of the engineer, surveyor, or landscape
architect.
   (2)   All inspection reports shall be on forms supplied by the Stormwater
Administrator. An original inspection report shall be provided to the
Stormwater Administrator beginning one (1) year from the date of as-built
certification and each year thereafter on or before the date of the as-built
certification. (Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3304.2   Operation and maintenance agreement.
   (a)   In general.
   (1)   Prior to the conveyance or transfer of any lot or building site to be
served by a structural BMP pursuant to this article, and prior to issuance of
any permit for development or redevelopment requiring a structural BMP pursuant
to this article, the applicant or owner of the site must execute an operation
and maintenance agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the
site, portions of the site, and lots or parcels served by the structural BMP.
Until the transference of all property, sites, or lots served by the structural
BMP, the original owner or applicant shall have primary responsibility for
carrying out the provisions of the maintenance agreement.
   (2)   The operation and maintenance agreement shall require the owner or
owners to maintain, repair and, if necessary, reconstruct the structural BMP,
and shall state the terms, conditions, and schedule of maintenance for the
structural BMP. In addition, it shall grant to the Town a right of entry in the
event that the Stormwater Administrator has reason to believe it has become
necessary to inspect, monitor, maintain, repair, or reconstruct the structural
BMP; however, in no case shall the right of entry, of itself, confer an
obligation on the Town to assume responsibility for the structural BMP.
   (3)   The operation and maintenance agreement must be approved by the
Stormwater Administrator prior to plan approval, and it shall be referenced on
the final plat and shall be recorded with the Burke County Register of Deeds
upon final plat approval. A copy of the recorded maintenance agreement shall be
given to the Stormwater Administrator within fourteen (14) days following its
recordation.
   (b)   Special requirement for homeowners' and other associations. For all
structural BMPs required pursuant to this article and that are to be or are
owned and maintained by a homeowners' association, property owners'
association, or similar entity, the required operation and maintenance
agreement shall include all of the following provisions:
   (1)   Acknowledgment that the association shall continuously operate and
maintain the stormwater control and management facilities.
   (2)   Provide financial security, which can be spent solely for sediment
removal, structural, biological or vegetative replacement, major repair, or
reconstruction of the structural BMPs. If structural BMPs are not performing
adequately or as intended or are not properly maintained, the Town, in its sole
discretion, may remedy the situation, and in such instances the Town shall be
fully reimbursed by the association and its members for sediment removal,
structural, biological or vegetative replacement, major repair, and
reconstruction of the structural BMPs, provided that the Town of Valdese shall
first consent to the expenditure.
   (3)   An annual certified financial statement shall be provided to the Town
along with the required annual inspection report.
   (4)   Granting to the Town right of entry to inspect, monitor, maintain,
repair, and reconstruct structural BMPs.
   (5)   Allowing the Town to recover from the association and its members any
and all costs the Town expends to maintain or repair the structural BMPs or to
correct any operational deficiencies. Failure to pay the Town all of its
expended costs, after forty-five (45) days written notice, shall constitute a
breach of the agreement. In case of a deficiency, the Town shall thereafter be
entitled to bring an action against the association and its members to pay, or
foreclose upon the lien hereby authorized by the agreement against the
property, or both. Interest, collection costs, and attorney fees shall be added
to the recovery.
   (6)   A statement that this agreement shall not obligate the Town to
maintain or repair any structural BMPs, and the Town shall not be liable to any
person for the condition or operation of structural BMPs.
   (7)   A statement that this agreement shall not in any way diminish, limit,
or restrict the right of the Town to enforce any of its ordinances as
authorized by law.
   (8)   A provision indemnifying and holding harmless the Town for any costs
and injuries arising from or related to the structural BMP, unless the Town has
agreed in writing to assume the maintenance responsibility for the BMP and has
accepted dedication of any and all rights necessary to carry out that
maintenance. (Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3304.3   Inspection program.
   (a)   Inspections and inspection programs by the Town may be conducted or
established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to routine
inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other
notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies
inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are
not limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges,
surface water, groundwater, and material or water in BMPs; and evaluating the
condition of BMPs.
   (b)   If the owner or occupant of any property refuses to permit such
inspection, the Stormwater Administrator shall proceed to obtain an
administrative search warrant pursuant to G.S. 15-27.2 or its successor. No
person shall obstruct, hamper or interfere with the Stormwater Administrator
while carrying out his or her official duties. (Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3304.4   Performance security for installation and maintenance.
   (a)   Required. The Town shall require the submittal of a performance
security or bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit or other acceptable
legal arrangement prior to issuance of a permit in order to ensure that the
structural BMPs are
   (1)   Installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater
management plan, and
   (2)   Maintained by the owner as required by the operation and maintenance
agreement.
   (b)   Amount.
   (1)   Installation. The amount of an installation performance security shall
be the total estimated construction cost of the BMPs approved under the permit,
plus twenty-five percent (25%).
   (2)   Maintenance. The amount of a maintenance performance security shall be
the present value of an annuity of perpetual duration based on a reasonable
estimate of the annual cost of inspection, operation and maintenance of the
BMPs approved under the permit, at a discount rate that reflects the cost of
borrowing minus a reasonable estimate of long-term inflation.
   (c)   Uses of performance security.
   (1)   Forfeiture provisions. The performance security shall contain
forfeiture provisions for failure, after proper notice, to complete work within
the time specified, or to initiate or maintain any actions which may be
required of the applicant or owner in accordance with this article, approvals
issued pursuant to this article, or an operation and maintenance agreement
established pursuant to this article.
   (2)   Default. Upon default of the owner to construct, maintain, repair and,
if necessary, reconstruct any structural BMP in accordance with the applicable
permit or operation and maintenance agreement, the Stormwater Administrator
shall obtain and use all or any portion of the security to make necessary
improvements based on an engineering estimate. Such expenditure of funds shall
only be made after requesting the owner to comply with the permit or
maintenance agreement. In the event of a default triggering the use of
installation performance security, the Town shall not return any of the unused
deposited cash funds or other security, which shall be retained for
maintenance.
   (3)   Costs in excess of performance security. If the Town takes action upon
such failure by the applicant or owner, the Town may collect from the applicant
or owner the difference between the amount of the reasonable cost of such
action and the amount of the security held, in addition to any other penalties
or damages due.
   (4)   Refund. Within sixty (60) days of the final approval, the installation
performance security shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated, except
any amount attributable to the cost (plus twenty-five percent (25%)) of
landscaping installation and ongoing maintenance associated with the BMPs
covered by the security. Any such landscaping shall be inspected one (1) year
after installation with replacement for compliance with the approved plans and
specifications and, if in compliance, the portion of the financial security
attributable to landscaping shall be released. (Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3304.5   Notice to owners.
   (a)   Deed recordation and indications on plat. The applicable operations
and maintenance agreement and conservation easement (if applicable), pertaining
to every structural BMP shall be referenced on the final plat and shall be
recorded with the Burke County Register of Deeds upon final plat approval. If
no subdivision plat is recorded for the site, then the operations and
maintenance agreement and conservation easement (if applicable), shall be
recorded with the Burke County Register of Deeds so as to appear in the chain
of title of all subsequent purchasers under generally accepted searching
principles.
   (b)   Signage. To assure compliance with this article, structural BMPs shall
be posted with a conspicuous sign stating who is responsible for required
maintenance and annual inspection. The sign shall be maintained so as to remain
visible and legible. (Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3304.6   Records of installation and maintenance activities.
   The owner of each structural BMP shall keep records of inspections,
maintenance, and repairs for at least five (5) years from the date of creation
of the record and shall submit the same upon reasonable request to the
Stormwater Administrator. (Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3304.7   Nuisance.
   The owner of each stormwater BMP, whether structural or non-structural BMP,
shall maintain it so as not to create or result in a nuisance condition. (Ord.
of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3305   Enforcement and violations.
Section 9-3305.1   General.
   (a)   Authority to enforce. The provisions of this article shall be enforced
by the Stormwater Administrator, his or her designee, or any authorized agent
of the Town. Whenever this section refers to the Stormwater Administrator, it
includes his or her designee as well as any authorized agent of the Town.
   (b)   Violation unlawful. Any failure to comply with an applicable
requirement, prohibition, standard, or limitation imposed by this article, or
the terms or conditions of any permit or other development or redevelopment
approval or authorization granted pursuant to this article, is unlawful and
shall constitute a violation of this article.
   (c)   Each day a separate offense. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation or offense.
   (d)   Responsible persons/entities.
   (1)   Any person who erects, constructs, reconstructs, alters (whether
actively or passively), or fails to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter,
repair or maintain any structure, BMP, practice, or condition in violation of
this article shall be subject to the remedies, penalties, and/or enforcement
actions in accordance with this section. Persons subject to the remedies and
penalties set forth herein may include any architect, engineer, builder,
contractor, developer, agency, or any other person who participates in,
assists, directs, creates, causes, or maintains a condition that results in or
constitutes a violation of this article, or fails to take appropriate action,
so that a violation of this article results or persists; or an owner, any
tenant or occupant, or any other person, who has control over, or
responsibility for, the use or development of the property on which the
violation occurs.
   (2)   For the purposes of this article, responsible person(s) shall include
but not be limited to:
   a.   Person maintaining condition resulting in or constituting violation. An
architect, engineer, builder, contractor, developer, agency, or any other
person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, causes, or maintains a
condition that constitutes a violation of this article, or fails to take
appropriate action, so that a violation of this article results or persists.
   b.   Responsibility for land or use of land. The owner of the land on which
the violation occurs, any tenant or occupant of the property, any person who is
responsible for stormwater controls or practices pursuant to a private
agreement or public document, or any person, who has control over, or
responsibility for, the use, development or redevelopment of the property.
(Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3305.2   Remedies and penalties.
   The remedies and penalties provided for violations of this article, whether
civil or criminal, shall be cumulative and in addition to any other remedy
provided by law, and may be exercised in any order.
   (a)   Remedies.
   (1)   Withholding of certificate of occupancy. The Stormwater Administrator
or other authorized agent may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for
the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site
and served by the stormwater practices in question until the applicant or other
responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of
violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein.
   (2)   Disapproval of subsequent permits and development approvals. As long
as a violation of this article continues and remains uncorrected, the
Stormwater Administrator or other authorized agent may withhold, and the
Planning Director or Planning Board may disapprove, any request for permit or
development approval or authorization provided for by this article or other
land development ordinances applicable to the land on which the violation
occurs.
   (3)   Injunction, abatements, etc. The Stormwater Administrator, with the
written authorization of the Town Manager, may institute an action in a court
of competent jurisdiction for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order
of abatement to correct a violation of this article. Any person violating this
article shall be subject to the full range of equitable remedies provided in
the General Statutes or at common law.
   (4)   Correction as public health nuisance, costs as lien, etc. If the
violation is deemed dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or public
safety and is within the geographic limits prescribed by G.S. 160A-193, the
Stormwater Administrator, with the written authorization of the Town Manager,
may cause the violation to be corrected and the costs to be assessed as a lien
against the property.
   (5)   Stop work order. The Stormwater Administrator may issue a stop work
order to the person(s) violating this article. The stop work order shall remain
in effect until the person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the
notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations
described therein. The stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable
the person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or
violations.
   (b)   Civil penalties. Violation of this article may subject the violator to
a civil penalty to be recovered in a civil action in the nature of a debt if
the violator does not pay the penalty within thirty (30) days after notice of
the violation is issued by the Stormwater Administrator. Civil penalties may be
assessed up to the full amount of penalty to which the Town is subject for
violations of its Phase II Stormwater permit.
   (c)   Criminal penalties. Violation of this article may be enforced as a
misdemeanor subject to the maximum fine permissible under North Carolina law.
(Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3305.3   Procedures.
   (a)   Initiation/complaint. Whenever a violation of this article occurs, or
is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such
complaint shall state fully the alleged violation and the basis thereof, and
shall be filed with the Stormwater Administrator, who shall record the
complaint. The complaint shall be investigated promptly by the Stormwater
Administrator.
   (b)   Inspection. The Stormwater Administrator shall have the authority,
upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter and inspect any land,
building, structure, or premises to ensure compliance with this article.
   (c)   Notice of violation and order to correct.
   (1)   When the Stormwater Administrator finds that any building, structure,
or land is in violation of this article, the Stormwater Administrator shall
notify, in writing, the property owner or other person violating this article.
The notification shall indicate the nature of the violation, contain the
address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring,
order the necessary action to abate the violation, and give a deadline for
correcting the violation. If civil penalties are to be assessed, the notice of
violation shall also contain a statement of the civil penalties to be assessed,
the time of their accrual, and the time within which they must be paid or be
subject to collection as a debt.
   (2)   The Stormwater Administrator may deliver the notice of violation and
correction order personally, by the Town code enforcement personnel, by
certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by any means
authorized for the service of documents by Rule 4 of the North Carolina Rules
of Civil Procedure.
   (3)   If a violation is not corrected within a reasonable period of time, as
provided in the notification, the Stormwater Administrator may take appropriate
action under this article to correct and abate the violation and to ensure
compliance with this article.
   (d)   Extension of time. A person who receives a notice of violation and
correction order, or the owner of the land on which the violation occurs, may
submit to the Stormwater Administrator a written request for an extension of
time for correction of the violation. On determining that the request includes
enough information to show that the violation cannot be corrected within the
specified time limit for reasons beyond the control of the person requesting
the extension, the Stormwater Administrator may extend the time limit as is
reasonably necessary to allow timely correction of the violation, up to, but
not exceeding thirty (30) days. The Stormwater Administrator may grant fifteen
(15)-day extensions in addition to the foregoing extension if the violation
cannot be corrected within the permitted time due to circumstances beyond the
control of the person violating this article. The Stormwater Administrator may
grant an extension only by written notice of extension. The notice of extension
shall state the date prior to which correction must be made, after which the
violator will be subject to the penalties described in the notice of violation
and correction order.
   (e)   Enforcement after time to correct. After the time has expired to
correct a violation, including any extension(s) if authorized by the Stormwater
Administrator, the Stormwater Administrator shall determine if the violation is
corrected. If the violation is not corrected, the Stormwater Administrator may
act to impose one (1) or more of the remedies and penalties authorized by this
article.
   (f)   Emergency enforcement. If delay in correcting a violation would
seriously threaten the effective enforcement of this article or pose an
immediate danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, then the Stormwater
Administrator may order the immediate cessation of a violation. Any person so
ordered shall cease any violation immediately. The Stormwater Administrator may
seek immediate enforcement, without prior written notice, through any remedy or
penalty authorized by this article. (Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3306   Definitions.
Section 9-3306.1   Terms defined.
   When used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meaning set forth in this section, unless other provisions of this article
specifically indicate otherwise.
   Built-upon area (BUA) That portion of a development project that is covered
by impervious or partially impervious surface including, but not limited to,
buildings; pavement and gravel areas such as roads, parking lots, and paths;
and recreation facilities such as tennis courts. Built-upon area does not
include a wooden slatted deck, the water area of a swimming pool, or pervious
or partially pervious paving material to the extent that the paving material
absorbs water or allows water to infiltrate through the paving material.
   Department The North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural
Resources.
   Design Manual The stormwater design manual approved for use in Phase II
jurisdictions by the Department. All references herein to the Design Manual are
to the latest published edition or revision.
   Development Any land-disturbing activity that increases the amount of built-
upon area or that otherwise decreases the infiltration of precipitation into
the soil.
   Division. The Division of Water Quality in the Department.
   High-density project Any project that exceeds the low-density threshold for
dwelling units per acre or built-upon area.
   Larger common plan of development or sale Any area where multiple separate
and distinct construction or land-disturbing activities will occur under one
(1) plan. A plan is any announcement or piece of documentation (including but
not limited to a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement,
loan application, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer
design) or physical demarcation (including but not limited to boundary signs,
lot stakes, or surveyor markings) indicating that construction activities may
occur on a specific plot.
   Low-density project
   (1)   A project is a low -density project if it has no more than two (2)
dwelling units per acre or twenty-four percent (24%) built-upon area (BUA) for
all residential and non-residential development.
   (2)   A project with an overall density at or below the relevant low-density
threshold, but containing areas with a density greater than the overall project
density, may be considered low density as long as the project meets or exceeds
the post-construction model practices for low-density projects and locates the
higher density in upland areas and away from surface waters and drainageways to
the maximum extent practicable.
   1-year, 24-hour storm The surface runoff resulting from a 24-hour rainfall
of an intensity expected to be equaled or exceeded, on average, once in twelve
(12) months and with a duration of twenty-four (24) hours.
   Owner The legal or beneficial owner of land, including but not limited to a
mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, or long-term or
commercial lessee, or any other person or entity holding proprietary rights in
the property or having legal power of management and control of the property.
Owner shall include long-term commercial tenants; management entities, such as
those charged with or engaged in the management of properties for profit; and
every person or entity having joint ownership of the property. A secured lender
not in possession of the property does not constitute an owner, unless the
secured lender is included within the meaning of owner under another
description in this definition, such as a management entity.
   Redevelopment Any development on previously-developed land, other than a
rebuilding activity that results in no net increase in built-upon area and
provides equal or greater stormwater control than the previous development.
   Structural BMP A physical device designed to trap, settle out, or filter
pollutants from stormwater runoff; to alter or reduce stormwater runoff
velocity, amount,
timing, or other characteristics; to approximate the pre-development hydrology
on a developed site; or to achieve any combination of these goals. Structural
BMP includes physical practices such as constructed wetlands, vegetative
practices, filter strips, grassed swales, and other methods installed or
created on real property. Structural BMP is synonymous with "structural
practice," "stormwater control facility," "stormwater control practice,"
"stormwater treatment practice," "stormwater management practice," "stormwater
control measures," "structural stormwater treatment systems," and similar terms
used in this article.
   Substantial progress For the purposes of determining whether sufficient
progress has been made on an approved plan, one (1) or more of the following
construction activities toward the completion of a site or subdivision plan
shall occur: obtaining a grading permit and conducting grading activity on a
continuous basis and not discontinued for more than thirty (30) days; or
installation and approval of on-site infrastructure; or obtaining a building
permit for the construction and approval of a building foundation. Substantial
progress for purposes of determining whether an approved plan is null and void
is not necessarily the same as "substantial expenditures" used for determining
vested rights pursuant to applicable law. (Ord. of 9/3/13)
ARTICLE S
Regulation of Land Disturbing Activities
Section 9-33401   Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to prevent or minimize stormwater pollution
and nuisance conditions associated with land disturbing activities commenced
within the Town of Valdese. Nothing in this article shall be construed as
creating an exemption from any other local, state, or Federal regulations or
permit requirements. (Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-33402   Exemptions.
   Activities solely related to agriculture, mining, forestry, or emergency
response, as defined in G.S. 113A-52.01, are not subject to this article. (Ord.
of 9/3/13)
Section 9-33403   Permit requirements.
   (a)   No person shall commence any land disturbing activity that will result
in the disturbance of one-half (½) acre (twenty-one thousand, seven hundred
eighty (21,780) square feet) or more of land without first obtaining a Grading
Permit from the Town. To obtain a Grading Permit, an application shall be
submitted to the Stormwater Administrator with required information concerning
the proposed land disturbing activity. Such information shall include the
purpose of the land disturbance, the identification of the property to be
graded and its owner, the identification of the person who will perform the
grading and be responsible for restoring a stable ground surface, and a sketch
plan of the proposed grading and storm water controls. The sketch plan shall
show the planned area to be graded, the current and planned directions of
stormwater runoff flow, and the planned measures to control on-site soil
erosion and off-site sedimentation. The Stormwater Administrator shall not
issue a Grading Permit if the application is incomplete or if the application
is for an activity that would likely cause stormwater pollution, a nuisance
condition, or some other hazard to public health, safety, or welfare. The
Stormwater Administrator may issue the Grading Permit subject to such
conditions as the Stormwater Administrator determines are necessary in order to
prevent or minimize stormwater pollution or nuisance conditions associated with
land disturbing activities.
   (b)   If the proposed activity will disturb one (1) acre or more of land,
the activity will be subject to the State of North Carolina Sedimentation
Pollution Control Act of 1973 and require the filing of a plan with the State
Department of Environment and Natural Resources. A plan approved by the State
shall be deemed an approved sketch plan for purposes of this article.
   (c)   If the proposed activity will disturb one (1) acre or more of land,
the activity may also be subject to the Town of Valdese Phase II Stormwater
Ordinance and require the filing of a plan pursuant to that ordinance. Land
disturbance that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale may be
subject to the Phase II Stormwater Ordinance even if the initial grading
activity will disturb less than one (1) acre of land. A stormwater permit
issued under the Phase II Stormwater Ordinance shall be deemed an approved
permit under this article.
   (d)   If the proposed activity is subject to the Sedimentation Pollution
Control Act of 1973 or the Phase II Stormwater Ordinance, the Town shall not
issue a Grading Permit until all authorizations required under those laws have
been obtained. (Ord. 9/3/13)
Section 9-33404   Control of soil erosion, off-site soil deposits, and other
forms of pollution.
   (a)   If a Grading Permit is issued by the Town, land disturbance may
proceed in accordance with the Grading Permit and this article. Barriers, such
as silt fence, shall be in place prior to grading in order to contain sediment
on site. All reasonable measures, such as gravel aprons, shall be used to
prevent the tracking of mud from the site onto public or private streets. The
location where stormwater runoff leaves the site shall not be altered, and to
the extent practicable, runoff shall not be concentrated. Off-site, adjacent
properties shall be protected from damage due to the grading and the resultant
runoff. Vegetation, such as grass, shall be planted and established within
ninety (90) days from the issuance of the Grading Permit to a degree sufficient
to prevent soil erosion. With justification, the Stormwater Administrator may
grant an extension of up to ninety (90) additional days.
   (b)   The Stormwater Administrator may order that work on the site be
stopped if it is not in compliance with this article or the Grading Permit.
Upon the expiration of the Grading Permit or the Stormwater Administrator
ordering that the work be stopped, the Permittee shall cease all grading
related activities except as needed to establish vegetation and to control soil
erosion and sedimentation. (Ord. 9/3/13)
Section 9-33405   Fees.
   The Town may from time to time establish fees relating to Grading Permits
such as an application fee and an inspection fee. (Ord. 9/3/13)
ARTICLE T
Illicit Discharges and Connections and Onsite Wastewater
Section 9-3501   Illicit discharges and connections.
   (a)   Illicit discharges. No person shall cause or allow the discharge,
emission, disposal, pouring, or pumping directly or indirectly to any
stormwater conveyance, the waters of the State, or upon the land in manner and
amount that the substance is likely to reach a stormwater conveyance or the
waters of the State, any liquid, solid, gas, or other substance, other than
stormwater; provided that non-stormwater discharges associated with the
following activities are allowed and provided that they do not significantly
impact water quality:
   (1)   Water line flushing;
   (2)   Landscape irrigation;
   (3)   Diverted stream flows;
   (4)   Rising ground waters;
   (5)   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005
(20));
   (6)   Uncontaminated pumped ground water;
   (7)   Discharges from potable water sources;
   (8)   Foundation drains;
   (9)   Air conditioning condensation;
   (10)   Irrigation water;
   (11)   Springs;
   (12)   Water from crawl space pumps;
   (13)   Footing drains;
   (14)   Lawn watering;
   (15)   Residential and charity car washing;
   (16)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
   (17)   Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
   (18)   Street wash water; and
   (19)   Other non-stormwater discharges for which a valid NPDES discharge
permit has been approved and issued by the State of North Carolina, and
provided that any such discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system
shall be authorized by the Town.
   Prohibited substances include but are not limited to: oil, anti-freeze,
chemicals, animal waste, paints, garbage, and litter.
   (b)   Illicit connections.
   (1)   Connections to a stormwater conveyance or stormwater conveyance system
that allow the discharge of non-stormwater, other than the exclusions described
in subsection (a) above, are unlawful. Prohibited connections include, but are
not limited to: floor drains, waste water from washing machines or sanitary
sewers, wash water from commercial vehicle washing or steam cleaning, and waste
water from septic systems.
   (2)   Where such connections exist in violation of this section and said
connections were made prior to the adoption of this provision or any other
ordinance prohibiting such connections, the property owner or the person using
said connection shall remove the connection within one (1) year following the
effective date of this article. However, the one (1)-year grace period shall
not apply to connections which may result in the discharge of hazardous
materials or other discharges which pose an immediate threat to health and
safety, or are likely to result in immediate injury and harm to real or
personal property, natural resources, wildlife, or habitat.
   (3)   Where it is determined that said connection:
   a.   May result in the discharge of hazardous materials or may pose an
immediate threat to health and safety, or is likely to result in immediate
injury and harm to real or personal property, natural resources, wildlife, or
habitat; or
   b.   Was made in violation of any applicable regulation or ordinance, other
than this section; the Stormwater Administrator as appoint by the Town Manager
shall designate the time within which the connection shall be removed. In
setting the time limit for compliance, the Stormwater Administrator shall take
into consideration:
   1.   The quantity and complexity of the work,
   2.   The consequences of delay,
   3.   The potential harm to the environment, to the public health, and to
public and private property, and
   4.   The cost of remedying the damage.
   (c)   Spills.
   (1)   Spills or leaks of polluting substances released, discharged to, or
having the potential to be released or discharged to the stormwater conveyance
system, shall be contained, controlled, collected, and properly disposed. All
affected areas shall be restored to their preexisting condition.
   (2)   Persons in control of the polluting substances immediately prior to
their release or discharge, and persons owning the property on which the
substances were released or discharged, shall immediately notify the Town Fire
Chief of the release or discharge, as well as making any required notifications
under state and federal law. Notification shall not relieve any person of any
expenses related to the restoration, loss, damage, or any other liability which
may be incurred as a result of said spill or leak, nor shall such notification
relieve any person from other liability which may be imposed by State or other
law. (Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3502   Onsite wastewater.
   (a)   Onsite wastewater.
   (1)   Operation and maintenance requirements. New and replaced onsite
systems for domestic wastewater installed after the effective date of this
article shall be subject to the operation and maintenance requirements of the
Burke County Public Health Department.
   (2)   Standards for operation and maintenance. Onsite systems for domestic
wastewater shall be operated and maintained so as to avoid adverse effects on
surface water and groundwater. Operation and maintenance of onsite systems for
domestic wastewater shall be in accordance with the standards of the Burke
County Public Health Department.
   (3)   Enforcement. The Burke County Public Health Department shall be
responsible for the enforcement of the installation, operation, and maintenance
standards for onsite systems for domestic wastewater within the limits of the
Town and the extraterritorial jurisdiction, if any. (Ord. of 9/3/13)
Section 9-3503   Remedies and penalties.
   The remedies and penalties provided for violations of this article, whether
civil or criminal, shall be cumulative and in addition to any other remedy
provided by law, and may be exercised in any order.
   (a)   Remedies.
   (1)   Withholding of certificate of occupancy. The Stormwater Administrator
or other authorized agent may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for
any building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site
at which the violation is taking place until the applicant or other responsible
person cures the violation.
   (2)   Disapproval of subsequent permits and development approvals. As long
as a violation of this article continues and remains uncorrected, the
Stormwater Administrator or other authorized agent may withhold, and the
Planning Director or Planning Board may disapprove, any request for approval or
authorization provided for by land development ordinances applicable to the
land on which the violation is occurring.
   (3)   Injunction, abatements, etc. The Stormwater Administrator, with the
written authorization of the Town Manager, may institute an action in a court
of competent jurisdiction for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order
of abatement to correct a violation of this article. Any person violating this
article shall be subject to the full range of equitable remedies provided in
the General Statutes or at common law.
   (4)   Correction, costs as lien, etc. If the violation is deemed dangerous
or prejudicial to the public health or public safety, the Stormwater
Administrator, with the written authorization of the Town Manager, may cause
the violation to be corrected and the costs to be assessed as a lien against
the property.
   (5)   Civil penalties. Violation of this article may subject the violator to
a civil penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for each day
the violation continues. The civil penalty may be recovered in a civil action
in the nature of a debt if the violator does not pay the penalty within thirty
(30) days after notice of the violation is issued by the Stormwater
Administrator.
   (6)   Criminal penalties. Violation of this article may be enforced as a
misdemeanor subject to the maximum fine permissible under North Carolina law.
(Ord. of 9/3/13)
APPENDIX I
Traffic
Section 101   Parking prohibited at all times except on Sundays on the
following streets (See Section
7-1183):
 
Street       Location                                        Side
             Between and including Eldred Street on east
All streets: Morganton Street on west, St. Germain Avenue on Left of centerline
             south, Bobo Avenue on north
 
Section 102   Parking is limited to three hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m. or any day except Saturday, Sunday and public holidays within the
district or upon any of its streets as follows (See Section
7-1184:
 
Street         Location
Main Street    Between Eldred Street and Praley Street
Rodoret Street Both north and south Rodoret Street
Faet Street    Faet Street SW
 
(Ord. of 11/7/16)
Section 103   Parking limited to two hours between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
6:00p.m. on any day except Sundays and public holidays within the district or
upon any of the streets as follows (See Section
7-1187):
 
Street           Location
East Main Street At Morgan Street southeast to Columbo Street on west
West Main Street At Morgan Street southeast to Columbo Street on west
 
Section 104   Parking limited to one hour between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:
30 p.m. on any day except Sundays and public holidays within the district upon
any of the streets as follows (See Section
7-1184):
Section 105   Parking limited to five minutes (See Section
7-1184):
Section 106   The following streets or portion of streets shall be reserved as
stands for the specific purpose and at the exact location described in the
following (See Section
7-1174):
Section 107   Diagonal parking.
All vehicles shall be parked within the lines drawn for parking on the
following streets or portions thereof. (See Section
7-1142):
Section 108   Through streets (See Section
7-1081):
 
Through Street     Location
Massel Avenue      at Rodoret Street (Ord. of 5/7/18)
St. Germain Avenue at Rodoret Street (Ord. of 5/7/18)
 
Section 109   Intersections at which "Stop" is required before entering (See
Section
7-1083):
Section 110   One-way streets (See Section
7-1072):
Section 111   Left turns to be made to the left of the center of the following
intersections (See Section
7-1063):
Section 112   No left turns at following intersections (See Section
7-1063):
Section 113   No right turns at following intersections (See Section
7-1063):
Section 114   No complete or "U" turns at following intersections (See Section
7-1063):
Section 115   Twenty mile per hour speed limit on the following streets (See
Section
7-1052(1)):
 
Street                        Location
                              From Church Street (SR 1538) to Rodoret Street,
W. Main Street (US 64-70)     thence along East Main Street (US 64-70) to
                              Laurel Street (SR 1545)
South Praley Street (SR 1733) From Massel Street to West Main Street
 
Section 116   Twenty-five mile per hour speed limit on the following streets
(See Section
7-1052(2)):
 
Street                              Location
                                    From a point 0.15 mile south of Dixie
*Church Street                      Avenue N.W., north to a point 0.15 miles
                                    north of Dixie Avenue N.W. (Francis
                                    Garrow High School Zone)
*Time
School days,
7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m.
3:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m.
                                    From a point 0.10 mile south of Dixie
*Church Street (SR 1538)            Avenue N.W. to Washington Avenue
                                    (Valdese Junior High School Zone)
*Time
School days, from 30 minutes before
school begins to 30 minutes after
school ends (Ord. of 4/5/82)
Hauss Ridge Road (SR 1740)          From SR 1744 to Perkins Road (SR 1740)
                                    (Ord. of 3/1/82)
Hoyle Street                        north and south bound (Ord. of 6/4/18)
Perkins Road (SR 1740)              From Hauss Ridge Road (SR 1740) to
                                    Bridge #108) (Ord. of 3/1/82)
Powell Avenue SW                    north and south bound (Ord. of 8/6/18)
 
 
Section 117   Thirty mile per hour speed limit on the following streets (See
Section
7-1052(2)):
Section 118   Forty mile per hour speed limit on the following streets (See
Section
7-1052(4)):
Section 119   Forty-five mile per hour speed limit on the following streets
(See Section
7-1053(5)):
 
Street           Location
Eldred Street    From southern corporate limit to Pons
(SR1744)
East Main Street From Micol Creek to a point 0.12 mile east of SR 1547(Ord. of
(US 64-70)       3/1/82)
 
Section 120   Fifty mile per hour speed limit on the following streets (See
Section
7-1052(6)):
Section 121   Fifty-five mile per hour speed limit on the following streets
(See Section
7-1052(7)):
Section 122   Twenty mile per hour speed limit on the following streets (See
Section
7-1052(8)):
 
Street           Location
Laurel Street NE Between Main Street East and Eldred Street NE
(Ord. of 9/5/17)
 
Section 123   Twenty-five mile per hour speed limit on the following streets
(See Section
7-1052(9)):
Section 124   Thirty mile per hour speed limit on the following streets (See
Section
7-1052(10)):
Section 125   Forty mile per hour speed lim­ it on the following streets (See
Section
7-1052(11)):
Section 126   Forty-five mile per hour speed limit on the following streets
(See Section
7-1052(12)):
Section 127   Fifty mile per hour speed lim­ it on the following streets (See
Section
7-1052(13)):
Section 128   Fifty-five mile per hour speed limit on the following streets
(See Section
7-1052(14)):
Section 129   The fo1fowing streets or portions thereof, are designated as
passenger loading and unloading zones (See Section
7-1172):
Section 130   The following streets or portions thereof, are designated as
commercial loading and unloading zones (See Section
7-1173):
Section 131   Vehicles may turn right on red lights after coming to a complete
stop on the following streets (See Section
7-1034(3) a.):
Section 132   Yield right-of-way signs shall be posted at the following
locations (See Section
7-1043):
Section 133   Vehicle restrictions on certain streets.
   (a)   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for
any person to operate any vehicle with more then two (2) axles at any time upon
any of the following streets or parts of streets:
 
Street      Direction
Pons Avenue Southeast
 
   (b)   Provided that this section shall not apply to persons operating school
buses, vehicles driven to or from property along these streets for purposes of
loading or unloading or vehicles being used to provide services such as fire
protection, garbage pick-up, and street maintenance.
   (c)   Violation of this section shall be punish-able upon conviction by a
fine not exceeding $50 or imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days, as
provided in G.S. 14-4. (Ord. of 10/5/87)
Section 134 (Reserved)
Section 135   Traffic control signals shall be installed at the following
locations (See Section
7-1034):
Section 136   (Reserved)
Section 137   Flashing yellow caution signal lights installed at the following
locations (See Section
7-1036):
Section 138   The following locations are designated as "No Parking After
Business Hours" and "Customer Parking Only" areas.
All parking is prohibited on property owned or controlled by the following
businesses except during the business hours of the business operating at the
location and parking during such business hours is restricted to parking by the
customers of the business (See Section
7-1193):
   Location
      First Union National Bank
            Valdese Gulf
            Family Dollar Store
      Wachovia Bank and Trust
             Company, N.A.
            Centel
            Flowers Auto Parts
            The Rock Drug Store
            Better Homes Furnishings
            Bubble Brush Car Wash
            Colonel's Pantry
            Jack B. Quick
            Ferree's Laundry
Section 139   Parking prohibited between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m.
on any day along the streets or portions of streets described below (See
Section
7-1188):
Section 140   Parking prohibited between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m.
on any day in any of the municipal parking lots described below (See Section
7-1201):
 
Street      Location                  Side Description
                                           The municipal parking lot
Main Street Between Eldred Street and Both located off of Main Street
            Praley Street                  adjacent to the First Union
                                           National Bank lot
                                           The municipal parking lot
                                           located off of Main Street
                                           adjacent to the Duke Power
                                           Company building
                                           The McGalliard Falls parking lot
                                           located off of Church Street
                                           The McGalliard Falls parking lot
                                           adjacent to the ball fields;
                                           provided, however, that in the
                                           event softball games or other
                                           activities organized by the Town
                                           of Valdese Recreation Department
                                           are continuing after 9:30 p.m.,
                                           persons may park in this lot
                                           until such games or activities
                                           end.
 
Section 141   The following streets are hereby designated as "No Cruising
Areas." (See Section
7-1109)
 
Street             Location
Main Street        Between Eldred Street and Sterling Street
St. Germain Street Between Laurel Street and Columbo Street
Massell Street     Between Laurel Street and Praley Street
Bobo Street        Between Italy Street and Faet Street
 
(Res. of 6/6/94)
ORDINANCE DISPOSITION TABLE
 
Date Subject Location
10/8/79 Water regulations                   5-1001, 5-1018 - 5-1020
10/8/79 Water regulations definition        5-1001
3/3/80  Town council meetings               2-1011
8/4/80  Fair housing code                   Part 8, Chapter 7
                                            2-1004, 2-2021, 2-7002 - 2-7004, 3-
11/3/80 Several amendments                  1011, 4-1018, deletes 4-2009, 5-
                                            1005, deletes 5-1008
9/14/81 Loitering and disorderly conduct    8-1005
3/1/82  Speed limit                         Appendix I, Sec. 116
3/1/82  Speed limit                         Appendix I, Sec. 119
4/5/82  Speed limit                         Appendix I, Sec. 116
12/6/82 Regulating game rooms               6-1041 - 6-1046
12/6/82 Sewer use ordinance                 Part 5, Chapter 3
2/17/83 Charter amendment; economic         Charter 6.3
        development
5/2/83  Cemetery lot prices                 4-3005
11/3/86 Tree ordinance                      8-8001 - 8-8019
12/8/86 Town arbor-beautification committee 2-7040 - 2-7047
5/4/87  Areas of operation for game rooms   6-1047
8/3/87  Abolishing Valdese Parks and        2-7021, deletes 2-7021 - 2-7029
        Recreation Commission
10/5/87 Vehicle restrictions on certain     Appendix I, Sec. 133
        streets
2/5/90  Abandoned vehicles                  Part 8, Chapter 3
4/2/90  Civil penalties - parking           Part 7, Chapter 1, Article S
4/2/90  Parking                             7-1188; Appendix I, Sec. 139
4/2/90  Parking                             Part 7, Chapter 1, Article P;
                                            Appendix I, Sec. 138
4/2/90  Parking                             Part 7, Chapter 1, Article Q;
                                            Appendix I, Sec. 140
5/6/90  Street vendors                      6-1051 - 6-1061
5/7/90  Parking                             7-1188; Appendix I, Sec. 139
5/7/90  Parking                             Appendix I, Sec. 138
5/7/90  Parking                             Part 7, Chapter I, Article Q;
                                            Appendix I, Sec. 140
9/3/91  Street address numbers              4-1041 - 4-1043
10/7/91 Alarm systems                       3-2041 - 3-2048
                                           
 
 
Date Subject Location
4/6/92         Municipally-owned cemeteries         Part 4, Chapter 3
6/24/92        Parks and recreational facilities    8-9001 - 8-9009
9/8/92         Partial payments of bills            5-1021, 5-3033
/ /            Fire prevention and protection       3-2021
Res. of 9/8/92 Inspection fee schedule              3-2021(m)
3/1/93         Game rooms                           6-1045(1),(3)
/ /            Fire prevention and protection       3-2021
6/12/00        Gross receipts tax from vehicle      2-2051 through 2-2059
               lease or rental
6/29/00        Charter amendment; mayor’s term of Charter Sections 2.3, 3.4
               office
4/1/02         Coasters, roller skates, and similar 7-1025
               devices restricted
6/3/02         Gross receipts tax on electric power 2-2081 through 2-2091
               companies
12/8/03        Fire district amendment              3-2031
12/8/03        Vehicle restrictions on certain      7-1240
               streets
2/2/04         Cemetery lot sales                   4-3001
                                                    4-2001, 4-2010 through 4-
                                                    2016, 4-2020 through 4-
12/6/04        Solid waste                          2027, 4-2030 through 4-
                                                    2035; deletes former 4-2001
                                                    through 4-2010
               Zoning amendments; of Ords. of 5/3/  9-3001 through 9-3197;
1/10/05        93, 6/27/94, 5/6/96, 11/4/96, 4-7-   deletes former 9-3001
               97, 6/23/97, 5/4/98, 5-5-97, 8/2/99  through 9-3197
8/1/05         Fats, oils and grease control        5-4001 through 5-4013;
                                                    deletes former 8-4005
               Zoning amendment - Manufacturing     9-3058, 9-3058.1, 9-3071
6/5/06         District                             through 9-3074, 9-3076
                                                    through 9-3079
               Zoning amendments - Board of         9-3131, 9-3132, 9-3142, 9-
6/26/06        Adjustment, Planning Board and Town  3144 through 9-3146
               Council actions
                                                    5-3002, 5-3011, 5-3013, 5-
                                                    3018, 5-3019, 5-3034, 5-
11/6/06        Amending municipal utilities sewer   3042, 5-3051, 5-3054
               use                                  through 5-3056, 5-3058, 5-
                                                    3061, 5-3091, 5-3092, 5-
                                                    3114, 5-3115
1/8/07         Zoning amendment - watershed         9-3111, 9-3111.1, 9-3155
               protection
8/6/07         Flood damage prevention              Part 9, Chapter 3, Article
                                                    Q
9/4/07         Implementing new water conservation  5-1022; deletes former 5-
               procedures                           1022
                                                    Part 2, Chapter 2, Appendix
11/5/07        Town personnel policy                A; deletes former Part 2,
                                                    Chapter 2, Appendix A
11/5/07        Amending designation of primary fire 3-2031
               district
11/5/07        Zoning amendment - definitions;      9-3012, 9-3056, 9-3056.1
               General Business District
                                                   
 
 
Date Subject Location
12/3/07         Zoning amendment - permitted    9-3056.1
                uses - crematory
1/7/08          Zoning amendment - continuing   9-3032.2
                use of nonconforming buildings
11/3/08         Subdivision ordinance           Part 9, Chapter 2; deleting
                                                former Part 9, Chapter 2
1/5/09          Zoning amendment - Office-      9-3054, 9-3054.1
                Institutional District
1/5/09          Zoning amendment - signs        9-3100, 9-3106
                permitted without a permit
2/2/09          Discharging firearms            8-6028
6/1/09          Amending separate meters for    5-1004
                irrigation systems
                Personnel policy amendment -    Part 2, Chapter 2, App. A, Art.
6/29/09         FMLA                            VII, Section 17; Art. XI,
                                                Section 1
Res. of 1/4/10  Personnel policy amendment -    Part 2, Chapter 2, App. A, Art.
                FMLA                            VII, Section 17
2/1/10          Amendment to smoking ordinance  8-5006
6/7/10          Malt beverages and unfortified  8-10001 - 8-10007
                wine
8/2/10          Rescinding 8-6026 (malt         repeals 8-6026
                beverages and fortified wine)
12/6/10         Zoning                          Part 9, Chapter 3, Articles A
                                                through P
6/27/11         Smoking prohibited in Town      8-5006 through 8-5010
                parks and sports facilities
                                               
8/1/11          Animals                         8-2008 through 8-2012, 8-2022,
                                                deletes 8-2025
11/7/11         Fire prevention and protection  3-2021
12/5/11         Animals                         8-2008
Res. of 6/25/12 Sharing sick leave              Part 2, Chapter 2, App. A, Art.
                                                VII, Section 13
                                                5-3001, 5-3002, 5-3011, 5-3012,
                                                5-3013, 5-3017, 5-3018, 5-3033,
                                                5-3041, 5-3042, 5-3051 through
11/5/12         Sewer use                       5-3058, 5-3060, 5-3061, 5-3063,
                                                5-3072, 5-3073, 5-3081, 5-3091,
                                                5-3092, 5-3093, 5-3094, 5-3101,
                                                5-3105
12/3/12         Zoning - definitions;           9-3012, 9-3056.1, 9-3060, 9-
                electronic gaming operations    3060.07
2/11/13         Sidewalk cafés                 4-1051 through 4-1058
9/3/13          Zoning - regulation of land     9-33401 through 9-33405
                disturbing activities
                Zoning - illicit discharges and
9/3/13          connections and onsite          9-3501 through 9-3503
                wastewater
9/3/13          Zoning - Phase II stormwater    9-3301 through 9-3306.1
Res. of 3/3/14  Town manager residency          2-2003
                requirement
6/30/14         Zoning - conditional use        9-3047, 9-3131 through 9-3134,
                permit; Board of Adjustment     9-3137, deletes 9-3147
                                               
 
 
Date Subject Location
               Zoning - definitions; use       9-3012, 9-3054.1, 9-3055.1, 9-
12/1/14        requirements by district        3056.1, 9-3058.1, 9-3060.08, 9-
                                               3060.09
               Zoning - definitions; location  9-3012, 9-3039, 9-3052.1, 9-
6/29/15        of accessory buildings; use     3053.1, 9-3060.10
               requirements by district
8/3/15         Changing council meeting time   2-1011
               Prohibiting the use of e-
9/8/15         cigarettes and tobacco products 8-5006 through 8-5012
               on certain Town property
                                               9-3091, 9-3032, 9-3095, 9-
10/5/15        Zoning - sign regulations       3097.1, 9-3097.4, 9-3098, 9-
                                               3100, 9-3102, 9-3103.1, 9-3106
3/3/16         Zoning - definitions; use       9-3012, 9-3055.1, 9-3056.1, 9-
               requirements by district        3058.1
4/4/16         Zoning - definitions; animal    9-3012, 9-3061
               keeping
6/27/16        Retiree insurance coverage      2-8.14
11/7/16        Zoning; planned unit            9-3111.1
               developments
11/7/16        Parking                         7-1184, 7-1230, App. I, Sec. 103
12/5/16        Parking                         7-1230
2/6/17         Subdivision regulations         9-2052.03, 9-2052.09, 9-2052.11
8/7/17         Sunday sales; alcohol           6-1031
9/5/17         Speed limits                    App. I, Sec. 122
                                               9-2050.04, 9-2020, 9-3012, 9-
/ /            Zoning                          3031, 9-3035, 9-3047, 9-3051
                                               through 9-3053
5/7/18         Through streets                 App. I, Sec. 108
6/4/18         Speed limits                    App. I, Sec. 116
                                               8-2001 through 8-2009, 8-2011
6/4/18         Animals                         through 8-2014, 8-2021 through
                                               8-2030, 8-2034, 8-2041 through
                                               8-2045, 8-2051 through 8-2055
8/6/18         Speed limits                    App. I, Sec. 116
Res. of 2/4/19 Smoking, e-cigarettes           8-5006, 8-5007
Res. of 5/6/19 Storage and removal of junk     8-6021
Res. of 5/6/19 Property nuisances              8-4001 through 8-4013
5/6/19         Special events                  8-11001 through 8-11005
Res. of 5/6/19 Junked vehicles                 8-3001 through 8-3017
Res. of 5/6/19 Zoning - minimum housing        9-1061 through 9-1113
               standards
 
 
