TOWN OF WILLIAMSTON, NORTH
CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2013 S-3 Supplement Contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2012-40, passed 9-4-2012
State legislation current through 2013 ALS Pamphlet #1
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING CORPORATION
432 Walnut Street Cincinnati, Ohio 45202-3909 (800) 445-5588
ORDINANCE 2009-6
ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE TOWN OF WILLIAMSTON, NORTH
CAROLINA, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN OF WILLIAMSTON DEALING WITH
SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES.
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of North Carolina empower and authorize the
Town of Williamston to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any existing ordinances and all new
ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance
in book form; and
WHEREAS, the Board of Commissioners of the Town of Williamston, North Carolina has authorized a
general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the Town of Williamston of a
general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in book form; and
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE
TOWN OF WILLIAMSTON OF THE TOWN OF WILLIAMSTON, NORTH CAROLINA:
Section 1. The general ordinances of the Town of Williamston, North Carolina as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and shall constitute the
“Code of Ordinances of the Town of Williamston, North Carolina.”
Section 2. Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the following Titles:
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 10. General Provisions
11. Extraterritorial Jurisdiction
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
30. Organization and Administration
31. Board of Commissioners
32. Boards and Committees
33. Town Departments
34. Police
35. Elections
36. Finance and Taxation
37. Civil Emergencies and Emergency Management
38. Municipal Policies
39. Personnel Policies
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
50. Electricity
51. Garbage and Refuse
52. Weeds and Vegetation
53. Water and Sewers
1
2009 S-1
2 Williamston - Adopting Ordinance
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
70. Motor Vehicles and Traffic
71. Traffic Control Devices
72. Bicycles
73. Railroads
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
90. Animals and Fowl
91. Fire Protection
92. Streets and Sidewalks
93. Nuisance
94. Cemeteries
95. Public Assemblies
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
110. Licenses
111. Taxicabs
112. Alcoholic Beverages
113. Peddlers and Solicitors
114. Amusements
115. Electronic Video Games
116. Closing Out or Distress Sales
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
130. Offenses Against Public Morals
131. Miscellaneous Offenses
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
150. Buildings
151. Flood Provisions
152. Subdivision Regulations
153. Zoning
154. Housing
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
[Reserved]
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to North Carolina General Statutes
References to 1992 Code
References to Ordinances
INDEX
2009 S-1
Adopting Ordinance 3
Section 3. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such Code of Ordinances shall
be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance except as they are included and
reordained in whole or in part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of this ordinance, nor
shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or
detaching territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing
public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money, authorizing the
purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of
land to public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such
repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to subjects not
contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4. Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption and approval by the
Board of Commissioners and the Clerk of the Town of Williamston is hereby authorized and ordered to
file a copy of such Code of Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.
Section 5. Such Code shall be in full force and effect upon adoption, and such Code shall be
presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties
and regulations therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices thereof as required by law
have been given.
Passed and adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Town of Williamston, North Carolina on
this 21st day of September, 2009.
Tommy Roberson /s/
Tommy Roberson, Mayor
Attest:
Glinda W. Fox /s/
Glinda W. Fox, Town Clerk
2009 S-1 Repl.
4 Williamston - Adopting Ordinance
Adopting Ordinance 5
ORDINANCE 2010-09
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES FOR THE TOWN OF WILLIAMSTON, NC.
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has completed the first
supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Williamston, Williamston, NC, which
supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted since the prior adoption
to the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Williamston.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE
TOWN OF WILLIAMSTON OF THE TOWN OF WILLIAMSTON, NORTH CAROLINA:
Section 1. That the first supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Williamston as
submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be
and the same is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2. Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption and approval
by the Town of Williamston Board of Commissioners and the Town Clerk is hereby authorized and
ordered to insert such supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of
the Clerk.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Board of Commissioners of the Town of Williamston on this 1st day
of March, 2010.
Tommy Roberson /s/
Tommy Roberson, Mayor
Attest:
Glinda W. Fox /s/
Glinda W. Fox, Town Clerk
2011 S-2
Williamston - Adopting Ordinance 6
WILLIAMSTON, NORTH CAROLINA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
10. General Provisions
11. Extraterritorial Jurisdiction
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
30. Organization and Administration
31. Board of Commissioners
32. Boards and Committees
33. Town Departments
34. Police
35. Elections
36. Finance and Taxation
37. Civil Emergencies and Emergency Management
38. Municipal Policies
39. Personnel Policies
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
50. Electricity
51. Garbage and Refuse
52. Weeds and Vegetation
53. Water and Sewers
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
70. Motor Vehicles and Traffic
71. Traffic Control Devices
72. Bicycles
73. Railroads
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
90. Animals and Fowl
91. Fire Protection
92. Streets and Sidewalks
93. Nuisances
1
2 Williamston - Table of Contents
General Regulations (Cont’d)
94. Cemeteries
95. Public Assemblies
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
110. Licenses
111. Taxicabs
112. Alcoholic Beverages
113. Peddlers and Solicitors
114. Amusements
115. Electronic Video Games
116. Closing Out or Distress Sales
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
130. Offenses Against Public Morals
131. Miscellaneous Offenses
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
150. Buildings
151. Flood Provisions
152. Subdivision Regulations
153. Zoning
154. Housing
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
[Reserved]
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to North Carolina General Statutes
References to 1992 Code
References to Ordinances
INDEX
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
10. GENERAL PROVISIONS
11. EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION
1
2 Williamston - General Provisions
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
10.01 Title of code
10.02 Interpretation
10.03 Application to future ordinances
10.04 Captions
10.05 Definitions
10.06 Rules of interpretation
10.07 Severability
10.08 Reference to other sections
10.09 Reference to offices
10.10 Errors and omissions
10.11 Official time
10.12 Reasonable time; computing time
10.13 Ordinances repealed
10.14 Ordinances unaffected
10.15 Effective date of ordinances
10.16 Repeal or modification of ordinances
10.17 Ordinances which amend code; effect of new ordinances
10.18 Section histories; section headings; statutory references
10.19 Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances
10.99 General penalty; enforcement of ordinances; continuing violations
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
This codification of ordinances by and for the Town of Williamston shall be designated as the
Code of Williamston, North Carolina and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of
construction, definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing
the interpretation of state law.
3
4 Williamston - General Provisions
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to ordinances hereafter
adopted amending or supplementing this code unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and section numbers are
employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
(A) General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or ordinary and usual
sense. However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall
be understood according to their technical import.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
COMMISSIONERS or BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. The governing body of
Williamston, North Carolina.
COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day is Saturday, Sunday or a
legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
COUNTY. The County of Martin, North Carolina.
GENDER. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
neuter.
G.S. or GENERAL STATUTES. The latest edition of the GENERAL STATUTES of North
Carolina, as amended.
GENERALLY. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the
common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and the others as may
have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood
according to the peculiar and appropriate meaning.
GOVERNOR. The Governor of North Carolina.
General Provisions 5
JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers
shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority of persons or officers.
MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
MONTH. A calendar month.
NUMBER. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular
number.
OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an
oath and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and
AFFIRMED.
OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of this municipality unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall
mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this town.
OTHER TOWN OFFICIALS or OFFICERS. Whenever references are made to officials,
boards, commissions, departments and the like, by title only, they shall be deemed to refer to the
officials, boards, commissions and departments of the Town of Williamston.
OWNER. Applied to any property, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of the property.
PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee,
lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms
PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every species of property except real property.
PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line
intended for the use of pedestrians.
6 Williamston - General Provisions
SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
STATE. The State of North Carolina.
STREET. Any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway,
dedicated alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the town and shall mean the
entire width of the right-of-way between abutting property lines.
SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in the
chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections
related by the subject matter of the heading. Not all chapters have subchapters.
TENANT or OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of the building or land, whether alone or with others.
TENSE. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past
and present.
TOWN. The Town of Williamston, in the County of Martin, North Carolina.
WEEK. Seven days.
WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or
otherwise.
YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. One designated by the Council.
(1992 Code, § 1-2)
Statutory reference:
For state law as to computation of time, see G.S. §§ 1-593 and 1A-1, Rule 6(a)
For state law as to similar definitions and rules of construction, see G.S. § 12-3
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
The construction of all ordinances of this town shall be by the following rules, unless the
construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of the same
ordinance.
(A) AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written “and/or”, if the sense
requires it.
General Provisions 7
(B) Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an
agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of
an act by an authorized agent or deputy.
(C) Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed
to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural and words in
the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
(D) General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to
the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions that can be given effect
without the invalid provision or application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that reference shall extend
and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless
the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee
of this town exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of
any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words, the omission of any
word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words
to which no meaning can be attached or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, that spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied,
omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the
same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.
8 Williamston - General Provisions
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws, shall be the official time
within this town for the transaction of all municipal business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME; COMPUTING TIME.
(A) In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or
requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time
which is necessary for a prompt performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
(B) The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by
excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature
pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the
subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code,
subject however to § 10.19.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
(A) All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to
subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly
or by necessary implication.
(B) Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall be construed to repeal or
otherwise affect the validity of any of the following:
(1) Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any
contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this code;
(2) Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the
town or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town or any evidence of the town's indebtedness;
(3) Any contract or obligation assumed by the town;
(4) Any ordinance fixing the salary of any town officer or employee;
(5) Any right or franchise granted by the town;
General Provisions 9
(6) Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening,
paving and the like, any street or public way in the town;
(7) Any appropriation ordinance;
(8) Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term;
(9) Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefore;
(10) Any zoning ordinance or zoning map amendment;
(11) Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat;
(12) Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the town;
(13) The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the town not in conflict or inconsistent
with the provisions of this code;
(14) Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein;
(15) Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the town; and/or
(16) Any personnel ordinance.
(C) Nor shall any ordinance be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been
repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all ordinances are hereby
recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.
Statutory reference:
Statutes not repealed by General Statutes, see G.S. § 164-7
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall take effect from and after
the due publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication
shall take effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.
(A) Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent
ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until
the due publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give
effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
10 Williamston - General Provisions
(B) No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted, created, given, secured or
accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged,
but may be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force unless
it is otherwise expressly provided.
(C) When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed,
the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is
expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND CODE; EFFECT OF NEW ORDINANCES.
(A) All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this
code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system hereof and printed for inclusion
herein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection, or any portion thereof,
the repealed portions may be excluded from this code by omission from reprinted pages. The
subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie
evidence that the subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the town.
(B) Amendments to any of the provisions of the code shall be made by amending provisions by
specific reference to the section number of this code in language substantially similar to the following:
“Section of the Code of Ordinances, Town of Williamston, North Carolina, is hereby
amended as follows....” The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
(C) If a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added, language substantially
similar to the following shall be used: “The Code of Ordinances, Town of Williamston, North Carolina,
is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered , which section shall read as
follows:....” The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.
(D) All sections, subchapters, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically
repealed by section, subchapters or chapter number, as the case may be.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; SECTION HEADINGS; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
(A) As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage date of the original
ordinance and the amending ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section.
Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25,
passed 1-1-1985)
(B) (1) A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the text of the section reads
substantially the same as the statute. Example: (G.S. § 160A-11) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord.
20, passed 1-1-1985)
General Provisions 11
(2) A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the text of the section
indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for further information. Example:
§ 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
Statutory reference:
Inspection of public records, see G.S. §§ 132-1 et seq.
(C) If a section of this code is derived from the prior code of ordinances of the town, the prior
code section number shall be indicated in the history by “(1992 Code, § )”. The history notes
following sections and the references scattered throughout the code are not part of the code, but are
merely for the benefit for the user of the code.
§ 10.19 PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATIONS OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.
The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances adopted
prior to the adoption of this code and included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and
not as new enactments.
(1992 Code, § 1-3)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY; ENFORCEMENT OF ORDINANCES; CONTINUING
VIOLATIONS.
(A) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of any section or division of
this code of ordinances for which no other penalty is provided, or failing or neglecting or refusing to
comply with same, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not
to exceed $100 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of the provisions of this
code of ordinances are violated shall constitute a separate offense.
(B) Unless otherwise specifically provided, violation of any provision of this code of ordinances
or other town ordinance may subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $100, to be
recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of a penalty within a prescribed period of time after
he or she has been cited for the violation.
(C) Any provision of this code of any other town ordinance may be enforced by an appropriate
equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction. In such cases, the general court of
justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders as may be appropriate, and it shall not be a defense to
the application of the town for equitable relief that there is an adequate remedy at law.
(D) (1) Any provision of this code or any other town ordinance that makes unlawful a condition
existing upon or use made of real property may be enforced by injunction and order of abatement, and
the general court of justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders. When a violation of such a
provision occurs, the town may apply to the appropriate division of the general court of justice for a
12 Williamston - General Provisions
mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement commanding the defendant to correct the
unlawful condition upon or cease the unlawful use of the property. The action shall be governed in all
respects by the laws and rules governing civil proceedings, including the Rules of Civil Procedure in
general and Rule 65 in particular.
(2) In addition to an injunction, the court may enter an order of abatement as a part of the
judgment in the cause. An order of abatement may direct that buildings or other structures on the
property be closed, demolished, or removed; that fixtures, furniture or other movable property be
removed from buildings on the property; that grass and weeds be cut; that improvement or repairs be
made; or that any other action be taken that is necessary to bring the property into compliance with this
code or the ordinance. If the defendant fails or refuses to comply with an injunction or with an order of
abatement within the time allowed by the court, he or she may be cited for contempt, and the town may
execute the order of abatement. The town shall have alien on the property for the cost of executing an
order of abatement in the nature of a mechanic’s and materialman’s lien. The defendant may secure
cancellation of an order of abatement by paying all costs of the proceedings and posting a bond for
compliance with the order. The bond shall be given with sureties approved by the Clerk of Superior
Court in an amount approved by the judge before whom the matter is heard and shall be conditioned on
the defendant’s full compliance with the terms of the order of abatement within a time fixed by the
judge. Cancellation of an order of abatement shall not suspend or cancel an injunction issued in
conjunction therewith.
(E) The provisions of this code and any other town ordinance may be enforced by any one, all or a
combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed by this section.
(F) Except as otherwise specifically provided, each day’s continuing violation of any provision of
this code or any other town ordinance shall be a separate and distinct offense.
(G.S. § 14-4(a)) (Ord. passed 8-6-2007)
Statutory reference:
As to penalty for violation of town ordinances, see G.S. § 14-4
For provisions concerning enforcement of ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-175
For statutory authority, see G.S. § 160A-175
CHAPTER 11: EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION
Section
11.01 How determined; scope
11.02 Map; adoption by reference
11.03 Where filed
§ 11.01 HOW DETERMINED; SCOPE.
The boundaries for the extraterritorial enforcement of the following ordinances shall be as
determined from time to time by the Board of Commissioners:
(A) The Zoning Ordinance;
(B) Subdivision regulations;
(C) Chapter 96 “Housing”, found in this code;
(D) Ordinances adopting the North Carolina State Building Code or any part thereof;
(E) National Flood Insurance Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance (8-13-1987);
(F) An Ordinance Establishing the Williamston Planning Board; and
(G) Any other ordinance heretofore or hereafter enacted pursuant to G.S. Chapter 160A, Article
19.
(1992 Code, § 1-10)
Statutory reference:
For state law as to authority of a town to establish extraterritorial jurisdiction for planning and
regulation of development, see G.S. § 160A-360
§ 11.02 MAP; ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
(A) The extraterritorial boundaries, as determined by the Board of Commissioners, shall be
delineated on the face of a map entitled “Extraterritorial Jurisdiction of the Town of Williamston,
North Carolina”. The map is hereby adopted by reference.
13
14 Williamston - General Provisions
(B) The boundaries shall be recommended by the Williamston Planning Board pursuant to studies
of existing and projected urban development and areas of critical concern to the town.
(1992 Code, § 1-11)
§ 11.03 WHERE FILED.
The official copy of the extraterritorial jurisdiction boundaries map shall be on record in the office
of the Town Clerk for public inspection during normal business hours. The Town Clerk shall cause a
certified copy of this map and any subsequent amendments to be recorded in the office of the Register
of Deeds of the county. The Town Clerk shall cause signs, signposts or similar readily identifiable
marker to be installed at all points of intersection of the above described boundary with all roads,
streets, highways and railroads.
(1992 Code, § 1-12)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
30. ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION
31. BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
32. BOARDS AND COMMITTEES
33. TOWN DEPARTMENTS
34. POLICE
35. ELECTIONS
36. FINANCE AND TAXATION
37. CIVIL EMERGENCIES AND EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT
38. MUNICIPAL POLICIES
39. PERSONNEL POLICIES
1
2 Williamston - Administration
CHAPTER 30: ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
Form of Government
30.01 Mayor-Council form
Mayor
30.15 Term of office
30.16 Duties
30.17 Mayor Pro Tem
Town Administrator
30.30 Creation of office
30.31 Appointment
30.32 Term; compensation
30.33 Duties
30.34 Relation to Charter
Town Officials
30.45 Town Attorney
30.46 Town Clerk
30.47 Finance Officer
30.48 Town Tax Collector
Cross-reference:
Chief of Police, see §§ 34.01 through 34.03
Fire Chief, see §§ 91.20 and 91.21
FORM OF GOVERNMENT
§ 30.01 MAYOR-COUNCIL FORM.
The Town of Williamston shall operate under the Mayor-Council form of government, in
accordance with G.S. Ch. 160A, Article 7, Part 3.
3
4 Williamston - Administration
MAYOR
§ 30.15 TERM OF OFFICE.
The mayor of the town shall be elected for a term of four years beginning with the election held in
1995.
§ 30.16 DUTIES.
The mayor shall:
(A) Preside at all meetings of the Board of Commissioners and in his or her absence the Mayor
Pro Tempore shall preside.
(B) Not vote on any question before the Board except in the case of a tie vote.
(Sec. 30.02 Ord. passed 5-1-1995)
Statutory reference:
G.S. 160A-101(8)(a)
§ 30.17 MAYOR PRO TEM.
The Board of Commissioners shall elect one of its members as Mayor Pro Tempore, who in the
absence of the Mayor shall preside at meetings and perform the duties assigned to that office.
Statutory reference:
Mayor Pro Tempore, see G.S. 160A-70
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR
§ 30.30 CREATION OF OFFICE.
The Board of Commissioners of the town shall appoint an administrative officer whose title shall
be Town Administrator.
(1992 Code, § 2-14)
Town Officials 5
§ 30.31 APPOINTMENT.
The Town Administrator shall be appointed with regard to merit only, and he or she need not be a
resident of the town at the time of his or her appointment. The Mayor or any member of the Board of
Commissioners shall not be eligible for appointment as Town Administrator. The Office of Town
Administrator may be combined with any other town office, and the Town Administrator shall perform
the duties of other offices as directed by the Board of Commissioners.
(1992 Code, § 2-15)
§ 30.32 TERM; COMPENSATION.
The Town Administrator shall hold office at the pleasure of the Board of Commissioners and shall
receive such compensation as the Board of Commissioners shall by ordinance determine.
§ 30.33 DUTIES.
The Town Administrator shall have the following duties:
(A) Be the Chief Administrative Officer of the town government, responsible to the Mayor and the
Board of Commissioners for the performance of his or her duties. The Administrator shall perform or
supervise the performance of all administrative affairs of the town as he or she may be authorized and
directed so to do by the Mayor and Board of Commissioners;
(B) Attend all regular and special meetings of the Board of Commissioners. In addition, he or she
shall attend all committee meetings of the Board of Commissioners when requested to do so by the
Mayor or Board;
(C) Make investigations, studies and reports concerning town government affairs for the Mayor
and Board of Commissioners as they may direct and as the Administrator shall from time to time deem
necessary. Reports may include recommendations for adopting such measures as the Administrator
may deem best for the good government of the municipality;
(D) Keep the Mayor and the Board of Commissioners advised of the town’s financial condition
and its future financial needs, and to perform the fiscal control duties in connection therewith as may
from time to time be authorized by the Board of Commissioners;
(E) When directed by the Board of Commissioners, coordinate the activities of all departments
and assist the Mayor and the members of the Board in seeing that superintendents and other town
employees perform their duties and functions as they may be required;
6 Williamston - Administration
(F) Serve as the town’s Budget Officer and perform those duties and responsibilities assigned to
him or her by the Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act (G.S. Chapter 159, Article 3); and
(G) Perform the other duties and functions as the Board of Commissioners may prescribe.
(1992 Code, § 2-17)
§ 30.34 RELATION TO CHARTER.
This chapter, or any part thereof, shall not be interpreted so as to alter or modify the requirements
of the Williamston Town Charter relating to the power and authority granted therein to the Mayor or
any individual Town Commissioner. It is the intent of this chapter to establish the Office of Town
Administrator as a means of assisting the Mayor in his or her duties as Chief Executive Officer and
members of the Board as department heads in expediting their administrative duties imposed on them
by the Charter.
(1992 Code, § 2-18)
Cross-reference:
Town Administrator, see § 33.01(A)
TOWN OFFICIALS
§ 30.45 TOWN ATTORNEY.
The Board of Commissioners shall appoint a Town Attorney who shall be licensed to engage in the
practice of law in the State of North Carolina. Upon request by the Board of Commissioners, it shall
be duty of the Town Attorney to defend suits against the town; to advise the Mayor, Board of
Commissioners and other town officials with respect to the affairs of the town; to draft legal documents
relating to the affairs of the town; to inspect and pass upon agreements, contracts, franchises and other
instruments with which the town may be concerned; to attend meetings of the Board of
Commissioners, and to perform other duties as the Board of Commissioners may direct.
Cross-reference:
Town Attorney, see § 33.01(D)
§ 30.46 TOWN CLERK.
The Board of Commissioners shall appoint a Town Clerk to keep a journal of the proceedings of
the Board, to maintain in a safe place all records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the town,
and to perform such other duties as may be required by law or as the Board of Commissioners may
direct.
Cross-reference:
Town Clerk, see § 33.01(B)
Town Officials 7
§ 30.47 FINANCE OFFICER.
The Board of Commissioners shall appoint a Finance Officer to perform the duties of the Finance
Officer as required by the Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act, being G.S. §§ 159-7, et
seq.
Cross-reference:
Finance Officer, see § 33.01(C)
§ 30.48 TOWN TAX COLLECTOR.
The Board of Commissioners shall appoint a Tax Collector to collect all taxes, licenses, fees and
other revenues accruing to the town, subject to the General Statutes, the provisions of this charter and
the ordinances of the town. The Town Tax Collector shall diligently comply with and enforce all the
laws of North Carolina relating to the collection of taxes and other revenues by municipalities.
Cross-reference:
Finance and Taxation, see Chapter 36
8 Williamston - Administration
CHAPTER 31: BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
Section
31.01 Meetings; time
31.02 Procedure; Robert’s Rules of Order
31.03 Motion to reconsider
31.04 Rules of decorum
31.05 Enforcement of decorum
§ 31.01 MEETINGS; TIME.
Regular meetings of the Board of Commissioners shall be held at 5:30 p.m. on the first Monday of
each month until changed from time to time by the Board.
(1992 Code, § 2-6) (Am. Ord. 2012-40, passed 9-4-2012)
Statutory reference:
As to open meetings and public notice, see G.S. §§ 143-318.9 through 143-318.18
As to the organization meeting of the Board generally, see G.S. § 160A-68
For state law as to regular and special meetings, see G.S. § 160A-71
See also G.S. § 160A-81
§ 31.02 PROCEDURE; ROBERT’S RULES OF ORDER.
(A) Rules of procedure followed during meetings of the Board of Commissioners shall be as from
time to time adopted by the Board of Commissioners.
(B) When a procedural issue is not covered by the Board’s adopted rules of procedure, by local
ordinance or by state law, that issue shall be governed by Robert’s Rules of Order.
(1992 Code, § 2-7)
§ 31.03 MOTION TO RECONSIDER.
A motion to reconsider shall not be in order unless made not later than the next regular meeting of
the Board of Commissioners.
(1992 Code, § 2-8)
9
2013 S-3
10 Williamston - Administration
§ 31.04 RULES OF DECORUM.
For the preservation of order and decorum during Commissioners meetings, the following Rules of
Decorum shall govern.
(A) Any person making personal, impertinent, slanderous or profane remarks, or who willfully
utters loud, threatening or abusive language, or engages in any disorderly conduct which would
impede, disrupt or disturb the orderly conduct of any meeting, hearing or other proceeding, shall be
called to order by the Chairperson and, if the conduct continues, may, at the discretion of the
Chairperson, be ordered barred from further audience before the Board during that meeting.
(B) No person in the audience shall engage in disorderly conduct such as hand clapping, stamping
of feet, whistling, using profane language, yelling and similar demonstrations, which conduct disturbs
the peace and good order of the meeting.
(1992 Code, § 2-9) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 31.05 ENFORCEMENT OF DECORUM.
The Rules of Decorum shall be enforced as follows.
(A) All persons shall, at the request of the Chairperson, be silent. If, after receiving a warning
from the Chairperson, a person persists in disturbing the meeting, the Chairperson may order him or
her to remove himself or herself from the meeting. If he or she does not remove himself or herself, the
Chairperson may order a police officer to remove him or her.
(B) Any person who resists removal by the police shall be charged with violating this subchapter.
(C) Any Commissioner may move to require the Chairperson to enforce these rules and the
affirmative vote of a majority of the Board shall require him or her to do so.
(D) In the event that any meeting is willfully disturbed by a group or group of persons so as to
render the orderly conduct of the meeting unfeasible and when order cannot be restored by the removal
of individuals who are creating the disturbance, the meeting may be adjourned and the remaining
business considered at the next regular meeting.
(E) If the matter being addressed prior to adjournment is of such a nature as to demand immediate
attention, the Chairperson may call a special meeting and assess the cost of that meeting to the
disrupting parties if those parties are identifiable.
(1992 Code, § 2-10)
CHAPTER 32: BOARDS AND COMMITTEES
Section
Designation of Boards and Committees
32.001 Public bodies
32.002 Appointment process
Planning Board/Board of Adjustment
32.015 Creation; power
32.016 Appointment; terms
32.017 Comprehensive studies
32.018 Board of Adjustment
Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
32.030 Purpose/function
32.031 Appointment; terms
Police Advisory Board
32.045 Purpose/function
32.046 Appointment; terms
Williamston Housing Authority
32.060 Purpose/function
32.061 Appointment; terms
Williamston Community Appearance Commission
32.075 Purpose/function
32.076 Appointment; terms
Martin Memorial Library Board of Trustees
32.090 Purpose/function
32.091 Appointment; terms
11
12 Williamston - Administration
DESIGNATION OF BOARDS AND COMMITTEES
§ 32.001 PUBLIC BODIES.
The Board of Commissioners determines that authorities, boards, commissions or other bodies
constitute PUBLIC BODIES as defined in G.S. Chapter 143, Article 33C.
§ 32.002 APPOINTMENT PROCESS.
(A) The Board of Commissioners is authorized to appoint positions for authorities, boards,
commissions or other public bodies to serve as advisory boards. If an appointee fills an unexpired
vacancy on any authority, board or commissioner, the new appointee may serve the balance of that
term plus their own full service terms if approved by the Board of Commissioners. Individuals must
observe one year of inactive membership prior to service on another town appointed board,
commission or authority. Except in the case of a special appointed short term committee as defined by
the Board of Commissioners, appointed members should serve on only one board, commission or
authority at a time. It is recommended that the department-appropriate Town Commissioner meet with
their respective board, commission, or authority as often as possible but at least quarterly.
(B) The authorities, boards and commissions that serve the Town of Williamston shall include, but
are not limited to the following:
(1) Planning Board/Board of Adjustment;
(2) Parks and Recreation Advisory Board;
(3) Police Advisory Board;
(4) Williamston Housing Authority;
(5) Williamston Community Appearance Commission; and
(6) Martin Memorial Library Board of Trustees.
Boards and Committees 13
PLANNING BOARD/BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 32.015 CREATION; POWER.
The Williamston Planning Board is created and established pursuant to a special act of the General
Assembly so that it is empowered to exercise any power or authority granted by the General Statutes of
North Carolina.
(1992 Code, § 2-24)
§ 32.016 APPOINTMENT; TERM.
(A) The Williamston Planning Board shall consist of seven members. Currently, composition of
the board is comprised of:
(1) Five members residing in the corporate limits; and
(2) Two members residing in the extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(B) The number of extraterritorial jurisdiction representatives is determined by the proportional
representation method described in G.S. 160A-362. The Martin County Board of Commissioners has
the authority to appoint members to represent the extraterritorial jurisdiction, but may concede the
appointment to the Town Board of Commissioners.
(C) Each member shall be appointed to a three-year term and may be re-appointed to serve two
additional terms.
§ 32.017 COMPREHENSIVE STUDIES.
The Planning Board has authority to make comprehensive studies of the present and future needs
of the Williamston planning area. Such studies may include physical, social, and economic conditions
and trends within the area for the purpose of preparing a plan which will guide the sound growth and
orderly development of the Williamston planning area and best promote the health, safety,
convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of its citizens.
§ 32.018 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
Five of the seven members of the Planning Board also serve as the Board of Adjustment, with the
remaining members serving as alternates. Members of the extraterritorial jurisdiction must serve on the
Board of Adjustment for matters within the extraterritorial jurisdiction. The Board of Adjustment is
authorized to hear and decide appeals from citizens regarding alleged errors in decisions by the code
enforcement officer; make decisions on special uses; and authorizes variances, upon appeal, as outlined
in the zoning ordinance.
14 Williamston - Administration
PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD
§ 32.030 PURPOSE/FUNCTION.
The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board serves as an advisory board for the Williamston
Recreation Department. It shall suggest policies to the Recreation Department, the Town
Administrator and the Board of Commissioners, within its powers and responsibilities, and serve as a
liaison between the Parks and Recreation Director, the Town Administrator and the Board of
Commissioners.
§ 32.031 APPOINTMENT; TERMS.
The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall consist of seven members, who are appointed to a
three-year term and may be re-appointed to serve two additional terms.
POLICE ADVISORY BOARD
§ 32.045 PURPOSE/FUNCTION.
The Police Advisory Board serves as a liaison between the neighborhoods of the community, the
Williamston Police Department, the Town Administrator, and the Board of Commissioners. It works
with the Chief of Police in identifying and resolving safety problems in the municipality.
§ 32.046 APPOINTMENT; TERMS.
The Police Advisory Board shall consist of seven members, who are appointed to a three-year term
and may be re-appointed to serve two additional terms.
WILLIAMSTON HOUSING AUTHORITY
§ 32.060 PURPOSE/FUNCTION.
The Williamston Housing Authority has the responsibility of striving to meet the need for all of
Williamston’s citizens to live in standard housing. Plans and proposals are submitted to the Planning
Board and the Board of Commissioners for approval.
Boards and Committees 15
§ 32.061 APPOINTMENT; TERMS.
The Williamston Housing Authority shall consist of five members, who are appointed to a fiveyear
term and may be re-appointed to serve an indefinite number of terms.
WILLIAMSTON COMMUNITY APPEARANCE COMMISSION
§ 32.075 PURPOSE/FUNCTION.
The Williamston Community Appearance Commission’s primary function is to make careful
studies of the visual problems and needs of the municipality within its area of zoning jurisdiction and
make plans and carry out programs that will enhance and improve the visual quality and aesthetic
characteristics of its jurisdiction. Whereupon, they may make recommendations to the Planning Board
or the Board of Commissioners.
§ 32.076 APPOINTMENT; TERMS.
The Williamston Community Appearance Commission shall consist of seven members, who are
appointed to a four-year term and may be re-appointed to serve two additional terms.
MARTIN MEMORIAL LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
§ 32.090 PURPOSE/FUNCTION.
The Martin Memorial Library is the public library of the Town of Williamston. It shall have a
board of trustees appointed by the Town Board of Commissioners and the purpose of the board of
trustees is to advise the Board of Commissioners on library matters. Other library matters will be
allocated between the town and BHM Regional Library, Inc. by contact between the two entities and
by policy as from time to time adopted..
§ 32.091 APPOINTMENT; TERMS.
The Martin Memorial Library Board of Trustees shall consist of nine members, who are appointed
to a six-year term and may be re-appointed to serve one additional term.
16 Williamston - Administration
CHAPTER 33: TOWN DEPARTMENTS
Section
33.01 Administration Department
33.02 Fire and EMS Department
33.03 Planning and Development Department
33.04 Police Department
33.05 Recreation Department
33.06 Public Works Department
§ 33.01 ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT.
The Administration Department is hereby established, under the direction and supervision of the
Town Administrator, to aid the Town Administrator in administering the affairs of the town.
(A) Town Administrator. The Board of Commissioners of the town shall appoint an
administrative officer whose title shall be Town Administrator.
Cross-reference:
Town Administrator, see §§ 30.30 through 30.34
(B) Town Clerk. Subject to the supervision of the Town Administrator or his or her designee, the
Town Clerk is appointed by the Board of Commissioners to perform the duties of a town clerk as
described by law in G.S. § 160A-171.
(C) Finance Officer. Subject to the supervision of the Town Administrator or his or her designee,
the Finance Officer is appointed by the Board of Commissioners and shall have general control of the
Finance Department, its apparatus and its personnel. The Finance Department includes a utility
collections division and a tax collections division.
(D) Town Attorney. The Board of Commissioners shall appoint a Town Attorney who shall be a
licensed attorney in the State of North Carolina. The Town Attorney shall serve as the Board of
Commissioners’ legal advisor and perform such duties as are prescribed by law or required by the
Board.
17
18 Williamston - Administration
(E) Personnel Clerk. Subject to the supervision of the Town Administrator or his or her designee,
the Personnel Clerk shall serve to assist all departments in meeting their human resource needs through
the development and administration of the town’s Personnel Policy as adopted by the Board of
Commissioners. The Personnel Clerk will assist in recruiting qualified applicants for all job vacancies
and will maintain custody of centralized personnel files of all employees.
Cross-reference:
Personnel policies, see § 39.01
§ 33.02 FIRE AND EMS DEPARTMENT.
Subject to the supervision of the Town Administrator or his or her designee, the Chief of the Fire
and Rescue Department is appointed by the Board of Commissioners and shall have general control of
the Department, its apparatus and its personnel. The Chief shall perform such duties as are prescribed
by law or required by the Board of Commissioners.
Cross-reference:
Fire Protection, see Chapter 91
Statutory reference:
State law provisions, see G.S. 160A-292
§ 33.03 PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT.
Subject to the supervision of the Town Administrator or his or her designee, the Director of
Planning and Development is appointed by the Board of Commissioners and shall have general control
of the Department, its apparatus and its personnel. The duties of the department include planning,
zoning and code enforcement.
Cross-reference:
Housing, see Chapter 154
Land Usage, Title XV
§ 33.04 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
Subject to the supervision of the Town Administrator or his or her designee, the Police Chief is
appointed by the Board of Commissioners and shall have general control of the Department, its
apparatus and its personnel.
Cross-reference:
Police, see Chapter 34
Traffic Code, Title VII
Town Departments 19
§ 33.05 RECREATION DEPARTMENT.
Subject to the general control and supervision of the Town Administrator or his or her designee,
the Recreation Director is appointed by the Board of Commissioners and shall have general
supervision, direction and control over all matters pertaining to all recreation and recreation areas and
facilities, such as, but not limited to, playgrounds, community centers, recreation buildings, swimming
pools, lakes, tennis courts, ballfields, picnic areas of the town, rented and other facilities and grounds
that might be rented or borrowed by the town for recreational activities wherever located.
§ 33.06 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.
Subject to the general control and supervision of the Town Administrator or his or her designee,
the Public Works Director is appointed by the Board of Commissioners and shall have general control
of the Department, apparatus and its personnel. The following divisions are included in the Public
Works Department: Water Department, Sewer Department, Town Garage, Town Cemetery, Street
Department and Sanitation Department.
Cross-reference:
Public Works, Title V
Cemeteries, see Chapter 94
20 Williamston - Administration
CHAPTER 34: POLICE
Section
34.01 Chief of Police; appointment; removal
34.02 Duties; generally
34.03 Duties of police
Statutory reference:
For state law as to town police and law enforcement generally, see G.S. §§ 160A-281 to 160A-289
§ 34.01 CHIEF OF POLICE; APPOINTMENT; REMOVAL.
The Board of Commissioners shall appoint a Chief of Police and shall have the power to remove
the Chief of Police.
(1992 Code, § 23-1)
Statutory reference:
As to oath of officer, see G.S. § 160A-284
For state law as to authority of town to appoint Chief of Police, see G.S. § 160A-281
§ 34.02 DUTIES; GENERALLY.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to:
(A) Supervise the Police Department, including training and assignment of police officers;
(B) Apply modern law enforcement principles and practices under which the Department shall
operate;
(C) Plan, direct, coordinate and promote the law enforcement program of the town; and
(D) Carry out further orders as may be assigned to him or her by the Board of Commissioners,
provisions of this code, other ordinances of the town or state law.
(1992 Code, § 23-2)
Statutory reference:
For state law as to powers and duties of police officers generally, see G.S. § 160A-285
21
22 Williamston - Administration
§ 34.03 DUTIES OF POLICE.
The police shall perform those duties from time to time determined by the Chief of Police as well
as those proscribed in the town personnel policy and by state law.
(1992 Code, § 23-3)
CHAPTER 35: ELECTIONS
Section
35.01 Method adopted for election of Mayor and Commissioners
35.02 Conducted by County Board of Elections
§ 35.01 METHOD ADOPTED FOR ELECTION OF MAYOR AND COMMISSIONERS.
The Mayor and Commissioner of the town shall henceforth be elected by the nonpartisan plurality
method as set out in G.S. § 163-292 and as authorized by G.S. § 160A-101(7)(b) and Chapter 374 of
the 1991 Session Laws of North Carolina. Their terms shall be four years as provided in ordinances
adopted September 19, 1994, April 3, 1995 and May 1, 1995.
(1992 Code, § 9-1)
§ 35.02 CONDUCTED BY COUNTY BOARD OF ELECTIONS.
The elections of the town shall be conducted by the Martin County Board of Elections, subject to
the approval of the State Board of Elections as set out in G.S. § 163-285(2).
(1992 Code, § 9-2)
23
24 Williamston - Administration
CHAPTER 36: FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section
36.01 Levying tax; retail short-term lease or rental of motor vehicles
36.02 Tax discount
36.99 Penalty
§ 36.01 LEVYING TAX; RETAIL SHORT-TERM LEASE OR RENTAL OF MOTOR
VEHICLES.
(A) Levy of tax. A tax is hereby imposed and levied in an amount equal to 1.5% of the gross
receipts derived from the short-term lease or rental of vehicles at retail to the general public. This tax
on gross receipts is in addition to the privilege license taxes authorized by G.S. § 160A-211.
(B) Administration. The town, through its Tax Collector, will administer and collect from the
operators of leasing and rental entities the tax hereby levied. The Town Tax Collector may advocate
additional lawful rules and regulations necessary for implementation and collection of the tax.
(C) Collection of the tax. Every person engaged in the business of the short-term lease or rental of
vehicles at retail to the general public shall collect, at the time of the lease or rental, the tax herein
levied, place the tax so collected in a segregated account and thereafter remit the tax to the Tax
Collector in accordance with the provisions if this section. The taxpayer shall include, in each retail,
short-term lease or rental agreement stating that the percentage amount enacted by this section of the
total lease or rental price, excluding sales tax, is being charged as tax on gross receipts. The amount of
the tax shall be stated separately from the lease or rental and shown separately on the taxpayer's
records. The tax shall be paid by the customer to the taxpayer as trustee for and on account of the town.
The taxpayer shall be liable for the collection thereof and for his or her payment to the Tax Collector,
and the taxpayer's failure to charge or to collect the tax from the customer shall not affect the liability.
(D) Situs. The transaction giving rise to the tax herein levied shall be deemed to have occurred at
the location of the entity from which the customer takes delivery of the vehicle.
(G. S. § 160A-215.1(b))
(E) Payment of taxes and filing of returns. The taxes levied hereby are due and payable to the
town in monthly installments on or before day 15 of each month, prepare and render a return to the
town. The town shall design, print and furnish to all the entities the necessary forms for filing the
returns and
25
26 Williamston - Administration
instructions to insure the full collection of the tax. These tax proceeds shall be placed in a segregated
account by the collecting entity and are the property of the town. A return filed for this purpose is not a
public record as defined by G.S. § 132-1 and may not be disclosed except as provided by law.
(F) Taxpayer to keep records. The taxpayer shall keep and preserve suitable records of the gross
receipts received by the taxpayer in the conduct so business and other books or accounts as may be
necessary to determine the amount of the tax for which the taxpayer is liable under the provisions of
this section. It shall be the duty of the taxpayer to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all the
records of gross receipts, other books and accounts described. All records, books and accounts herein
described shall be open for the examination at all reasonable hours during the day by the Tax Collector
or his or her duly authorized agent.
(G) Misdemeanor for willful violation. Any person, firm, corporation or association who willfully
attempts in any manner to evade a tax imposed herein or who willfully fails to pay the tax or make and
file a return shall, in addition to the penalties provided by law and herein, be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable as provided by law.
(H) Authority. This section is enacted pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 160A-215.1.
(Ord. passed 3-6-2006) Penalty, see § 36.99
§ 36.02 TAX DISCOUNT.
There shall be a discount of 2% for taxes levied by the town and paid during the month of August
of the fiscal year for which the taxes are levied.
(1992 Code, § 11-1)
§ 36.99 PENALTY.
(A) Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is
prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.
(B) Levying tax. In case of failure or refusal to file a return or pay the tax for a period of 30 days
after the time required for filing the return or paying the tax, there shall be an additional tax, as a
penalty, of 5% of the tax due, with an additional tax of 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof
until the tax is paid. The Town Board of Commissioners, for good cause shown, may consider appeals
and adjust any penalty or additional tax imposed hereunder.
(Ord. passed 3-6-2006)
CHAPTER 37: CIVIL EMERGENCIES AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
37.01 When state of emergency deemed to exist
37.02 Issuance of proclamation by Mayor
37.03 Restorations during emergency
37.04 Extension, alteration and the like, of proclamation; violation of restorations prohibited
Statutory reference:
As to power of town to enact ordinances to deal with states of emergency, see G.S. § 14-288.12
For state law as to riots and civil disorders generally, see G.S. §§ 14-288.1 et seq.
§ 37.01 WHEN STATE OF EMERGENCY DEEMED TO EXIST.
A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during the times of great public crisis,
disaster, rioting, catastrophe or similar public emergency or for any other reason, municipal public
safety authorities are unable to maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives or
property.
(1992 Code, § 8-1)
§ 37.02 ISSUANCE OF PROCLAMATION BY MAYOR.
(A) In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency endangering the lives, safety,
health or welfare of the people within the town or threatening damage to or destruction of property, the
Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all persons the
existence of such a state of emergency and, in order to more effectively protect the lives and property
of people within the town, to place in effect any or all of the restorations authorized in this chapter.
(B) The Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit, by the proclamation, the application
of all or any part of the restrictions in this chapter, to any specifically designated or described area
within the corporate limits of the town and to specific hours of the day or night, and to exempt from all
or any part of the restrictions law enforcement officers, firefighters and other public employees,
doctors, nurses, employees of hospitals and other medical facilities, on-duty military personnel whether
state or federal, on-duty employees of public utilities, public transportation companies and newspaper,
magazine, radio broadcasting and television broadcasting corporations operated for profit and other
classes of persons as may be essential to the preservation of public order and immediately necessary to
serve the safety, health and welfare needs of the people within the town.
27
28 Williamston - Administration
(C) The Mayor shall proclaim the end of the state of emergency or all or any part of the
restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances warrant, or when directed to do so by the Board of
Commissioners.
(1992 Code, § 8-2)
§ 37.03 RESTORATIONS DURING EMERGENCY.
During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, the Mayor may impose, by
proclamation, any or all of the following restrictions:
(A) Prohibit or regulate the possession of one’s own premises of explosives, firearms,
ammunition or dangerous weapons of any kind, and prohibit the purchase, sale, transfer or other
disposition thereof;
(B) Prohibit or regulate the buying or selling of beer, wine or intoxicating beverages of any
kind, and their possession or consumption of one’s own premises;
(C) Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade, march, vigil or participation therein
from taking place on any of the public ways or upon any public property;
(D) Prohibit or regulate the sale of gasoline, kerosene, naphtha or any other explosive or
inflammable fluids or substances;
(E) Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street, alley or roadway or upon any other
public, property, except by those in search of medical assistance, food or other commodity or service
necessary to sustain the well-being of themselves, their families or some member thereof; and
(F) Prohibit or regulate the participation in or carrying on of any business activity and
prohibit or regulate the keeping open of places of business, places of entertainment and any other place
of public assembly.
(1992 Code, § 8-3)
§ 37.04 EXTENSION, ALTERATION AND THE LIKE, OF PROCLAMATION; VIOLATION
OF RESTORATIONS PROHIBITED.
(A) Any proclamation may be extended, altered or repealed in any particular during the continued
or threatened existence of a state of emergency by the issuance of a subsequent proclamation.
(B) During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to
violate any provision of any restriction imposed by any proclamation authorized by this chapter. The
fine for violation of any such restriction may exceed $50, up to a maximum of $500, as provided in
G.S. § 14-4.
(1992 Code, § 8-4) Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 38: MUNICIPAL POLICIES
Section
38.01 Regulating smoking in municipal buildings and vehicles
38.02 Criminal history checks
38.99 Penalty
§ 38.01 REGULATING SMOKING IN MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS AND VEHICLES.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context indicates or requires a different meaning.
SMOKING. The inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or
other combustible tobacco product.
(B) Smoking regulated in municipal buildings. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any
building or facility or portion of a building or facility now or hereafter owned, leased, operated,
occupied, managed or controlled by the town, except in specially designated smoking areas. The Board
of Commissioners shall have the authority to designate smoking areas within each town building or
facility. An area within any building or facility may be designated as a smoking area only if the
ventilation of the area is sufficient, any adverse impact on municipal employees and members of the
public is minimal and no fire or other safety hazard will be created by smoking in the area.
(C) Smoking prohibited in municipal vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any
vehicle now or hereafter owned or leased by the town.
(D) Conflict of laws. If any portion of this section or the enforcement thereof is found to be
preempted by state or federal law, the preemption shall not operate to invalidate the rest of the
ordinance, and the same shall remain in full force and effect.
(E) Effective date. This section shall be effective upon adoption.
(Ord. passed 10-4-1993) Penalty, see § 38.99
29
2009 S-1
30 Williamston - Administration
§ 38.02 CRIMINAL HISTORY CHECKS.
(A) The Town Administrator, or designee, shall conduct an investigation on final applicants for
regular full- and part-time positions in the city government; on final applicants for all coaches, assistant
coaches or other volunteers working directly with children participating in the town’s activities and
events; persons applying for permits or license to operate adult establishments; dance halls; game
rooms; massage parlors; and as a canvasser, pawn broker, peddler or itinerant merchant, precious metal
dealer, or taxi driver. It shall be a precondition of employment or for working directly with children in
a volunteer capacity, that upon request, the applicant provide necessary personal identification,
including a birth certificate, social security number (as allowed by law) and driver’s license, if
available, so the Town Administrator or designee may cause a thorough search to be made of local and
state criminal records for the purpose of determining if the applicant has a history of criminal
convictions by use of the Division of Criminal Information Network (DCIN).
(B) Prior to denial or termination of employment as a full- or part-time employee, or prior to the
termination of a volunteer or prior to denial of a permit or license to operate a business within the city
which termination or denial is based upon criminal history record inquiry (CHRI) received from
criminal information and identification section (CIIS) through the Williamston Police Department, the
Town Administrator or designee shall verify the existence of a record by obtaining a certified public
record or by submitting a fingerprint card of the individual to the CIIS for verification that the CHRI
record belongs to the individual.
(C) The Williamston Police Department shall provide the findings from the use of the DCIN to the
Town Administrator or designee.
(D) If any criminal history check reveals a prior record, the applicable clerk of court shall be
contacted to obtain the record. The town shall pay the applicable party the cost of obtaining a criminal
history record check.
(E) All parties handling sensitive information described herein shall comply with North Carolina
State Law, particularly G.S. § 160A-168, all federal laws, rules, regulations, and the town ordinances,
as they relate to the confidential handling of criminal record checks.
(Ord. 2009-4, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 38.99 PENALTY.
(A) General. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is
prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.
2009 S-1
Municipal Policies 30A
(B) Regulating smoking in municipal buildings and vehicles. Violation of § 38.01 shall subject
the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $10 to be recovered by the town. Violators shall be
issued a written citation which must be paid to the town within 48 hours. Violation of § 38.01 shall not
constitute a misdemeanor or infraction punishable under G.S. § 14-4.
(Ord. passed 10-4-1993)
2009 S-1
30B Williamston - Administration
CHAPTER 39: PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
39.01 Personnel policies
§ 39.01 PERSONNEL POLICIES.
The personnel policies of the town are contained in a separate manual. A copy of that manual shall
be maintained in the office of the Town Administrator and shall be available for public inspection
during regular business hours.
(1992 Code, § 22-1)
31
32 Williamston - Administration
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
50. ELECTRICITY
51. GARBAGE AND REFUSE
52. WEEDS AND VEGETATION
53. WATER AND SEWERS
1
2 Williamston - Public Works
CHAPTER 50: ELECTRICITY
Section
50.01 Electrical Code; adopted
50.02 Effect of amendments to adopt code
50.03 Filing of copies with Zoning Administrator
50.04 Compliance
Statutory reference:
For state law as to power of town to adopt regulatory codes by reference, see G.S. § 160A-76
§ 50.01 ELECTRICAL CODE; ADOPTED.
The North Carolina Electrical Code (North Carolina State Building Code, Volume IV,
“Electrical”), adopting by reference the National Electrical Code of the National Fire Protection
Association, as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council and as amended, is hereby
adopted by reference as fully as though set forth in this chapter as the Electrical Code for the town.
(1992 Code, § 10-1)
§ 50.02 EFFECT OF AMENDMENTS TO ADOPT CODE.
Amendments to the regulatory code adopted by reference in this chapter, which are from time to
time adopted and published by the agencies or organizations referred to herein, shall be effective in the
town at the time the amendments are filed with the Zoning Administrator as provided in § 50.03.
(1992 Code, § 10-2)
§ 50.03 FILING OF COPIES WITH ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
(A) An official copy of each regulatory code adopted in this chapter, and official copies of all
amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator.
(B) The copies shall be the official copies of the codes and the amendments.
(C) If copies of the regulatory code are on file with the town’s Building Inspector, they shall be
considered to be on file with the Zoning Administrator.
(1992 Code, § 10-3)
3
4 Williamston - Public Works
§ 50.04 COMPLIANCE.
All electrical wiring, installations and appurtenances shall be erected, altered, repaired, used and
maintained in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements and other provisions of the
Electrical Code adopted by § 50.01.
(1992 Code, § 10-4)
CHAPTER 51: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
General Provisions
51.01 Definitions
51.02 Clean and ordinary condition of premises; compliance with chapter
51.03 Disposal; throwing, dropping or depositing on public lands or in waters
51.04 Permitted areas and methods
51.05 Obstruction of drainage ditch
51.06 Construction site to be maintained in sanitary condition; construction refuse not to be
deposited on street, sidewalk and the like
51.07 Transportation
Collection
51.20 Collection practices; generally
51.21 Preparation of certain materials for collection
51.22 Containers; generally
51.23 No collection on weekends and holidays
51.24 Violation
51.25 Appeal
51.99 Penalty
Statutory reference:
For state law as to authority of town to regulate disposal of solid wastes, impose charges for
collection and disposal by town and the like, see G.S. § 160A-209
5
6 Williamston - Public Works
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or
requires a different meaning.
ASHES. Refuse resulting from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible material.
AUTOMATIC CONTAINERS. Waterproof and odor-proof containers, in size from one cubic
yard to eight cubic yards, approved by the town for use in commercial, business, industrial, residential
and other approved areas. (A dumpster is an AUTOMATIC CONTAINER.)
BUILDING RUBBISH. Rubbish from construction, remodeling and repair operations on houses,
commercial buildings and other structures, including but not limited to excavated earth, stones, brick,
plaster, lumber, concrete and waste parts occasioned by installations and replacements.
BUSINESS BUILDING. Any structure, whether public or private, that is adapted for transaction
of business, for rendering of professional services, for amusement, for the display or sale or storage of
goods, wares, merchandise, articles or equipment, including hotels, apartment houses, rooming houses,
office buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters, markets, restaurants, warehouses, sheds, barns and
other structures on premises used for or adapted to business purposes.
GARBAGE. Animal and vegetable refuse resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food, including a minimum amount of liquid necessarily incidental thereto.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Sawdust, shavings, feathers, excelsior, cartons, boxes, metal, glass,
paper, wood, textiles, chemicals, plastic or other waste materials from processing plants, factories or
manufacturing operations.
REFUSE. Solid waste, including but not limited to garbage, rubbish and ashes.
RUBBISH. Refuse, exclusive of garbage and ashes, including but not limited to paper, rags,
cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, trees, bush and hedge branches, cuttings and
trimmings, yard trimmings, grass, leaves, tin cans, metals, small mineral matter, glass, crockery, dirt,
earth and dust.
WASTE. Useless, unused, unwanted or discarded materials resulting from natural community
activities, including solids, liquids and gasses.
(1992 Code, § 13-1)
Garbage and Refuse 7
§ 51.02 CLEAN AND ORDINARY CONDITION OF PREMISES; COMPLIANCE WITH
CHAPTER.
Every owner and every occupant or other person in control of any building or land in the town,
including vacant property, shall keep the same in a clean and orderly condition and shall deposit refuse
for collection in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the regulations of the Public Works
Director. Combustible and noncombustible refuse shall be stored in containers complying with this
chapter.
(1992 Code, § 13-2)
§ 51.03 DISPOSAL; THROWING, DROPPING OR DEPOSITING ON PUBLIC LANDS OR
IN WATERS.
No person shall throw, drop or deposit, or cause to be thrown, dropped or deposited, on any land in
the town, vacant or occupied, including streets, alleys, sidewalks, parking lots and other public and
other semi-public areas and all waters, under the jurisdiction of the town, any waste, including but not
limited to refuse, garbage, ashes, rubbish, dead animals or fish, paper, drinking cups, broken glass,
tacks, brush, grass, weeds, junk automobiles and anything injurious to health. If any person, while
transporting or hauling or causing to be transported or hauled, the rubbish or material, or earth
excavation, coal or other material, shall throw, drop or deposit, or cause to be thrown, dropped or
deposited, the rubbish or material from the body of the vehicle in violation of the provisions of this
section, the person must daily clean up and remove the rubbish or material in a manner satisfactory to
the Public Works Director. If any person fails to clean up and remove the rubbish and material, the
Sanitation Department may clean up and remove the rubbish and material, and the town may recover
the cost of the cleaning up and removal from the person.
(1992 Code, § 13-3)
§ 51.04 PERMITTED AREAS AND METHODS.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 51.03, it shall not be unlawful to dispose of or throw away
refuse by personally carrying same to a garbage disposal area operated for the use of the residents of
the Town of Williamston, or as provided in §§ 51.20 through 51.25.
(1992 Code, § 13-4)
§ 51.05 OBSTRUCTION OF DRAINAGE DITCH.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit refuse, including dirt, in any ditch or otherwise
obstruct any ditch in the town if the ditch carries in it any water running off the street in the town, or
off any property, title to which is held by the town.
(1992 Code, § 13-5) Penalty, see § 51.99
8 Williamston - Public Works
§ 51.06 CONSTRUCTION SITE TO BE MAINTAINED IN SANITARY CONDITION;
CONSTRUCTION REFUSE NOT TO BE DEPOSITED ON STREET, SIDEWALK AND THE
LIKE.
Any person engaged in the construction of any residence or other structure in the town shall keep
the lot upon which construction is taking place in a reasonably clean and sanitary condition, and shall
not deposit on the sidewalk, parkway or street any refuse resulting from the construction.
(1992 Code, § 13-6)
§ 51.07 TRANSPORTATION.
No swill, slops, garbage, bones, offal, kitchen waste or refuse shall be carried through the streets of
the town, except in watertight containers with tight fitting covers.
(1992 Code, § 13-7)
COLLECTION
§ 51.20 COLLECTION PRACTICES; GENERALLY.
(A) Collection schedules; residences. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except in
the case of emergency arising from an act of God or under circumstances over which the Sanitation
Department has no control, the Department shall collect, remove and dispose of refuse from residences
at least once per week and, if possible, twice each week.
(B) Building rubbish. Building rubbish shall be collected, removed and disposed of by the
contractor or builder, or in case of their failure to do so, by the owner of the property.
(C) Trees, tree branches and trimmings.
(1) Subject to Martin County Landfill acceptance, the Department will provide curbside
pickup of not more than one standard dump truck load per week of residential rubbish derived from
normal landscape maintenance of premises when placed according to the following specifications:
(a) Tree branches, leaves and grass clippings shall be placed beside the street;
(b) Tree branches shall be no larger than four inches in diameter and eight feet in length;
(c) Tree stumps may not exceed 150 pounds; and
Garbage and Refuse 9
(d) Tree branches, leaves and other refuse are placed in separate piles.
(2) All persons engaged in the business of building, land clearing, tree removal and stump
grinding, operating on public or private property, shall be responsible for removing all rubbish which
they create.
(D) Vacant lots. No collection shall be made from vacant lots. However, in certain special
cleanup periods designated by the Town Commissioners, this section may be waived by the Public
Works Director.
(E) Fees.
(1) Fees for residential and business refuse collection shall be in accordance with the
rates and penalties as are from time to time adopted by the Town Board. The charges shall be added to
each customer’s water bill and payments shall be credited first to the refuse collection fee.
(2) In addition to other remedies provided by law and this code, service may also be
discontinued to any customer whose account remains delinquent. The term DELINQUENT shall have
the same meaning as that term is defined in the Water Use Ordinance of the Town of Williamston.
(1992 Code, § 13-8) (Ord. passed 7-1-1991; Ord. passed 4-7-2008) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.21 PREPARATION OF CERTAIN MATERIALS FOR COLLECTION.
Liquids; covering of containers. All refuse shall have the liquid drained therefrom before it is
placed in the container for collection. All lids to containers shall fit tight after the containers are filled.
The cover shall be kept on the containers at all times, except when being filled or emptied.
(1992 Code, § 13-9)
§ 51.22 CONTAINERS; GENERALLY.
(A) Requirements for residences; specifications; number required.
(1) Every person occupying a house or other residence shall provide containers
made of such materials as are approved by the Public Works Director. A list of approved containers
shall be maintained and available for public inspection at the office of the Public Works Director.
(2) Each container shall be provided with handles and with a tight fitting cover.
Containers must not have more than a 35-gallon capacity, unless an automatic container is used
pursuant to division (B) below.
(3) Each home shall have a sufficient number of containers to hold the refuse until collected.
10 Williamston - Public Works
(B) Automatic containers required where excess garbage. In addition to those requirements set
out in division (C) below, the owner or lessor of any premises, residential or otherwise, where refuse
accumulates to the extant of more than four cans per collection shall be required to purchase an
automatic container when notified in writing by the Public Works Director.
(C) Commercial, industrial, business and office building waste.
(1) Commercial, industrial, business and office buildings will be required to store their refuse
in containers holding four, six or eight cubic yards of refuse, equivalent to their needs. New building
construction sites must prepare concrete container pads for their occupants’ use prior to final inspection
and prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued. Size of the concrete pad will depend on location,
size of container and number of containers stored on the pads.
(2) The Public Works Director shall determine the location of the pads and containers, and
shall take into consideration the public safety and the area required for safely and conveniently
maneuvering the refuge collection.
(3) With the approval of the Public Works Director, more than one establishment to which
this section applies may combine to use one container or one pad when the volume of their refuse does
not justify their each providing a container, or where their location would justify a single pad for more
than one container.
(4) If the Public Works Director should determine that an existing establishment or group of
establishments are situated in such a location that it would be impractical for refuse collection, vehicles
to service an automatic container, than the Superintendent may waive the requirements of this section.
(D) Storage of cardboard boxes. Persons occupying business buildings shall store cardboard
boxes inside the building, unless the boxes are stored in automatic containers.
(E) Prohibited containers. No wooden boxes, pails or other wooden or cardboard containers
shall be used for refuse, nor shall any container not approved by the Public Works Director be used. If
used, the containers shall be confiscated by the town. This provision applies to oversize containers and
55-gallon drums or parts thereof.
(1992 Code, § 13-10)
§ 51.23 NO COLLECTION ON WEEKENDS AND HOLIDAYS.
No collection will be made of any refuse if placed on the streets after 10:00 a.m. on Friday or days
preceding holidays.
(1992 Code, § 13-11)
Garbage and Refuse 11
§ 51.24 VIOLATION.
In addition to those penalties provided below in § 51.99, the Public Works Director may refuse to
collect the refuse of anyone violating the terms of this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 13-12)
§ 51.25 APPEAL.
Appeal from any decision of the Public Works Director pursuant to this subchapter may be taken
to the Town Board of Commissioners.
(1992 Code, § 13-13)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
(A) Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable as provided in § 10.99. Each day of violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense.
(B) The provisions of this chapter shall in no way limit or restrict its enforcement to the remedies
provided, but instead the provisions shall also be enforced as provided in G.S. § 160A-175.
(1992 Code, § 13-22)
12 Williamston - Public Works
CHAPTER 52: WEEDS AND VEGETATION
Section
52.01 Plantings on right-of-way between curbs and sidewalk near intersections
52.02 Maximum permitted height of growth
52.03 When deemed public nuisance
52.04 Investigation of conditions by Town Administrator
52.05 Notice to abate nuisance
52.06 Abatement of nuisance by town; upon request
52.07 Upon failure of property owner to obey notice
52.08 When notice cannot be given
52.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Nuisances, see Chapter 93
§ 52.01 PLANTINGS ON RIGHT-OF-WAY BETWEEN CURBS AND SIDEWALK NEAR
INTERSECTIONS.
No planting or other obstruction more than 36 inches high may be made on the right-of-way
between the curb and sidewalk for a distance of 25 feet from the corners of intersections.
(1992 Code, § 13-14)
§ 52.02 MAXIMUM PERMITTED HEIGHT OF GROWTH.
Heavy under growths and excessive accumulations of plant growth such as grass and weeds shall
not be permitted to exceed ten inches in height upon occupied property or vacant lots within the town.
Every owner, lessee, occupant or person in possession of property in the town shall cut down, within
ten inches of the ground, all weeds, grass or other noxious growth thereon as often as may be necessary
and at least twice each year, the first time not later than June15 and the second time not later than
September 15 of each year. If the weeds, grasses or other noxious growth are not cut in compliance
with this section, the town, through its agents and employees, shall proceed to have the weeds, grass or
other noxious growth cut out, and the owner, lessee, occupant or person in possession of the property
shall be responsible to the town for the cost thereof as provided in G.S. § 160A-193.
(1992 Code, § 13-15)
13
14 Williamston - Public Works
§ 52.03 WHEN DEEMED PUBLIC NUISANCE.
The uncontrolled growth of noxious weeds and grass, pausing or threatening to cause conditions
dangerous and prejudicial to the public health or a fire hazard dangerous to the public safety, upon any
premises or upon any vacant lot, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(1992 Code, § 13-16)
§ 52.04 INVESTIGATION OF CONDITIONS BY TOWN ADMINISTRATOR.
The Town Administrator, upon notice from any person of the existence of the conditions
described in § 52.05, shall make or cause to be made the investigations as may be necessary to
determine whether, in fact, the conditions constitute a public nuisance.
(1992 Code, § 13-17)
§ 52.05 NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE.
Following the investigation provided in § 52.04 and upon determination by the Town
Administrator that the conditions constitute a public nuisance, the Town Administrator shall notify, in
writing, the owner, lessee, occupant or person in possession of the premises in question of the
condition constituting a public nuisance and shall order the prompt abatement thereof.
(1992 Code, § 13-18)
§ 52.06 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY TOWN; UPON REQUEST.
Any person who, under the provisions of § 52.05, has been ordered to abate a public nuisance
may, within ten days from receipt of the order, request the Town Administrator in writing to remove
the conditions constituting the nuisance, the costs of the removal to be paid by the person making the
request. If not paid, the costs shall be a lien upon the land or premises where the nuisance was situated
and shall be collected as unpaid taxes as provided in G.S. § 160A-193.
(1992 Code, § 13-19)
§ 52.07 UPON FAILURE OF PROPERTY OWNER TO OBEY NOTICE.
If any person who, under the provisions of § 52.05, has been ordered to abate a nuisance, fails
to do so or fails to request the Town Administrator to do so, within ten days of receipt of the order, the
Town Administrator shall proceed to remove the conditions constituting the nuisance. The costs of the
removal shall be a lien upon the premises where the nuisance was situated and shall be collected as
unpaid taxes as provided in G.S. § 160A-193.
(1992 Code, § 13-20)
Weeds and Vegetation 15
§ 52.08 WHEN NOTICE CANNOT BE GIVEN.
In any case in which the Town Administrator is unable to give written notice to the owner, lessee,
occupant or person in possession of premises upon which a nuisance exists, whether by reason of
inability to identify any person or to ascertain his or her address, the Town Administrator shall give the
notice by publication in a newspaper of general circulation which is qualified under G.S. § 1-597 to
publish legal advertisements in the county. At the same time, the Town Administrator shall post a copy
of the notice at a conspicuous place upon the premises in question. The ten day period provided in §
52.06 shall commence to run from the date of the newspaper publication, and the cost of the
publication shall be included in the cost of removal of the conditions which constitute the nuisance.
(1992 Code, § 13-21)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
(A) Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable as provided in § 10.99. Each day of violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense.
(B) The provisions of this chapter shall in no way limit or restrict its enforcement to the remedies
provided, but instead the provisions shall also be enforced as provided in G.S. § 160A-175.
(1992 Code, § 13-22)
16 Williamston - Public Works
CHAPTER 53: WATER AND SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
53.01 Town required connection to water and sewer lines
Water
53.15 Water use ordinance
Sewers
53.30 Sanitary sewer use ordinance
Water Shortage Response Plan
53.45 Purpose
53.46 Definitions
53.47 Plan implementation
53.48 Monitoring and enforcement
53.49 Violations, surcharges and penalties
53.50 Variance requests
53.51 Plan effectiveness and revision
53.52 Water use classifications
53.53 Interruption of service
53.54 Conservation measures
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.01 TOWN REQUIRED CONNECTION TO WATER AND SEWER LINES.
(A) Any owner of improved property located within the town limits of the Town of Williamston
and upon or within a reasonable distance of any water line or sewer collection line owned, leased and
17
2011 S-2
18 Williamston - Public Works
operated by the Town of Williamston, shall be required to connect his or her premises with the water
line, sewer line or both.
(B) Charges shall be made in accordance with the specifications and schedules of the town then in
effect.
(C) Any connections shall be made in accordance with the specifications of the town, and it shall
be unlawful for any person without authority from the town to make any excavation in any street or
other right-of-way for the purpose of connecting with a water line or sewer line or for any other
purpose.
(D) The town’s providing its water or sewer line at or within close proximity of the owner’s
property line shall be considered “a reasonable distance” as that term is used herein.
(Ord. passed 7-12-1993) Penalty, see § 10.99
WATER
§ 53.15 WATER USE ORDINANCE.
(A) The town’s duly adopted Water Use Ordinance is adopted herein by reference as if set out in
full. Any subsequent amendments to that ordinance shall be automatically and simultaneously
incorporated into this chapter.
(B) The text of the Water Use Ordinance shall be maintained under separate cover in the office of
the Town Administrator and shall be available for public inspection during regular business hours.
(1992 Code, § 28-1) (Am. Ord. 2009-7, passed 12-16-2009)
SEWERS
§ 53.30 SANITARY SEWER USE ORDINANCE.
(A) The town’s duly adopted Sanitary Sewer Use Ordinance is adopted herein by reference as if
set out in full. Any subsequent amendments to that ordinance shall be automatically and
simultaneously incorporated into this subchapter.
(B) The text of the Sanitary Sewer Use Ordinance shall be maintained under separate cover in the
office of the Town Administrator and shall be available for public inspection during regular business
hours.
(1992 Code, § 25-1)
2011 S-2
Water and Sewers 19
WATER SHORTAGE RESPONSE PLAN
§ 53.45 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this subchapter is to ensure the availability of sufficient water supply to preserve
public health and safety and to balance the availability and equitable distribution of limited potable
water during drought or other adverse conditions. The subchapter provides for the declaration,
monitoring, and enforcement of the official phases of a water shortage response plan during water
supply shortage situations and the implementation of voluntary and mandatory water conservation
measures throughout the town’s operation in the event a shortage is declared.
(Ord. 2010-12, passed 5-3-2010)
§ 53.46 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALLOTMENT. The maximum quantity of water allowed for each customer over any
applicable period as established in the water conservation provisions of this subchapter.
ANY WATER. Any type of water, including fresh water, brackish water, wastewater, or
reclaimed water.
BRACKISH WATER. Water containing more than 1,000 parts per million of dissolved salts.
CUSTOMER. Any person using water for any purpose from the town’s water distribution
system and for which either a regular charge is made, or in the case of bulk sales, a cash charge is made
at the site of delivery.
EMERGENCY. That water supplies are below the level necessary, to meet normal needs and
that serious shortages exist in the area.
EXCESS USE. The usage of water by a water customer in excess of the water allotment
provided under the water conservation provisions of this subchapter for that customer, over any
applicable period.
FRESH WATER. Water withdrawn from surface or groundwater which has not been
previously used, other than brackish water.
2011 S-2
20 Williamston - Public Works
MANDATORY CONSERVATION. That raw water supplies (i.e., stream flow, reservoir levels or
groundwater levels) are consistently below seasonal averages, and if they continue to decline, may not
be adequate to meet normal needs.
NON-RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER. Commercial, industrial, institutional, public and all other
such users, with the exception of hospitals and health care facilities.
RECLAIMED WATER. Wastewater which has been treated to allow reuse.
RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER. Any customers who receive water service for a single or multifamily
dwelling unit. The term RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER does not include educational or other
institutions, hotels, motel, or similar commercial establishments.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION. The temporary suspension of water supply, or reduction of
pressure below that required for adequate supply, to any customer, portion of a water supply, or entire
system.
VOLUNTARY CONSERVATION. That conditions exist which indicate the potential for
serious water supply shortages.
WASTE OF WATER. Includes, but is not limited to:
(1) Permitting water to escape down a gutter, ditch, or other surface drain; or
(2) Failure to repair a controllable leak of water due to defective plumbing.
WASTEWATER. Water which has been previously used for industrial, municipal, domestic, or
other purpose, and has not been returned to the surface or groundwater source.
WATER. Water available to the Town of Williamston treatment by virtue of its water rights or
withdrawal permit or any treated water introduced by the town into its water distribution system,
including water offered for sale.
WATER USE CLASSES. Shall be established as written in § 53.52.
(Ord. 2010-12, passed 5-3-2010)
§ 53.47 PLAN IMPLEMENTATION.
(A) Several parameters or conditions may require the town to implement the water shortage
response plan (WSRP). These include but may not be limited to:
2011 S-2
Water and Sewers 21
(1) Significant reductions in well water levels;
(2) A significant increase in pump run times for the predetermined total flow at the well(s);
(3) Contaminants in the water system;
(4) Acts of terrorism or vandalism;
(5) Main breaks; and
(6) Natural disasters.
(B) If the factors listed above reduce well water levels, increase pump run times or by any event
or combination of events significantly hinder the water system’s capacity to adequately deliver water,
WSRP phases will be enacted in the following order:
(1) Phase I - voluntary conservation will be enacted if a 20% reduction in normal well water
levels is noted or if pump run times increase 20% in order to maintain previous rates or any other event
which causes a 20% reduction in the water system’s capacity. The Public Works Director or his or her
designee shall, on a daily basis, monitor the supply and demand upon that supply. In addition the
mayor (or his or her agent) is authorized to call upon all water customers to employ voluntary water
conservation measures. Class 3 non-essential uses should be halted. Notification to employees and
customers shall be publicized in a newspaper of general circulation in the area, the general news media,
mailers, door hangers, public postings, or any other appropriate method. The town will terminate phase
I activation at such time as the threat is no longer viewed as a significant threat to system operation.
(See § 53.54 Conservation Measures and § 53.52 Water Use Classifications)
(2) Phase II - mandatory conservation will be enacted if a 40% reduction in normal well
water levels is noted or if pump run times increase 40% in order to maintain previous rates or any other
event which causes a 40% reduction in the system’s capacity. The town shall continue to encourage
voluntary water conservation measures defined under the voluntary conservation declaration, and
further shall impose a ban on all Class 3 non-essential water uses. Notification shall follow the
provisions outlined for voluntary conservation. Phase II activation will be terminated or phased down
at such time as the threat is no longer viewed as a significant threat to system operation.
(See § 53.52 Water Use Classifications)
(3) Phase III - water shortage emergency will be enacted if a 60% reduction in normal well
waters levels is noted or if pump run times increase 60% in order to maintain previous rates or any
other event which causes a 60% reduction in the system’s capacity. Class 1, essential uses shall be
identified, in specific, as targets for voluntary conservation initiatives. Also, all Class 2, socially or
economically important uses and Class 3, non-essential uses shall be banned. If it is deemed necessary
to further
2011 S-2
22 Williamston - Public Works
provide for the equitable distribution of critically-limited water supplies and assure that sufficient water
is available to preserve public health and safety, more specific mandatory reduction measures may be
enforced. Such measures may include mandatory usage reductions for businesses, household
allotments based on the number of persons served, or temporary interruption of service. Under extreme
conditions requiring mandatory reduction the following measures will apply:
(a) Residential customers may be allotted 1,000 gallons per month per
person per connection.
(b) The following surcharges will apply for customers exceeding allotted
usage.
1. Monthly usage of 1,001 - 1,250 gallons/person/connection will
result in a 25% surcharge.
2. Monthly usage of 1,251 - 1,500 gallons/person/connection will
result in a 75% surcharge.
3. Monthly usage of 1,501 or more gallons/person/connection will
result in a 150% surcharge.
(c) In order to maintain current water rates commercial, industrial, and
institutional facilities will be required to reduce their monthly water consumption by 25% of the
previous 12-month water consumption average. Average water usage may be evaluated on an
individual basis for customers with seasonal demand fluctuations.
1. A 10 - 24% water use reduction from the previous 12-month
average usage will result in a 25% surcharge on the monthly billing.
2. A 0 - 9% usage reduction will result in a 50% surcharge on the
monthly bill.
3. An increase of 1 - 25% above the previous 12-month average
usage will result in a 100% surcharge added to the next monthly bill.
4. Increased usage beyond 25% of the previous 12-month average
will be surcharged at 150% of the monthly bill.
(d) These restrictions shall continue until the emergency is declared ended
by the mayor. Notification shall follow the provisions outlined for voluntary conservation. Phase III
activation will be terminated or phased down at such time as the threat is no longer viewed as a
significant threat to system operation. (See § 53.52 Water Use Classification and § 53.53 Interruption
of Services)
(Ord. 2010-12, passed 5-3-2010)
2011 S-2
Water and Sewers 23
§ 53.48 MONITORING AND ENFORCEMENT.
The Town’s Administrative Office and Public Works Department will have primary responsibility
for monitoring compliance with the water conservation measures. Enforcement of these water shortage
measures shall be enforced by the town through the town’s public works and police department
personnel. Suspected violations may be reported to the town office by phone at (252) 792-5142 or by
contacting the town’s public works department at (252) 792-1024.
(Ord. 2010-12, passed 5-3-2010)
§ 53.49 VIOLATIONS, SURCHARGES AND PENALTIES.
(A) In addition to surcharges mentioned in § 53.47, failure to comply with the mandatory
conservation measures contained herein will result in a notice of violation and a civil penalty. For
violations of Phase II conditions there will be a $50 fine for the first offense. The fine will increase by
$50 for each subsequent offense. A fifth violation will result in discontinuation of service. Service may
be restored upon return to Phase I conservation and payment of all applicable fees.
(B) Violation of Phase III conditions will result in a $ 100 fine for the first offense, $350 for the
second offense and discontinuation of service for the third offense. Service may be restored upon return
to Phase I conservation and payment of all applicable fees.
(C) Any customer or other person aggrieved by a decision or action imposing a civil penalty or
other remedy for non-compliance with the requirements of this subchapter may file a complaint by
calling town hall and issuing such complaints with the Town Administrator. The Town Administrator
shall provide an opportunity for the customer or aggrieved party to rebut the finding of a violation, or
provide evidence of circumstances beyond the customer’s control which resulted in the violation. A
record of evidence regarding disputed violations shall be kept, and a written notice of the town’s final
decision and action in such cases shall be provided to the customer or aggrieved party.
(Ord. 2010-12, passed 5-3-2010)
§ 53.50 VARIANCE REQUESTS.
(A) Applications for water use variance requests are available from the Town Hall. All
applications must be submitted to the Town Hall for review by the Town Administrator or his or her
designee. A decision to approve or deny variance requests will be determined within two weeks of
submittal.
(1) Residential. If the mandated reductions in water usage cannot be obtained without
imposing extraordinary hardship for individual customers, as in the case of special health related
requirements, a revised reduction requirement for the particular customer may be established.
2011 S-2
24 Williamston - Public Works
(2) Non-Residential. If the mandated reductions in water usage cannot be obtained
without imposing extraordinary hardship which threatens health and safety, the non-residential
customer may apply to the town for a variance. For these purposes “extraordinary hardship” means a
permanent damage to property or an economic loss which is substantially more severe than the
sacrifices borne by other water users subject to the water conservation ordinance codified herein. If the
reduction would cause an extraordinary hardship or threaten health or safety, a variance may be granted
by the Town Administrator and a revised water use reduction requirement for the particular customer
may be established.
(B) Any person aggrieved by a decision relating to such a variance may file a complaint by
calling Town Hall and requesting the Board of Commissioner’s consideration of such complaint.
(Ord. 2010-12, passed 5-3-2010)
§ 53.51 PLAN EFFECTIVENESS AND REVISION.
The effectiveness of this plan will be evaluated following implementation, or every five years,
through observation and comparison of the conservation goals and actual water use reduction data as
well as reduction needs versus the frequency of plan implementation, number of violations, violation
resolution, and reduction attained relative to previous usage.
(Ord. 2010-12, passed 5-3-2010)
§ 53.52 WATER USE CLASSIFICATIONS.
(A) Class 1: essential water uses.
(1) Domestic use. Water necessary to:
(a) Sustain human life and the lives of domestic pets; and
(b) Maintain minimum standards of hygiene and sanitation.
(2) Health care facilities. Patient care and rehabilitation, including swimming pools
used for patient care and rehabilitation.
(3) Public use.
(a) Fire hydrants;
1. Firefighting; and
2011 S-2
Water and Sewers 25
2. Certain testing and drills by the fire department if performed in the interest of the
public safety and if approved by the Mayor or his or her designee.
(b) Flushing of sewers and hydrants: as needed to ensure public health and safety and if
approved by the Mayor or his or her designee.
(B) Class 2: socially or economically important uses of water.
(1) All domestic uses other than those included in Classes 1 and 3:
(a) Home water use including kitchen, bathroom and laundry use;
(b) Minimal watering of vegetable gardens; and
(c) Watering of trees where necessary to preserve them.
(2) Commercial, agricultural, industrial and institutional uses.
(a) Outdoor commercial watering (public or private) using conservation
measures and to the extent that sources of water other than fresh water are not available to use.
(b) Irrigation for commercial vegetable gardens and fruit orchards or the
maintenance of livestock.
(c) Watering by commercial nurseries at a minimum level necessary to
maintain stock.
(d) Water use by arboretums and public gardens of national, state, or
regional significance where necessary to preserve specimens.
(e) Use of fresh water at a minimum rate necessary to implement vegetation
following earth-moving, where such vegetation is required by law or regulation
(f) Watering of golf course greens.
(g) Filling and operation of swimming pools:
1. Residential pools which serve more than 25 dwelling units; and
2. Municipal pools.
(h) Commercial car and truck washes.
2011 S-2
26 Williamston - Public Works
(i) Commercial laundromats.
(j) Restaurants, clubs, and eating places.
(k) Air conditioning:
1. Refilling for start up at the beginning of the cooling season;
2. Make-up of water during the cooling season; and
3. Refilling specifically approved by health officials and the town
governing body, where the system has been drained for health protection or repair purposes.
(l) Schools, churches, motels/hotels and similar commercial establishments.
(C) Class 3: non-essential uses of water.
(1) Ornamental purposes: fountains, reflecting pools, and artificial waterfalls.
(2) Outdoor non-commercial watering (public or private):
(a) Gardens, lawns, parks, golf courses (except greens), playing fields and
other recreational areas;
(b) Filling and operation of recreational swimming pools serving fewer than
25 dwellings;
(c) Non-commercial washing of motor vehicles;
(d) Serving water in restaurants, clubs, or eating places except by specific
request; and
(e) Air conditioning: refilling cooling towers after draining except as
specified in Class 1.
(3) Public use. Fire hydrants: any purpose, including use of sprinkler caps and testing fire
apparatus and for fire department drills, except as listed in Class 1.
(Ord. 2010-12, passed 5-3-2010)
§ 53.53 INTERRUPTION OF SERVICES.
The following provisions shall govern the implementation of temporary service interruptions.
2011 S-2
Water and Sewers 27
(A) In order to effectuate compliance with this subchapter, the town is hereby authorized and
required to plan and implement temporary service interruption to all or part of its water supply system,
as may be deemed appropriate, when any and/or all of the following conditions are determined to exist:
(1) The mandated reduction in system-wide usage has not been achieved;
(2) The mandated reduction in system-wide water usage has been achieved, but has
failed to have a significant impact in extending limited water supplies; and/or
(3) Temporary service interruptions are necessary in order to further extend limited
and/or dwindling water supplies.
(B) In the event it is determined that temporary service interruptions are necessary, the
town shall notify its customers through the public media (newspapers, radio, and television), at least
one day-prior to the temporary service interruptions, that a planned, temporary service interruption is to
be imposed. Such notice shall:
(1) State the day or days when the planned, temporary service interruption will
occur;
(2) State the time(s) when such planned, temporary service interruptions will
commence, and the time(s) such interruption will cease;
(3) State whether the planned, temporary service interruptions are to be imposed on
the entire system, or part thereof, and if only part(s) of the system will experience planned, temporary
service interruptions, identify geographic boundaries within which such interruptions will occur; and
(4) Advise all customers within the areas affected by planned, temporary service
interruptions how to treat any water received from the system, for human consumption, during the
period(s) of such interruptions and for such additional time as may be necessary until full pressure is
restored to the system.
(C) If a planned, temporary service interruption is imposed as authorized and required by
this subchapter, the town must provide for the continued delivery of water to health care facilities
within the area(s) affected by such interruptions, by means of any adequate, alternative delivery
measures that may be necessary.
(D) If a planned, temporary service interruption is implemented, the town must make
provisions, by any means possible, the continued delivery of such water as may be necessary for the
proper operation of sewage collection, treatment, and disposal systems and facilities.
(E) Meter reading schedules are authorized to be altered to assure adequate monitoring of
compliance with this subchapter.
2011 S-2
28 Williamston - Public Works
(F) Any customer or other person aggrieved by a decision or action imposing an excess-use civil
penalty or other remedy for non-compliance with the requirements of this subchapter may file a
complaint with the Town Administrator and be provided an opportunity for the customer or aggrieved
party to rebut the finding of a violation, or provide evidence of circumstances beyond the customer’s
control which resulted in the violation. A record of evidence regarding disputed violations shall be
kept, and a written notice of the town’s final decision and action in such cases shall be provided to the
customer or aggrieved party.
(Ord. 2010-12, passed 5-3-2010)
§ 53.54 CONSERVATION MEASURES.
Direct users to adopt the following conservation measures.
(A) Indoor residential use.
(1) Conservation for voluntary and mandatory conservation phases.
(a) Use dishwasher only when they are full. Washing dishes by hand (don’t let the tap
run!) Saves about 25 gallons.
(b) Adjust water level on clothes washing machines, if possible. Use full loads only, if
not adjustable.
(c) Turn off faucets while brushing teeth, and the like. Saves about five gallons per day.
(d) Reduce water used per flush by installing toilet tank displacement inserts. A plastic
jug may often be used as an alternative. DO NOT USE BRICKS, they disintegrate when soaked and
the resulting grit hinders closing of the flap valve.
(e) Do not use the toilet as a trash can.
(f) Use sink and tub stoppers to avoid wasting water.
(g) Keep a bottle of chilled water in the refrigerator for drinking.
(h) Find and fix leaks in faucets and water-using appliances. Faucets can usually be fixed
cheaply and quickly by replacing washers.
(i) Adapt plumbing with flow-restricting or other water-saving devices. These are
usually inexpensive and easy to install. See list of devices in Appendix E.
2011 S-2
Water and Sewers 29
(j) Learn to read your water meter so you can judge how much water you
use and what difference conservation makes.
(k) Take shorter showers and shallow baths. Saves about 25 gallons.
(l) Reduce the number of toilet flushes per day. Each flush uses about five
gallons (two to three if you have water saving toilets).
(m) Don’t use a garbage disposal.
(n) Use non-phosphate detergent and save laundry water for lawns and plant.
(2) Conservation for emergency conservation or conservation (In addition to
measures listed above).
(a) Turn off showers while soaping up.
(b) Use disposable eating utensils.
(B) Outdoor residential use.
(1) Conservation for normal conditions and voluntary conservation phase.
(a) Lawns.
1. Water before 10:00 a.m. to prevent evaporation which occurs
during the hottest part of the day. Morning is better than evening, when the dampness encourages
growth of fungus.
2. Water only when lawn shows signs of wilt. Grass that springs back when
stepped on does not need water.
3. Water thoroughly, not frequently: long enough to soak roots. A light sprinkling
evaporates quickly and encourages shallow root systems. Water slowly to avoid runoff.
4. Don’t let the sprinkler run any longer than necessary. In an hour, 600 gallons can
be wasted.
5. Allow maximum of one inch of water per week on your lawn. To measure, place
cake tins outside to collect rain and water from sprinklers.
6. Use pistol-grip nozzles on hoses to avoid waste when watering flowers and
shrubs.
2011 S-2
30 Williamston - Public Works
7. Aerate lawns by punching holes six inches apart. This allows
water to reach roots rather than run off surfaces.
8. Position sprinklers to water the lawn, not the pavement.
9. Avoid watering on windy days when the wind not only blows
water off target, but also causes excess evaporation.
10. Keep sprinkler heads clean to prevent uneven watering.
11. Adjust hose to simulate a gentle rain. Sprinklers that produce a
fine mist waste water through evaporation.
12. Know how to turn off an automatic sprinkler system in case of
rain.
13. Use an alarm clock or stove timer to remind you to shut off
sprinklers that don’t have timers.
(b) Vegetable and flower gardens.
1. Water deeply, slowly and weekly. Most vegetables require
moisture to a depth of six to eight inches.
2. Keep soil loose so water can penetrate easily.
3. Keep weeds out to reduce competition for water.
4. Put the water where you want it and avoid evaporation by using
soil-soakers or slow-running hoses, not sprinklers.
(c) Trees and shrubs.
1. Water deeply using a soil -soaker or drip-irrigation.
2. Water only when needed. Check the depth of soil dryness by digging with a
trowel.
3. Mulch to reduce evaporation. A two inch to three inch layer of wood chips, pine
needles, grass clippings, or straw keeps the soil cool in summer.
4. Dig troughs around plants to catch and retain water.
2011 S-2
Water and Sewers 31
5. Water trees growing in full sun more often than those in shade.
6. Do not use sprinklers. Apply water directly at base.
7. Do not fertilize during the summer. Fertilizing increases a plant’s
need for water.
8. Postpone planting until fall or spring when there is generally less
need for water.
9. Install trickle-drip irrigation systems close to the roots of your
plants. By dripping water slowly, the system doesn’t spray water in to the air. Use soil probes for large
trees.
10. Water when cloudy, at night, or even when a light rain is falling.
(2) Conservation for voluntary conservation phase (in addition to measures listed
above).
(a) Do not allow children to play with hose or sprinklers.
(b) Limit car washing.
(c) Be ready to catch rainfall that occurs. Place containers under drain
sprouts.
(d) Use leftover household water if available.
(e) Consider delaying the seeding or sodding of new lawns.
(f) Determine the amount of water being used outdoors by comparing water
bills for summer and winter.
(3) Conservation for mandatory conservation phase (in addition to measure listed
above).
(a) Vegetable gardens and food trees should be given minimal amounts of water on an
individual basis only.
(b) Do not water lawns and inedible plants.
(c) Do not use sprinklers.
(4) Most outdoor watering is prohibited under emergency conservation conditions.
(C) Hospital and health care facility use.
(1) Reduce laundry usage or services by changing bed linens and the like only when
necessary to preserve the health of patients or residents.
2011 S-2
32 Williamston - Public Works
(2) Use disposable food service items.
(3) Eliminate, postpone, or reduce, as they may be appropriate, elective surgical procedures
during the period of emergency.
(D) Industrial use.
(1) Identify and repair all leaky fixtures and water-using equipment. Give special attention to
equipment connected directly to water lines, such as processing machines, steam-using machines,
washing machines, water-cooled air conditioners, and furnaces.
(2) Assure that valves and solenoids that control water flows are shut off completely when
the water-using cycle is not engaged.
(3) Adjust water-using equipment to use the minimum amount of water required to achieve
its stated purpose.
(4) Shorten rinse cycles for laundry machines as much as possible; implement lower water
levels wherever possible.
(5) For processing, cooling, and other uses, either re-use water or use water from sources that
would not adversely affect public water supplies.
(6) Advise employees, students, patients, customers, and other users not to flush toilets after
every use. Install toilet tank displacement inserts; place flow restrictors in shower heads and faucets;
close down automatic flushes overnight.
(7) Install automatic flushing valves to use as little water as possible or to cycle at longer
intervals.
(8) Place water-saving posters and literature where employees, students, patients, customers,
and the like will have access to them.
(9) Check meters on a frequent basis to determine consumptive patterns.
(10) Review usage patterns to see where other savings can be made.
(Ord. 2010-12, passed 5-3-2010)
2011 S-2
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
70. MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
71. TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
72. BICYCLES
73. RAILROADS
1
2 Williamston - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 70: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Section
General Provisions
70.001 Definitions
70.002 Traffic and parking regulations
70.003 Maintenance of Official Traffic Ordinance Book
70.004 Obedience to police
70.005 Authority of Police and Fire Department officials in special cases
70.006 Public employees to obey traffic regulations
70.007 Exemptions for authorized emergency vehicles
70.008 Boarding or alighting from vehicles
70.009 Unlawful riding
70.010 Entering, jumping on or riding vehicles without permission
70.011 Duty to stay inside moving vehicles; hanging onto vehicles
70.012 Limitation on number of persons in front seat
70.013 Persons propelling push carts, riding animals or bicycles to obey regulations
Operation of Vehicles
70.030 Stop before entering through street
70.031 Stop before entering stop intersection
70.032 Vehicles not to block intersections or crosswalks
70.033 One-way street
70.034 Driving through funeral processions
70.035 Left turns
70.036 Turns prohibited at certain intersections
70.037 Limitations on backing
70.038 Emerging from alley or private driveway
70.039 Vehicles not to be driven on sidewalks; exception
70.040 Operation of bicycle on sidewalk
70.041 Use of handlebars on bicycles or motorcycles
70.042 Clinging to moving vehicles
70.043 Riding on handlebars
70.044 Coasters, roller skates and the like
70.045 Moving cars from parked position
70.046 Driving over fire hose
70.047 Following fire apparatus
3
2011 S-2
4 Williamston - Traffic Code
70.048 Approaching emergency vehicles
70.049 Squealing tires unlawful
70.050 Driving on roadways laned for traffic
70.051 Heavy vehicles; prohibited generally
70.052 Local deliveries
70.053 Speed limits
70.054 Golf carts
Stopping, Standing and Parking
70.070 Vehicles not to stop in streets; exceptions
70.071 Parking in designated places; prohibited at all times
70.072 Designation
70.073 On certain streets at certain times
70.074 Parking lots
70.075 Method of parking; parallel generally
70.076 Vehicle backed to curb
70.077 Left side to curb
70.078 Double diagonal parking
70.079 Parking within lines
70.080 Prohibited for certain purposes
70.081 Prohibited for primary purposes of advertising
70.082 Moving vehicles owned by other operators into restricted areas
70.083 Handicapped parking spaces
Motor Vehicle Tax
70.095 Annual Motor Vehicle Tax
70.096 Administration of Motor Vehicle Tax
Abandoned, Nuisance and Junked Motor Vehicles
70.115 Objectives
70.116 Administration
70.117 Definitions
70.118 Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized
70.119 Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized
70.120 Junked motor vehicle regulated; removal authorized
70.121 Removal of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles; pre-towing notice
requirements
70.122 Exceptions to prior notice requirement
70.123 Removal of vehicles; post towing notice requirements
70.124 Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final disposition of vehicles
2011 S-2
Motor Vehicles and Traffic 4A
70.125 Redemption of vehicle during proceedings
70.126 Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicles
70.127 Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property
2011 S-2
4B Williamston - Traffic Code
Motor Vehicles and Traffic 5
70.128 Protection against criminal or civil liability
70.129 Exceptions
70.130 Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle
70.999 Penalty
Statutory reference:
As to authority of town to regulate on-street and off-street parking, see G.S. § 160A-301
As to authority of town to regulate removal of abandoned, nuisance and junked vehicles on
public and private property within the town’s jurisdiction, see G.S.§§ 160A-193, 160A-303 and
160A-303.2
As to limitations on the tax, see G.S. § 20-97
For state law as to authority of town to impose annual license tax on motor vehicles,
see G.S. § 160A-213
For state law as to operation of vehicles and rules of the road, see G.S. §§ 20-138.1 et seq.
For state law as to stopping, standing and parking generally, see G.S. §§ 20-161 to 20.163
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.001 DEFINITIONS.
Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by
G.S. Chapter 20.
(1992 Code, § 16-1)
§ 70.002 TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS.
Town traffic and parking regulations will be established by ordinance and the Board. When a new
traffic or parking ordinance is adopted, the Chief of Police shall place appropriate signs, traffic control
devices or other markings in the affected area to give adequate notice of the regulation.
(1992 Code, § 16-2)
§ 70.003 MAINTENANCE OF OFFICIAL TRAFFIC ORDINANCE BOOK.
(A) The Clerk of the Town of Williamston shall maintain an ordinance book separate from this
Code of Ordinances which shall contain the following ordinances:
(1) Those designating the location of traffic control devices;
(2) Those designating areas or zones where regulations are applied to parking, loading, bus
stops or taxicab stands;
2009 S-1 Repl.
6 Williamston - Traffic Code
(3) Those restricting or regulating traffic at certain times on certain streets, or to certain
types, weights or sizes of vehicles;
(4) Those designating the location of through streets, stop intersections, yield right-of-way
intersections, waiting lanes, one-way streets or truck traffic routes;
(5) Those establishing regulations upon vehicle turns at designated locations; and
(6) Those establishing speed limits on certain streets.
(B) The Traffic Ordinance Book shall be available for public inspection. It shall be organized and
indexed in such a manner as to allow reasonable access to the information contained therein.
(1992 Code, § 16-3)
§ 70.004 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE.
No person shall refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer.
(1992 Code, § 16-4) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.005 AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS IN SPECIAL
CASES.
In the event of fire or other emergency, or when necessary to expedite traffic or safeguard
pedestrians, police officers may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions
of this chapter. Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the
police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
(1992 Code, § 16-5)
§ 70.006 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the
service of the United States government, the state, County or town, and it shall be unlawful for any
driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter or state law.
(1992 Code, § 16-6) Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
For state law as to applicability of traffic regulations to drivers of governmental vehicles,
see G.S. § 20-168
Motor Vehicles and Traffic 7
§ 70.007 EXEMPTIONS FOR AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall
apply to authorized emergency vehicles, as defined in G.S. § 20-145, except as follows:
(A) Unless otherwise directed by a police officer, a driver, when operating the vehicle in any
emergency, may:
(1) Park or stand, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter;
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be
necessary for safe operation;
(3) Exceed the prima facie speed limits, so long as he or she does not endanger life or
property; and
(4) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions,
so long as he or she does not endanger life or property.
(B) The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any vehicle from the
consequence of his or her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(1992 Code, § 16-7)
Statutory reference:
For state law as to exemption of emergency vehicles from right-of-way rules, see G.S. § 20-156
§ 70.008 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLES.
No person shall board or alight from any public conveyance or other vehicle while the conveyance
or vehicle is in motion.
(1992 Code, § 16-8) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.009 UNLAWFUL RIDING.
(A) No person shall ride on any public conveyance or vehicle, or any portion thereof, not
designated or intended for the use of passengers.
(B) This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty,
nor to persons riding within truck bodies in spaces intended for merchandise.
(1992 Code, § 16-9) Penalty, see § 70.999
8 Williamston - Traffic Code
§ 70.010 ENTERING, JUMPING ON OR RIDING VEHICLES WITHOUT PERMISSION.
No person shall enter, jump on or ride any automobile or other vehicle without the consent of the
owner or driver.
(1992 Code, § 16-10) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.011 DUTY TO STAY INSIDE MOVING VEHICLES; HANGING ONTO VEHICLES.
No person shall allow any part of his or her body to protrude beyond the limits of the vehicle in
which he or she is riding, except to give the signals as are by law required, and no person shall hang
onto any vehicle whatsoever.
(1992 Code, § 16-11) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.012 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF PERSONS IN FRONT SEAT.
It shall be unlawful for the driver or the person in charge of any motor vehicle to permit more than
three persons, including the driver, to ride in the front or driver’s seat of a motor vehicle.
(1992 Code, § 16-12) Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
For state law as to overloaded or overcrowded vehicles, see G.S. § 20-140.2
§ 70.013 PERSONS PROPELLING PUSH CARTS, RIDING ANIMALS OR BICYCLES TO
OBEY REGULATIONS.
Every person propelling any push cart or riding a bicycle or an animal upon a roadway, and every
person driving any animal drawn vehicle shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter which are
applicable to any driver of any vehicle, except for those provisions of this chapter which, by their very
nature, can have no application.
(1992 Code, § 16-13)
Motor Vehicles and Traffic 9
OPERATION OF VEHICLES
§ 70.030 STOP BEFORE ENTERING THROUGH STREET.
When stop signs are placed upon highways which intersect a through street, the driver shall bring
his or her vehicle to a stop before entering the intersection, and he or she shall not proceed into or
across the through street until he or she has first determined that no conflict with traffic will ensue.
(1992 Code, § 16-21) Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
For state law as to authority of town to erect stop signs and require obedience thereto,
see G.S. § 20-158
§ 70.031 STOP BEFORE ENTERING STOP INTERSECTION.
When stop signs are placed at intersections, every driver shall stop before entering the intersection,
and he or she shall not proceed into or across the through street until he or she has first determined that
no conflict with traffic will ensue.
(1992 Code, § 16-22) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.032 VEHICLES NOT TO BLOCK INTERSECTIONS OR CROSSWALKS.
No driver shall move his or her vehicle across an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless he or
she knows that there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate his or her vehicle without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians,
although a traffic control signal may be indicating his or her right to proceed.
(1992 Code, § 16-23) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.033 ONE-WAY STREET.
Upon certain streets designated as one-way streets, vehicular traffic shall move only in the
direction indicated by traffic signs.
(1992 Code, § 16-24)
§ 70.034 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.
No vehicle shall be driven through a funeral procession, except for authorized emergency vehicles
when the same are responding to calls.
(1992 Code, § 16-25) Penalty, see § 70.999
10 Williamston - Traffic Code
§ 70.035 LEFT TURNS.
In making left turns at street intersections, all traffic, when approaching an intersection, shall keep
close to the center line of the street and the left turn shall then be made beyond the center of the
intersection and shall proceed in the new direction along the right-hand lane, except certain
intersections which may be expressly designated by the town.
(1992 Code, § 16-26)
§ 70.036 TURNS PROHIBITED AT CERTAIN INTERSECTIONS.
(A) No vehicle shall make a left turn at any street intersection designated by an appropriate
sign.
(B) No vehicle shall make a right turn at any street intersection designated by an appropriate
sign.
(1992 Code, § 16-27) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.037 LIMITATIONS ON BACKING.
The driver of a vehicle shall not back it into any intersection or over a crosswalk nor shall he or
she back it otherwise unless the movement can be made in safety and ample warning has been given by
hand and horn or other signal.
(1992 Code, § 16-28) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.038 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR PRIVATE DRIVEWAY.
The driver of a vehicle merging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop the vehicle
immediately prior to reaching the sidewalk or the sidewalk arena extending across any alleyway. Upon
entering the roadway, he or she shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.
(1992 Code, § 16-29) Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
For similar state law, see G.S. § 20-156
§ 70.039 VEHICLES NOT TO BE DRIVEN ON SIDEWALKS; EXCEPTION.
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or
temporary driveway.
(1992 Code, § 16-30) Penalty, see § 70.999
Motor Vehicles and Traffic 11
§ 70.040 OPERATION OF BICYCLE ON SIDEWALK.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle upon any sidewalk in the business area of
the town.
(1992 Code, § 16-31) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.041 USE OF HANDLEBARS ON BICYCLES OR MOTORCYCLES.
No person shall ride a bicycle or motorcycle on any street without having his or her hands on the
handlebars.
(1992 Code, § 16-32) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.042 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES.
Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle
shall not attach the vehicle or himself or herself to any public conveyance or other moving vehicle
upon any roadway.
(1992 Code, § 16-33) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.043 RIDING ON HANDLEBARS.
The operator of a motorcycle or bicycle, when upon a street, shall not carry any person upon the
handlebars, frame or tank of his or her vehicle, nor shall any person so ride upon any vehicle.
(1992 Code, § 16-34) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.044 COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND THE LIKE.
(A) (1) No person shall operate, ride or use any motive device propelled or designed for
propulsion by human power upon any public street, public sidewalk, public vehicular area, including
but not limited to the Town Hall premises and parking area, located in any commercial district as
identified by the Williamston Zoning Map or on any major thoroughfare as identified by the
Thoroughfare Plan for Williamston, dated 1995.
(2) The term MOTIVE DEVICE PROPELLED OR DESIGNED FOR PROPULSION BY
HUMAN POWER includes: tricycles, coasters, scooters, skateboards, roller-skates, roller blades, sleds
and wagons, but shall not include bicycles, strollers and wheelchairs nor shall it include other devices
operated by handicapped or disabled persons.
2011 S-2
12 Williamston - Traffic Code
(B) Any person operating, riding or using any motive device propelled or designed for
propulsion by human power in areas not specified in division (A) above shall keep to the right-hand
portion of a street and yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and/or vehicular traffic. All persons must
exercise due care for their own safety and the safety of other persons using the street and shall not
operate in a reckless manner. All persons must also utilize safety equipment to include but not be
limited to helmets, elbow pads, knee pads and wrist guards.
(C) No person shall ride or use any motive device propelled for propulsion by human power
in a reckless manner or without exercising due care for their own safety or the safety of other persons
using the sidewalk. Any person operating, ride or use any motive device propelled for propulsion by
human power on a sidewalk shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian.
(D) No person shall operate, ride or use any skateboard in city-owned parks except in
designated areas.
(E) Notwithstanding the foregoing, during special occasions and celebrations as from timeto-
time designated by the Board, the chief of police is hereby authorized and empowered to designate
certain public streets or portions thereof upon which persons may be permitted to operate, ride or use
any motive device propelled for propulsion by human power under such rules and regulations as may
be prescribed by the chief of police to insure the public safety.
(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.045 MOVING CARS FROM PARKED POSITION.
Parked cars shall move out in the direction headed, or if they are parked at an angle with the
curb, they shall back out at that angle until they have cleared the other cars and shall then proceed in
the direction they are most nearly headed in.
(1992 Code, § 16-37) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.046 DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
No vehicle shall be driven over any hose of the Fire Department when such is being used at any
fire, without the consent of the Fire Department official in command.
(1992 Code, § 16-38) Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
For similar state law, see G.S. § 20-157
2011 S-2
Motor Vehicles and Traffic 13
§ 70.047 FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, other than that on official business, to follow any
fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than one block, or to travel into or park the
vehicle within one block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
(1992 Code, § 16-39) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.048 APPROACHING EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
Upon the approach of any Police or Fire Department vehicle giving signal by bell, siren or
otherwise, the driver of every other vehicle shall immediately drive the same to a position as near as
possible and parallel to the right-hand edge of the curb, clear of any intersection of streets and shall
stop and remain in the position unless otherwise directed by a police or traffic officer until the Police or
Fire Department vehicle shall have passed.
(1992 Code, § 16-40) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.049 SQUEALING TIRES UNLAWFUL.
It shall be unlawful for any driver of any motor vehicle to intentionally and without cause, drive
or in any other manner operate any motor vehicle within the limits of the town in such a manner as to
“squeal” the tires or, as it is commonly termed, to “scratch off”.
(1992 Code, § 16-41) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.050 DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.
All vehicles operated on any roadway which has been clearly marked with traffic lanes shall be
driven as nearly as practical entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved out of the lane until
the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with safety.
(1992 Code, § 16-42) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.051 HEAVY VEHICLES; PROHIBITED GENERALLY.
It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle with a gross weight exceeding 13,000 pounds, or,
having a total length exceeding 30 feet, or having two or more axles to travel upon, park upon or make
use of in any way, any street in the town except and unless same is a street which constitutes a part of
the North Carolina Highway System and is maintained by the North Carolina Highway Commission.
(1992 Code, § 16-43) Penalty, see § 70.999
2011 S-2
14 Williamston - Traffic Code
§ 70.052 LOCAL DELIVERIES.
The trucks described and prohibited by § 70.051 shall be permitted to make use of the street in the
town for local delivery.
(1992 Code, § 16-44)
§ 70.053 SPEED LIMITS.
Except as otherwise posted, it shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of 35 mph inside the
town corporate limits. Ordinances affecting the speed limits allowed on certain streets in the town shall
be maintained in the Traffic Ordinance Book referred to in § 70.003.
(1992 Code, § 16-45) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.054 GOLF CARTS.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this section shall be to establish a golf cart ordinance within the
town to promote the health, safety and welfare of persons operating cart(s) within the town.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(1) DRIVER’S LICENSE. A valid license issued to operate a motor vehicle issued by North
Carolina or any other state.
(2) FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Liability insurance coverage on a golf cart in an
amount not less than required by North Carolina law for motor vehicles operated on public highway in
the State of North Carolina.
(3) GOLF CART. A vehicle designed and manufactured for operation on a golf course for
sporting or recreational purposes and that is not capable of exceeding speeds of 20 m.p.h.
(4) OPERATOR. Only persons over 16 years of age and holding a driver’s license may
operate a golf cart.
(C) Rules and regulations.
(1) Carts may be driven on roads only from dawn to dusk unless the cart is equipped with
two operating headlights (one on each side of the front of the golf cart) and two operating tail lights
with brake lights (one on each side of the rear of the cart) which are visible from a distance of 500 feet.
2011 S-2
Motor Vehicles and Traffic 14A
(2) Carts must be equipped with rear vision mirror and a rear triangle reflector of the same
type required by North Carolina law.
(3) Cart drivers must have a valid driver license in their name.
(4) Cart drivers will stay to the far right of the traveled portion of the road and yield the rightof-
way to overtaking vehicles.
(5) The number of occupants in a golf cart shall be limited to the number of persons for
whom individual seating is installed and provided on the golf cart. The operator and all occupants shall
be seated in the golf cart and no part of the body of the operator or occupant shall extend outside the
perimeter of the golf cart while the golf cart is in motion.
(6) All applicable state laws shall be adhered to, including the possession and use of
alcoholic beverages.
(7) The operator of the golf cart shall comply with all traffic rules and regulations adopted by
the State of North Carolina and the Town of Williamston which governs the operation of motor
vehicles.
(8) Carts will adhere to all traffic flow patterns, and will operate on the right side of the
roadway.
(9) Carts shall not be operated on sidewalks.
(10) Carts shall not be operated on private property, without the permission and consent of the
property owner.
(11) This section shall apply to the operation of golf carts on any public street, road or
highway where the speed limit is 35 miles per hour or less within the municipal limits of the town or on
any property owned or leased by the town.
(D) Inspection and fees. The inspection by the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, will cover
the following safety requirements and every cart operating on town streets must have the following
safety equipment.
(1) Permits issued to operators/owners of golf carts by the Williamston Police Department.
(2) Each owner must have proof of ownership, and liability insurance, and a completed
waiver of liability, releasing the town, its employees, and affiliates from all liability that may arise as a
result of operating a cart inside the town. A current waiver of liability must be on file with the Police
Department, and must be renewed annually.
2011 S-2
14B Williamston - Traffic Code
(3) All carts must meet the requirements or minimum standards of safety equipment as set
forth in division (C) of this section.
(4) All cart operators must present a valid driver’s license.
(5) Permits will be issued annually, and are valid from July 1st of each year. The following
fees shall apply:
(a) Inspection by Police Department (includes permit): $10.00 annually;
(b) Re-inspection by Police Department: $5.00
(If a cart fails the initial inspection)
(6) Lost or stolen permits are the responsibility of the owner. A police report must be filed in
the event of a lost or stolen permit. The Chief of Police will have the discretion in determining whether
a permit may be re-issued in this instance. If no record can be found of a previous application, or the
receipt of a permit, the Chief of Police may direct the applicant to reapply, and also resubmit any and
all fees necessary, before a replacement permit is issued.
(7) Any person who operates a cart in the town and fails to receive and properly display a
Town of Williamston permit will be subject to all applicable state laws, in addition to being in violation
of this section.
(8) Cart owners must complete the attached registration form, wavier of liability form and
provide a copy of the proof of liability insurance prior to the cart being inspected. The completed forms
and proof of insurance will be maintained by the Police Department.
(E) Enforcement. It shall be the policy of the Police Department to issue a uniform citation
against any person the officer has probable cause to believe has violated this section, whether the
offending person is a juvenile or any other person.
(Ord. 2010-2010-15, passed 7-12-2010) Penalty, see § 70.999
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
§ 70.070 VEHICLES NOT TO STOP IN STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
No vehicles shall stop in any street, except for the purpose of parking as prescribed in this chapter,
unless the stop is made necessary by the approach of fire apparatus, by the approach of a funeral or
other
2011 S-2
Motor Vehicles and Traffic 14C
procession which is given right-of-way, by the stopping of a public conveyance, by the lowering of
railway gates, by being given countermanding traffic signals, by the passing of some other vehicle or a
pedestrian or by some emergency. In all cases covered by these exceptions, the vehicles shall stop so as
not to obstruct any footway, pedestrian aisle, safety zone, crooning or street intersection if it can be
avoided.
(1992 Code, § 16-46) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.071 PARKING IN DESIGNATED PLACES; PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES.
When signs are placed which prohibit parking or when the curbing has been painted yellow in lieu
of the signs, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets.
(1992 Code, § 16-47) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.072 DESIGNATION.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when conflict with other traffic is imminent or
when so directed by a police officer or traffic control device in any of the following places:
(A) On a sidewalk;
(B) Within an intersection;
(C) On a crosswalk;
(D) Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a
street or roadway;
(E) Underpass approaches: No vehicle shall park on either side of any street leading to a railroad
underpass or an overhead bridge within 50 feet in any direction of the outer edge of the underpass or
overhead bridge;
(F) Grade crossing approaches: No vehicle shall park on either side of any street leading to a
grade crossing, within 50 feet of the closest rail; provided, that where existing permanent structures are
located closer than 50 feet, parking may be permitted in front of the structures, unless otherwise
prohibited and if the parking does not block the view in either direction of the approach of a
locomotive or train;
(G) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction, if the stopping, standing or parking
would obstruct traffic;
(H) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure or within any underpass structure;
2011 S-2
14D Williamston - Traffic Code
(I) Within 15 feet in either direction of the entrance to a hotel, theater, hospital, sanatorium or any
public building;
(J) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopping, standing or parking at the edge or curb of a
street;
(K) Within ten feet of any fire plug or hydrant;
(L) Upon a street or elsewhere in front of a fire station;
(M) In any public alley, or in a position as to block either the entrance or the exit of any public
alley;
(N) Upon a street in front of any private driveway;
2011 S-2
Motor Vehicles and Traffic 15
(O) In any portion of a street which shall be marked and designated as a loading zone; and
(P) In front of a theater.
(1992 Code, § 16-48) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.073 ON CERTAIN STREETS AT CERTAIN TIMES.
Upon those streets or portions of streets designated as streets where parking is prohibited or
limited to certain designated times, no person shall park a vehicle except in conformity with the
limitations when signs have been placed, erected or installed and maintained on the streets giving
notice of the applicable limitations.
(1992 Code, § 16-49) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.074 PARKING LOTS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle within or to otherwise use the
public parking lots of the Town of Williamston between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Eastern
Standard time or Daylight Savings time, whichever is in effect at the time. Further, it shall be unlawful
for any person to remain on the public parking areas between the hours after having been forbidden to
do so by any public officer of the Town of Williamston.
(B) Appropriate signs shall be maintained on the parking lots to give notice of these regulations. It
shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, deface or remove these signs, or any other materials
used to cordon off the parking lots during the above hours.
(C) The term PUBLIC PARKING LOT, as used in this chapter, shall mean any parking lot owned
or leased and maintained by the Town of Williamston and any private parking lot regulated by town
ordinance as provided for in G.S. § 160A-301(d).
(D) Notwithstanding the above, this section shall not apply to any bona fide resident or tenant (or
their guests and patrons) of property adjoining the parking lots who first obtains a written permit from
the Chief of Police authorizing the parking of the vehicle or vehicles of the owner or tenants (or guests
or patrons) between the above stated hours.
(1992 Code, § 16-50) (Ord. passed 11-19-1992) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.075 METHOD OF PARKING; PARALLEL GENERALLY.
All vehicles shall park parallel to the curb and not more than 12 inches therefrom.
(1992 Code, § 16-52)
16 Williamston - Traffic Code
§ 70.076 VEHICLE BACKED TO CURB.
In no case shall a vehicle remain backed up to the curb, except when actually loading or unloading.
(1992 Code, § 16-53)
§ 70.077 LEFT SIDE TO CURB.
No vehicle shall stop with its left side to the curb in the business district; except that on one-way
streets, vehicles shall stop headed in the direction of traffic.
(1992 Code, § 16-54) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.078 DOUBLE DIAGONAL PARKING.
Double diagonal parking, at an angle of approximately 45 degrees, shall be allowed.
(1992 Code, § 16-55)
§ 70.079 PARKING WITHIN LINES.
On any street which is marked off with lines indicating the parking spaces for cars, the same shall
be parked between the lines.
(1992 Code, § 16-56)
§ 70.080 PROHIBITED FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any street for the purpose of:
(A) Displaying it for sale;
(B) Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency;
(C) Storage thereof by garages, dealers or other persons; and
(D) Storage of any detached trailer or van when the towing unit has been disconnected or for the
purposes of transferring merchandise or freight from one vehicle to another.
(1992 Code, § 16-57) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.081 PROHIBITED FOR PRIMARY PURPOSES OF ADVERTISING.
No person shall stand or park any vehicle on any street for the primary purpose of advertising.
(1992 Code, § 16-58) Penalty, see § 70.999
Motor Vehicles and Traffic 17
§ 70.082 MOVING VEHICLES OWNED BY OTHER OPERATORS INTO RESTRICTED
AREAS.
No person shall move a vehicle not owned by the person into any prohibited area or sufficiently
away from the curb to make the distance unlawful.
(1992 Code, § 16-59) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.083 HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES.
(A) It shall be unlawful:
(1) To park or leave standing any vehicle in a space designated with a sign for handicapped
persons as provided for in G.S. § 20-37.6(d) when the vehicle does not display the distinguishing
license plate, removable windshield placard or temporary removable windshield placard as provided in
G.S.§ 20-37.6 or a disabled veteran registration plate issued under G.S. § 20-79.4; or
(2) For any person not qualifying for the rights and privileges extended to handicapped
persons under G.S. § 20-7.5 to exercise or attempt to exercise such rights or privileges by the
unauthorized use of a distinguishing license plate, removable windshield placard or temporary
removable windshield placard issued pursuant to the provisions of this section.
(B) The following described parking space shall be designated for handicapped parking: lying
along the easterly curb of Washington Street and beginning at a point 15 feet northerly from the
northerly side of Railroad Street and then running northerly along the easterly side of Washington
Street a distance of 20 feet.
(Ord. 2010-14, passed 5-24-2010) Penalty, see § 70.999
MOTOR VEHICLE TAX
§ 70.095 ANNUAL MOTOR VEHICLE TAX.
(A) Each motor vehicle licenced by the state which is resident within the Town of Williamston on
January 1 of each year shall be subject to an annual Motor Vehicle Tax of $5.
(B) The tax shall be imposed for the fiscal year beginning on July 1 following the January 1 date
on which the motor vehicle becomes resident in the town. For purposes of determining whether the
motor vehicle is “resident” within the town, the provisions of the Machinery Act (G.S. §§ 105-271 et
seq.) Shall be applicable, and any motor vehicle which under the Machinery Act would be taxable for
ad valorem property taxes shall be subject to the tax imposed by this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 16-60)
2011 S-2
18 Williamston - Traffic Code
§ 70.096 ADMINISTRATION OF MOTOR VEHICLE TAX.
Administration of the Motor Vehicle Tax shall be handled in accordance with the procedures
established for listing, discovery, collection, levy, attachment, garnishment, release and rebate as for
property taxes under the Machinery Act.
(1992 Code, § 16-61)
ABANDONED, NUISANCE AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 70.115 OBJECTIVES.
This subchapter is enacted in order to promote and enhance:
(A) The quality of urban attractiveness and aesthetic appearance of the town;
(B) The protection of property values throughout the town;
(C) The preservation of the livability and attractiveness of neighborhoods;
(D) The promotion of tourism, conventions and other opportunities for economic development of
the town;
(E) The attractiveness of the town’s thoroughfares and commercial roads which present the
primary public visibility to visitors and to passersby of the town; and
(F) The promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional stability of occupants of property in
the vicinity of junked motor vehicles.
(1992 Code, § 16-64)
§ 70.116 ADMINISTRATION.
The Police Department and the Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the administration
and enforcement of this subchapter. The Police Department shall be responsible for administering the
removal and disposition of vehicles determined to be abandoned on the public streets and highways
within the town and on property owned by the town. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for
administering the removal and disposition of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles located on
private property. The town may, on an annual basis, contract with private tow truck operators or towing
2011 S-2
Motor Vehicles and Traffic 18A
businesses to remove, store and dispose of abandoned vehicles, nuisance vehicles and junked motor
vehicles in compliance with this subchapter and applicable state laws. Nothing in this subchapter shall
be construed to limit the legal authority or powers of officers of the town Police Department and Fire
Department in enforcing other laws or in otherwise carrying out their duties.
(1992 Code, § 16-65)
§ 70.117 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ABANDONED VEHICLES. As authorized and defined in G.S. § 160A-303, an ABANDONED
MOTOR VEHICLE is one that:
(1) Is left upon a public street or highway in violation of a law or ordinance prohibiting
parking;
(2) Is left on property owned or operated by the town for longer than 24 hours;
(3) Is left on a public street or highway for longer than seven days; and
(4) Is left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant or lessee thereof for
longer than two hours.
2011 S-2
18B Williamston - Traffic Code
Motor Vehicles and Traffic 19
AUTHORIZING OFFICIAL. The supervisory employee of the Police Department or the Zoning
Administrator designated to authorize the removal of vehicles under the provisions of this subchapter.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES. Authorized and defined in G.S. § 160A-303.2, the term
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE means a vehicle that does not display a current license plate lawfully
upon that vehicle and that:
(1) Is partially dismantled or wrecked;
(2) Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it originally was intended to
move; or
(3) Is more than five years old and appears to be worth less than $100 or is more than five
years old and appears to be worth less than $500 as provided by the municipality in an ordinance
adopted under this section.
MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. All machines designed or intended to travel over land by selfpropulsion
or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle.
NUISANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle on public or private property that is determined and declared
to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance and unlawful, including a vehicle found to be:
(1) A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other insects, rats or other pests;
(2) A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over eight inches in height;
(3) A point of collection of pools or ponds of water;
(4) A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil or other flammable or explosive
materials as evidenced by odor;
(5) One which has areas of confinement which cannot be operated from the inside such as
trunks and hoods;
(6) One as situated or located that there is a danger of it falling or turning over;
(7) One which is a point of collection of garbage, food waste, animal waste or any other
rotten or putrescible matter of any kind;
(8) One which has sharp parts which are jagged or contain sharp edges of metal or glass; or
(9) Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and safety hazard and a public nuisance
by the Board of Commissioners.
(1992 Code, § 16-66)
2009 S-1
20 Williamston - Traffic Code
§ 70.118 ABANDONED VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a vehicle to
cause or allow the vehicle to be abandoned as the term is defined herein.
(B) Upon investigation, proper authorizing officials of the town may determine that a vehicle is an
abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle removed.
(1992 Code, § 16-67) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.119 NUISANCE VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a motor
vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located, to
leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle.
(B) Upon investigation, the Zoning Administrator may determine and declare that a vehicle is a
health or safety hazard and a nuisance vehicle as defined above, and order the vehicle removed.
(1992 Code, § 16-68) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.120 JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATED; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a junked motor
vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is
located, to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the vehicle has been ordered
removed.
(B) It shall be unlawful to have more than one junked motor vehicle as defined herein on the
premise of public or private property. A single permitted junked motor vehicle must strictly comply
with the location and concealment requirements of this section.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any owner, person entitled to the possession of a junked motor vehicle
or for the owner, lessee or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located,
to fail to comply with the locational requirements or the concealment requirements of this section.
(D) Subject to the provisions of division (A) above, upon investigation, the Zoning Administrator
may order the removal of a junked motor vehicle as defined in this chapter after finding in writing that
the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed on the private property
owner. The finding shall be based on a balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent owner against
the corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing community, neighborhood or area
appearance. The following, among other relevant factors, may be considered:
(1) Protection of property values;
(2) Promotion of tourism and other economic development opportunities;
Motor Vehicles and Traffic 21
(3) Indirect protection of public health and safety;
(4) Preservation of the character and integrity of the community; and
(5) Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional stability of area residents.
(E) Permitted concealment or enclosure of junked motor vehicle:
(1) Concealing junked motor vehicle.
(a) One junked motor vehicle, in its entirety, can be located in the rear yard as defined
by the town’s zoning ordinance if the junked motor vehicle is entirely concealed from public view from
the public street and from abutting premises by an acceptable covering; and
(b) The Zoning Administrator has the authority to determine whether any junked motor
vehicle is adequately concealed as required by this provision. The covering must remain in good repair
and must not be allowed to deteriorate. The covering or enclosure must be compatible with the
objectives stated in § 70.115.
(2) More than one junked motor vehicle. Any other junked motor vehicles must be kept in a
garage or building structure that provides a complete enclosure so that the junked motor vehicles
cannot be seen from a public street or abutting property. A garage or building structure means either a
lawful, nonconforming use or a garage or building structure erected pursuant to the lawful issuance of a
building permit and which has been constructed in accordance with all Zoning and Building Code
regulations.
(1992 Code, § 16-69) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.121 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED, NUISANCE OR JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES;
PRE-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Except as set forth in § 70.122, an abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle which is to be
removed shall be towed only after notice to the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the
vehicle. In the case of a nuisance vehicle or a junked motor vehicle, if the names and mailing addresses
of the registered owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle, or the owner, lessee or
occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located can be ascertained in the exercise of
reasonable diligence, the notice shall be given by first class mail. The person who mails the notice(e)
shall retain a written record to show the name(s) and address(es) to which mailed, and the date mailed.
If the names and addresses cannot be ascertained or if the vehicle to be removed is an abandoned motor
vehicle, notice shall be given by affixing on the windshield or some other conspicuous place on the
vehicle a notice indicating that the vehicle will be removed by the town on a specified date (no sooner
than seven days after the notice is affixed). The notice shall state that the vehicle will be removed by
the town on a specified date, no sooner than seven days after the notice is affixed or mailed, unless the
vehicle is moved by the owner or legal possessor prior to that time.
(B) With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property, nuisance vehicles and junked motor
vehicles to which notice is required to be given, if the registered owner or person entitled to possession
does not remove the vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle is abandoned, a
nuisance vehicle or in the
22 Williamston - Traffic Code
case of a junked motor vehicle that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens,
the appeal shall be made to the Board of Commissioners in writing, heard at the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Board of Commissioners and further proceedings to remove the vehicle shall
be stayed until the appeal is heard and decided.
(1992 Code, § 16-70)
§ 70.122 EXCEPTIONS TO PRIOR NOTICE REQUIREMENT.
(A) The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of an abandoned, nuisance or junked
motor vehicle may, as determined by the authorizing official, be omitted in those circumstances where
there is a special need for prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to otherwise maintain and
protect the public safety and welfare.
(B) The findings shall, in all cases, be entered by the authorizing official in the appropriate daily
records.
(C) Circumstances justifying the removal of vehicles without prior notice include:
(1) Vehicles abandoned on the streets. For vehicles left on the public streets and highways,
the Board of Commissioners hereby determines that immediate removal of the vehicles may be
warranted when they are:
(a) Obstructing traffic;
(b) Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or restricting parking;
(c) Parked in a no-stopping or standing zone;
(d) Parked in loading zones;
(e) Parked in bus zones; or
(f) Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions imposed under code sections.
(2) Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles. With respect to abandoned or nuisance vehicles
left on town-owned property other than the streets and highways and on private property, the vehicles
may be removed without giving prior notice only in those circumstances where the authorizing official
finds a special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the public health, safety and welfare. By
way of illustration and not of limitation, the circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstructing
ingress or egress to businesses and residences, vehicles parked in such a location or manner as to pose a
traffic hazard and vehicles causing damage to public or private property.
(1992 Code, § 16-71)
Motor Vehicles and Traffic 23
§ 70.123 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; POST TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which has been ordered removed may, as
directed by the town, be removed to a storage garage or area by the town truck operator or towing
business contracting to perform the services for the town. Whenever the vehicle is removed, the
authorizing town officials shall immediately notify the last known registered owner of the vehicle the
notice to include the following:
(1) The description of the removed vehicle;
(2) The location where the vehicle is stored;
(3) The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;
(4) The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and
(5) The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause hearing on the removal.
(B) The town shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by telephone; however, whether or
not the owner is reached by telephone, written notice, including the information set forth in divisions
(A)(1) through (5) above, shall also be mailed to the registered owner’s last known address, unless this
notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his or her agent.
(C) If the vehicle is registered in North Carolina, notice shall be given within 24 hours. If the
vehicle is not registered in the state, notice shall be given to the registered owner within 72 hours from
the removal of the vehicle.
(D) Whenever an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle is removed, and the vehicle has no
valid registration or registration plates, the authorizing town official shall make reasonable efforts,
including checking the vehicle identification number to determine the last known registered owner of
the vehicle and to notify him or her of the information set forth in divisions (A)(1) through (5) above.
(1992 Code, § 16-72)
§ 70.124 RIGHT TO PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING BEFORE SALE OR FINAL
DISPOSITION OF VEHICLES.
After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle or junked motor vehicle, the owner or
any other person entitled to possession is entitled to a hearing for the purpose of determining if
probable cause existed for removing the vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed in writing with the
magistrate. The magistrate will set the hearing within 72 hours of receipt of the request, and the hearing
will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 20-219.11.
(1992 Code, § 16-73)
24 Williamston - Traffic Code
§ 70.125 REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE DURING PROCEEDINGS.
At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause hearing, the owner may
obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the towing fee, including any storage charges, or
by posting a bond for double the amount of the fees and charges to the tow truck operator or towing
business having custody of the removed vehicle. Upon regaining possession of a vehicle, the owner or
person entitled to the possession of the vehicle shall not allow or engage in further violations of this
chapter.
(1992 Code, § 16-74) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.126 SALE AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.
Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which is not claimed by the owner or other
party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the tow truck operator or towing business having
custody of the vehicle. Disposition of such a vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the town
and in accordance with G.S. Chapter 44A, Article I.
(1992 Code, § 16-75)
§ 70.127 CONDITIONS ON REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
As a general policy, the town will not remove a vehicle from private property if the owner,
occupant or lessee of the property could have the vehicle removed under the applicable state law
procedures. In no case will a vehicle be removed by the town from private property without a written
request of the owner, occupant or lessee, except in those cases where a vehicle is a nuisance vehicle or
is a junked motor vehicle which has been ordered removed by the Zoning Administrator. The town
may require any person requesting the removal of an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle
from private property to indemnify the town against any loss, expense or liability incurred because of
the removal, storage or sale thereof.
(1992 Code, § 16-76)
§ 70.128 PROTECTION AGAINST CRIMINAL OR CIVIL LIABILITY.
No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any owner or other person
legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle, for disposing of
the vehicle as provided in this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 16-77) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.129 EXCEPTIONS.
Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any vehicle:
(A) Which is located in a bona fide AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD or JUNKYARD as defined in
G.S. § 136-143, in accordance with the “Junkyard Control Act”, G.S. §§ 136-141 et seq.;
Motor Vehicles and Traffic 25
(B) Which is in an enclosed building;
(C) Which is on the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a lawful place and manner
if the vehicle is necessary to the operation of the enterprise; or
(D) Which is in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and
manner by the town.
(1992 Code, § 16-78)
§ 70.130 UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any storage facility
designated by the town, any vehicle which has been impounded pursuant to the provisions of this code
unless and until all towing and impoundment fees, which are due or fond in lieu of the fees, have been
paid.
(1992 Code, § 16-79) Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.999 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed
shall be subject to § 10.99.
(B) A violation of §§ 70.071 through 70.074 shall be an infraction punishable by a fine of $10 if
paid within 24 hours from the time of ticketing of any motor vehicle parked in violation of §§ 70.071
through 70.074 to the Williamston Police Department. If the fine of $10 shall not be paid within the 24
hours, then the violation shall be punishable in the discretion of the court.
(C) Any motor vehicle parked in violation of §§ 70.071 through 70.074 may be removed and
disposed of in accordance with G.S. § 160A-303 and the applicable provisions of the Code of the Town
of Williamston.
(D) A violation of § 70.054 shall be an infraction, and subject to a penalty not to exceed $50. Each
day that any of the provisions of § 70.054 is violated shall constitute a separate offense.
(E) A violation of § 70.083 shall be an infraction punishable as provided for in G.S. § 20-37.6.
(1992 Code, § 16-51) (Ord. passed 11-19-1992; Am. Ord. 2010-14, passed 5-24-2010; Am. Ord. 2010-
15, passed 7-12-2010)
2011 S-2
26 Williamston - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Section
71.01 Obedience to official traffic control devices
71.02 Traffic control signal legend
71.03 Flashing signals
71.04 No turn signs and turning markers
71.05 No parking zone and safety zone markers
71.06 Play zones
71.07 School zone
§ 71.01 OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the directions of any official traffic control device applicable
thereto and placed in accordance with the traffic ordinances of the town, unless otherwise directed by a
police or fire officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in
§ 71.02.
(1992 Code, § 16-14)
§ 71.02 TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the words “Go”, “Caution” or
“Stop”, or exhibiting differently colored lights, successively, one at a time, the following colors only
shall be used, and the terms and lights shall indicate as follows.
(A) Green alone, or “Go”.
(1) Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through, or turn right or left
unless a sign prohibits either turn. Vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to
pedestrians who happen to be lawfully within the intersection.
(2) Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within the crosswalk area,
whether marked or not.
27
28 Williamston - Traffic Code
(B) Yellow alone, or “Caution” when shown following the green or “Go” signal.
(1) Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at the
intersection, but if the stop cannot be made in safety, a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the
intersection.
(2) Pedestrians facing the signals are thereby warned that there will not be sufficient time to
safely cross a roadway, and any pedestrian than starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles.
(C) Red alone, or “Stop”.
(1) Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an
intersection, or at the other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line, or, if neither, then before
entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or “Go” is shown alone; however, if a
sign is not erected prohibiting turns on red lights, vehicles may turn right on red lights after coming to a
complete stop and after the driver has ascertained that it is safe to do so.
(2) No pedestrian facing the signal shall enter or attempt to cross the street or roadway until
the signal light shall turn green or “Go”.
(1992 Code, § 16-15) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.03 FLASHING SIGNALS.
Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require obedience by vehicular traffic
as follows.
(A) Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes,
drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection, or at a limit line
when marked, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules of safety and non-interference with
other traffic.
(B) Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent
flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past the signal only with caution.
(1992 Code, § 16-16)
§ 71.04 NO TURN SIGNS AND TURNING MARKERS.
Whenever authorized signs are placed which indicate that no right, left or U-turn is permitted, the
driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions of any sign, and when authorized markers, buttons or other
indications are placed within an intersection which indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles
traversing or turning thereat, the driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions of the indications.
(1992 Code, § 16-17)
Traffic Control Devices 29
§ 71.05 NO PARKING ZONE AND SAFETY ZONE MARKERS.
Whenever authorized signs or markings are placed which indicate no parking zones or safety
zones, the driver of a vehicle shall obey the regulatory indications.
(1992 Code, § 16-18)
§ 71.06 PLAY ZONES.
“Children at Play” signs shall be installed at appropriate places, as may be determined by the
Board of Commissioners from time to time.
(1992 Code, § 16-19)
§ 71.07 SCHOOL ZONE.
Whenever authorized signs are placed which designate any street, or part thereof as a school zone,
drivers of motor vehicles and operators of street cars using the street, or part thereof, shall exercise the
greatest care for the protection of children.
(1992 Code, § 16-20)
30 Williamston - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 72: BICYCLES
Section
72.01 Responsibility of operator
72.02 Lights required on bicycles
§ 72.01 RESPONSIBILITY OF OPERATOR.
Any person operating a bicycle shall be required to observe traffic regulations or traffic control
signals in the same manner as required of operators of motor vehicles and shall be required to maintain
the bicycle under complete control at all times.
(1992 Code, § 16-80)
§ 72.02 LIGHTS REQUIRED ON BICYCLES.
Every bicycle shall be equipped with a lighted lamp on the front thereof, visible under normal
atmospheric conditions from a distance of at least 300 feet in front of the bicycle and shall also be
equipped with a reflex mirror or lamp on the rear exhibiting a red light visible under like conditions
from a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of the bicycle, when used at night.
(1992 Code, § 16-81)
Statutory reference:
For similar state law, see G.S. § 20-129(e)
31
32 Williamston - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 73: RAILROADS
Section
73.01 Regulating the use of rail trail
§ 73.01 REGULATING THE USE OF RAIL TRAIL.
(A) No motorized vehicle shall be operated on the trail. The term MOTORIZED VEHICLE shall
include automobiles, trucks, mopeds and all other motor vehicles except motorized wheelchairs and
emergency police, fire and rescue vehicles.
(B) A violation of this section shall be a Class 3 misdemeanor punishable as provided in G.S.§ 14-
4.
(C) This section shall be effective upon adoption, subject to appropriate signs being placed upon
the trail giving notice of this section.
(Ord. passed 5-17-2004) Penalty, see § 10.99
33
34 Williamston - Traffic Code
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
90. ANIMALS AND FOWL
91. FIRE PROTECTION
92. STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
93. NUISANCES
94. CEMETERIES
95. PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES
1
2 Williamston - General Regulations
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS AND FOWL
Section
General Provisions
90.01 Keeping animals prohibited
90.02 Animals running-at-large
90.03 Bird sanctuary
90.04 Keeping bees prohibited
90.05 Regulation of number and size of animals
90.06 Animal waste
Dogs
90.20 Dangerous dogs
90.21 Barking dogs
90.22 Dogs running-at-large
90.23 Vaccination and tags/collars required
90.24 Abatement
90.25 Impoundment and destruction of dog
90.26 Nuisance dogs
90.27 Rabies; confinement
90.28 Consent to application of Martin County Dangerous Dog Ordinance
Cats
90.40 Prolonged howling, whining prohibited
90.99 Penalty
Statutory reference:
As to creation of bird sanctuary, see G.S. § 160A-188
For state law as to authority of town to regulate keeping running-at-large and the like, of
domestic animals, see G.S. § 160A-186
3
4 Williamston - General Regulations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 KEEPING ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, stable, maintain or otherwise have a horse, pony,
mule, goat, cow, pig, chickens, turkeys, geese or any other fowl within the corporate limits of the Town
of Williamston. This section shall not apply to parades or other official celebrations, nor shall it apply
to animals used in legitimate farm operations or animals used for instructional purposes at Martin
Community College.
(1992 Code, § 4-1) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.02 ANIMALS RUNNING-AT-LARGE.
No person shall allow any animal or fowl to run-at-large. It shall be the duty of the police to
impound the animals and fowl and make sale thereof after reasonable efforts are made to locate their
owners; provided, that all monies collected pursuant to this section shall be turned over to the town
treasury by the police. Dogs running-at-large are subject to the superseding requirements of §§ 90.20
through 90.25.
(1992 Code, § 4-2) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.03 BIRD SANCTUARY.
Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-188, the entire area within the corporate limits of the Town of
Williamston is declared a bird sanctuary. It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, kill, trap or
otherwise take any birds within the town limits:
(A) Except for those birds classified as pests under G.S. Chapter 113, Article 22A, the
Structural Pest Control Act of North Carolina of 1955 or the North Carolina Pesticide Law of 1971; or
(B) Except pursuant to a permit issued by the North Carolina Wildlife Resources
Commission under G.S. § 113-274(c)(1a) or under any other license or permit of the Wildlife
Resources Commission specifically made valid for use in taking birds within town limits.
(1992 Code, § 4-3) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.04 KEEPING BEES PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in the Town of Williamston to keep or
maintain in the town any apiary or other such container for the purpose of the raising of honey bees.
(1992 Code, § 4-4) Penalty, see § 90.99
Animals and Fowl 5
§ 90.05 REGULATION OF NUMBER AND SIZE OF ANIMALS.
(A) It shall be a violation of this section for any person to keep or allow to be kept on any lot or
premises in the town more than three animals in excess of 15 pounds, or more than four animals total.
(B) This limitation shall not apply to animals which are less than six months of age.
(C) This limitation shall not apply to kennels as defined by the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of
Williamston which must otherwise be in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and other applicable
laws and regulations.
(Ord. -, passed 10-6-2008) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.06 ANIMAL WASTE.
It is unlawful for any person to allow animal waste to accumulate to the extent that it becomes a
health hazard to any animal, person or the public. Any accumulation of animal waste, when not
immediately removed or discarded in a sanitary manner, is considered to be a potential health hazard
(i.e. feces accumulated in homes, yards, pens, hutches, and public areas). IMMEDIATE in this
instance is defined as waste accumulation of not more than one day’s duration.
(Ord. -, passed 10-6-2008) Penalty, see § 90.99
DOGS
§ 90.20 DANGEROUS DOGS.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of a dangerous dog to keep or maintain said dog in
violation of this chapter. A DANGEROUS DOG is defined as follows:
(A) Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack without provocation, to
cause injury, or to otherwise threaten the safety of human beings or domestic animals;
(B) Any dog which, without provocation, has attacked or bitten a human being or domestic
animal;
(C) Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting, or any trained
for dog fighting;
(D) Any dog which, with provocation, chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks,
or any public or private property in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack; or
6 Williamston - General Regulations
(E) A Pit Bull Terrier when off the premises of the owner or keeper and not muzzled and held on
a chain-link leash not more than six feet long by a person of suitable age and discretion who can
maintain control of the dog. A PIT BULL TERRIER shall be defined as any American Pit Bull
Terrier, Staffordshire Bull Terrier, or American Staffordshire Terrier breed of dog, or any mixed breed
of dog which has the appearance of being predominantly of the breeds of dogs known as American Pit
Bull Terrier, Staffordshire Bull Terrier, or American Staffordshire Terrier, and any other breed of dog
commonly known as pit bull, pit bull dog, or pit bull terrier, or a combination of those breeds.(Ord. -,
passed 10-6-2008) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.21 BARKING DOGS.
It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain in the Town of Williamston, any dog which by prolonged
and habitual barking, howling or whining causes serious annoyance to neighboring residents and
interferes with the reasonable use and enjoyment of the premises occupied by the residents, or with the
reasonable use and enjoyment of the public streets, sidewalks or other public areas.
(1992 Code, § 4-6) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.22 DOGS RUNNING-AT-LARGE.
(A) Any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring, or having the care, custody or control of
a dog within the town shall keep the dog secured as follows:
(1) By keeping the dog inside the keeper’s premises;
(2) By keeping the dog in a secure enclosure; Except that dangerous dogs as defined above
shall be kept in an enclosure which has a top and a concrete base with fencing securely attached or
anchored to the concrete perimeter to a depth of six inches;
(3) By keeping the dog on a leash which is held by a person of suitable age and discretion
who can maintain control of the dog; Except that dangerous dogs as defined above shall be muzzled
and kept on a chain-link leash not more than six feet long.
(B) Proof of a dog found running at large, if identifiable, shall constitute a prima facie case against
the owner, possessor or keeper of the dog and if the owner, possessor or keeper of the dog shall not be
identifiable, the dog shall be considered a stray dog and disposed of accordingly.(Ord. -, passed 10-6-
2008) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.23 VACCINATION AND TAGS/COLLARS REQUIRED.
All dogs in the Town of Williamston shall be inoculated against rabies and shall wear a collar to
which is attached a current rabies vaccination tag and a tag sufficient for notification purposes, to
identify the owner or keeper.(Ord. -, passed 10-6-2008) Penalty, see § 90.99
2009 S-1 Repl.
Animals and Fowl 7
§ 90.24 ABATEMENT.
Any animal kept or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be a
public nuisance which may be abated by injunction, restraining order or other lawful means including
summary abatement.(Ord. -, passed 10-6-2008)
§ 90.25 IMPOUNDMENT AND DESTRUCTION OF DOG.
(A) Any dog kept or maintained in violation of this chapter or any stray dog as defined
below may be impounded by the duly authorized representative of the town and a charge as from time
to time set by the town imposed for the cost of impoundment. At the expiration of seven days, unless
claimed by its owner or keeper and the impounding charges paid, the dog may be humanely destroyed.
(B) A STRAY DOG shall be defined as any abandoned dog, any dog which does not wear a
tag or emblem of identification, any dog which has not been vaccinated as required by law, or any dog
which is found off the premises of its owner or keeper without being restrained by leash.
(C) Upon apprehension and impoundment, if the owner or keeper of the impounded dog can
be identified through tag or other identification, then reasonable notice of the impoundment shall be
given to the owner or keeper before the dog is destroyed.(Ord. -, passed 10-6-2008)
§ 90.26 NUISANCE DOGS.
It is a nuisance for any dog to habitually or frequently bark or cry, to frequent school grounds
and parks, to chase vehicles, to molest or annoy any person away from the property of its owner or
custodian, or to damage, defile or destroy public or private property. Failure of the owner or keeper of
the animal to prevent the animal from committing a nuisance is a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. -, passed 10-6-2008) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.27 RABIES; CONFINEMENT.
In all cases where a dog has bitten a human, the dog shall be confined for the appropriate rabies
incubation period. If it is determined by standard practices that the animal should be tested for rabies,
then the animal shall be destroyed for that purpose. Cost of confinement, maintenance and testing shall
be the responsibility of the owner or keeper.
(Ord. -, passed 10-6-2008)
8 Williamston - General Regulations
§ 90.28 CONSENT TO APPLICATION OF MARTIN COUNTY DANGEROUS DOG
ORDINANCE.
The Town of Williamston hereby consents to the application and enforcement of the Martin
County Dangerous Dog Ordinance within the incorporated area of the town.
(Res. -, passed 8-4-2008)
CATS
§ 90.40 PROLONGED HOWLING, WHINING PROHIBITED.
It shall be a violation of this section for any owner of a cat to allow such animal by prolonged
howling or whining to cause annoyance to neighboring residents or to interfere with the reasonable use
and enjoyment of the premises occupied by neighboring residents.
(Ord. -, passed 10-6-2008) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
A violation of this chapter shall be a Class 3 misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $50
and imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. In addition, enforcement may include all other remedies
included in the Code of the Town of Williamston. Each day’s continuing act or conduct prohibited
hereby and each day’s failure to comply shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.(Ord. -, passed
10-6-2008)
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
91.01 Fire Prevention Code; adopted
91.02 Applied to extraterritorial jurisdiction
91.03 Use of fireworks prohibited
91.04 Inspection of self-service gasoline pump
Fire Department
91.20 Chief; appointment; supervision
91.21 Duties
Statutory reference:
As to authority of town as to fire protection generally, see G.S. §§ 160A-291 to 160A-293
As to authority of town to send firefighters and apparatus beyond territorial limits, see G.S.
§ 58-83-1
As to fire protection outside town limits generally, see G.S. § 160A-293
For state law as to fire protection generally, see G.S. §§ 69-1 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 FIRE PREVENTION CODE; ADOPTED.
The Board of Commissioners of the town hereby adopts the Fire Prevention Code, abbreviated
edition.
(1992 Code, § 12-1)
Statutory reference:
For state law as to authority of town to adopt technical codes by reference, see G.S. § 160A-76
§ 91.02 APPLIED TO EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION.
The Fire Prevention Code is hereby made to apply to the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town.
(1992 Code, § 12-2)
9
10 Williamston - General Regulations
§ 91.03 USE OF FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful, for any person to shoot firecrackers, torpedoes or any explosive generally
known as fireworks in the town.
(1992 Code, § 12-3) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.04 INSPECTION OF SELF-SERVICE GASOLINE PUMP.
Before any self-service gasoline pumps or automatic gasoline dispensing systems be put into
operation, the fire prevention officer shall inspect same and the gasoline pumps or automatic
dispensing systems shall not be put into operation by the owner or lessor thereof until the fire
prevention officer has approved same in writing.
(1992 Code, § 12-4)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 91.20 CHIEF; APPOINTMENT; SUPERVISION.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners and shall be
subject to the supervision of the Board of Commissioners.
(1992 Code, § 12-5)
§ 91.21 DUTIES.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to:
(A) Preserve and care for fire apparatus;
(B) Have charge of fighting and extinguishing fires and training the Fire Department;
(C) Seek out and have corrected all places and conditions dangerous to the safety of the town and
its residents;
(D) Make annual reports concerning his or her activities to the Board of Commissioners; and
(E) Perform the other duties as may be assigned to him or her by the Board of Commissioners,
provisions of this code, other ordinances of the town or state law.
(1992 Code, § 12-6)
CHAPTER 92: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
92.01 Duty of lot occupant as to cleanliness of sidewalk and gutters
92.02 Sweeping trash on streets prohibited
92.03 Throwing glass and the like
92.04 Erection of posts and the like
92.05 Signs; erection prohibited without Commissioners permission
92.06 Regulations
92.07 Porches or balconies
92.08 Awnings
92.09 Fences and hedges
92.10 Skating prohibited
Obstruction
92.25 Bricks, boxes, building materials and the like
92.26 Public alley
92.27 Ditches
92.28 Display or sale of merchandise on sidewalk; permit
92.29 Application
92.30 Issuance
Changes or Alterations
92.45 Approval of town required
92.46 Barricades
92.47 Restoration of street
92.48 Permanent closing of streets by town
Statutory reference:
As to damage to public property, see G.S. § 14-127
For procedure for town closing of streets, see G.S. § 160A-299
For state law as to general authority and control over streets, sidewalks and the like,
see G.S. § 160A-296
11
12 Williamston - General Regulations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 DUTY OF LOT OCCUPANT AS TO CLEANLINESS OF SIDEWALK AND
GUTTERS.
(A) The occupant of a lot on any street shall keep the footway or sidewalk clean and the
gutter open and free from obstruction as far as the lot extends.
(B) If any rubbish, dirt, ashes or any other thing be placed or left, which is without lawful
authority, upon footway or sidewalk or upon the gutter, the occupant of the lot shall remove the same.
(1992 Code, § 26-1)
§ 92.02 SWEEPING TRASH ON STREETS PROHIBITED.
No merchant or any other person shall sweep or cause to be swept any litter, trash, paper or any
other sweepings from any store or building; but same shall be swept from the back door and
immediately placed in some box, barrel or other receptacle kept for the purpose as that the same can be
removed therefrom.
(1992 Code, § 26-2) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.03 THROWING GLASS AND THE LIKE.
No person shall throw any glass bottles, tin cans or other waste or refuse matter on any street or
sidewalk.
(1992 Code, § 26-3) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.04 ERECTION OF POSTS AND THE LIKE.
No person shall erect any post, filling station pump, plant any tree or build or erect anything on
any street or sidewalk, except upon the authority of a resolution duly adopted by the Board of
Commissioners.
(1992 Code, § 26-4) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.05 SIGNS; ERECTION PROHIBITED WITHOUT COMMISSIONERS PERMISSION.
No person shall erect any banner, sign, billboard or other advertising structure on any street or
sidewalk without the permission of the Board of Commissioners.
(1992 Code, § 26-5) Penalty, see § 10.99
Streets and Sidewalks 13
§ 92.06 REGULATIONS.
It shall be unlawful to hang or suspend any sign over or above the sidewalks or streets unless the
lower edge of the sign is at least eight feet above the sidewalk level, or at least 15 feet above the street
level. The sign shall be kept securely fastened at all times.
(1992 Code, § 26-6) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.07 PORCHES OR BALCONIES.
No person shall erect any porch or balcony over any sidewalk or street without a resolution
having been adopted by the Board of Commissioners giving the person permission to do so.
(1992 Code, § 26-7) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.08 AWNINGS.
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any shelter, sunshade or awning in front of any building
which extends over the sidewalk and where the lower edge is less than seven feet above the level of
any sidewalk, or which extends more than ten feet from the building to which it is attached. Stationary
awning arms shall not be less than eight feet above the level of the sidewalk.
(1992 Code, § 26-8) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.09 FENCES AND HEDGES.
(A) It shall be unlawful to erect or repair any fence which is more than four feet in height
within ten feet of any sidewalk. No hedge or shrubbery shall be permitted to overhang a sidewalk.
(B) In the event that there is no improved sidewalk, then it shall be considered that the word
SIDEWALK contained in this section shall include three feet of area, adjacent to the street curb or
gutter. At any street intersection where there is no improved sidewalk, it shall be unlawful to erect or
repair any fence more than four feet in height within ten feet of a point located seven feet from the
opposite curb or gutter. The word OPPOSITE, used herein, shall designate the curb or gutter which
tends to lie perpendicular to the fence.
(1992 Code, § 26-9) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.10 SKATING PROHIBITED.
No person shall skate with roller skates upon the streets and sidewalks.
(1992 Code, § 26-10) Penalty, see § 10.99
14 Williamston - General Regulations
OBSTRUCTION
§ 92.25 BRICKS, BOXES, BUILDING MATERIALS AND THE LIKE.
No person shall obstruct any of the public streets or sidewalks by placing therein any bricks,
stones, boxes, crates or building materials.
(1992 Code, § 26-11) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.26 PUBLIC ALLEY.
No person shall obstruct or close any public alley or shall make an excavation therein without the
permission of the Board of Commissioners.
(1992 Code, § 26-12) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.27 DITCHES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, change or alter in any way any ditch in the town
which carries in it any water running off any street in the town, or off any property, title to which is
held by the town.
(1992 Code, § 26-13) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.28 DISPLAY OR SALE OF MERCHANDISE ON SIDEWALK; PERMIT.
(A) No person shall place on any sidewalk or vacant lot any article of merchandise for the purpose
of display or sale; nor shall anyone place any counter, showcase or other fixture on any sidewalk or
vacant lot for the purpose of displaying or selling any article of merchandise.
(B) It shall be lawful to conduct sales and displays for a period not to exceed three days after first
obtaining a permit from the Town Administrator. No articles of merchandise, displays, counters,
showcases or other means to conduct the sales or displays shall be placed or maintained so as to take up
or displace over three feet of the inside portion of any sidewalk or that part of any sidewalk furthest
from the curb.
(C) For the purpose of this section and §§ 92.29 and 92.30, the word SIDEWALK shall be
construed to mean the portion of sidewalk from the curb to the next property line on the side furthest
from the street.
(1992 Code, § 26-14) Penalty, see § 10.99
Streets and Sidewalks 15
§ 92.29 APPLICATION.
An application for the permit required by § 92.28 shall be in writing to the Town Administrator
and shall be submitted to the office at least 24 hours in advance of the time the sale or display is to be
held or conducted, and shall designate the place and times of the sale or display. The office of Town
Administrator, before issuing the permit, shall first obtain the recommendation of the Chief of Police,
or in his or her absence the next highest ranking officer of the police force.
(1992 Code, § 26-15)
§ 92.30 ISSUANCE.
It shall be found as a requisite for issuance of the permit required by § 92.28, that:
(A) The activity will not require excessive diversion of police from other necessary duties;
(B) The activity will not interfere with the right of property owners in the area to enjoy peaceful
occupancy and use of their property;
(C) The activity can be conducted without unreasonable interference with normal vehicular or
pedestrian traffic in the area and will not prevent normal police or fire protection to the public and will
not be likely to cause injury to persons or property or provoke disorderly conduct or create a public
disturbance; and
(D) The activity will not violate any other ordinance of the town or law of the state.
(1992 Code, § 26-16)
CHANGES OR ALTERATIONS
§ 92.45 APPROVAL OF TOWN REQUIRED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to change, alter or vary in any manner whatever, any
existing street in the town without first presenting the proposed changes to the Board of
Commissioners of the town and obtaining the approval of the Board, officially given.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from any public street in the town, any dirt or
any other material in the street used or to be used in connection therewith.
(1992 Code, § 26-17) Penalty, see § 10.99
16 Williamston - General Regulations
§ 92.46 BARRICADES.
Any person carrying on or doing any work in any street or part of street in the town, pursuant to
the approval of the town as provided in § 92.45, shall erect and maintain proper, safe and sufficient
barricades, and during the period of time between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before
sunrise shall maintain sufficient lights or flares around the barricades, work or excavations to warn
persons of the presence of the excavations and work and to prevent injury to persons and property.
(1992 Code, § 26-18)
§ 92.47 RESTORATION OF STREET.
The person changing, altering or varying any public street pursuant to the provisions of § 92.45
shall restore that street or part of street upon which the work has been performed to the same condition
as existed prior to the work; provided, that the work may be done by the town at the expense of the
person.
(1992 Code, § 26-19)
§ 92.48 PERMANENT CLOSING OF STREETS BY TOWN.
When a street or alley is closed pursuant to G.S. § 160A-299 by order of the Board of
Commissioners, a copy of the order closing the street or alley shall be filed in the Traffic Ordinance
Book, described in § 70.003.
(1992 Code, § 26-20)
CHAPTER 93: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
93.01 What constitutes a nuisance
93.02 Cost of removal to be charged to owner
93.03 Notice of abatement
93.04 Provisions cumulative
Noises
93.20 Prohibition; generally
93.21 Enumerated
Motor Vehicles
93.35 Permits for motor vehicles not displaying current license plates and tags
93.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Weeds and Vegetation, see Chapter 52
Statutory reference:
For state law as to authority of town to regulate, restrict or prohibit loud noises,
see G.S. § 160A-184
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 WHAT CONSTITUTES A NUISANCE.
The existence of any of the following conditions on any vacant lot or other parcel of land within
the corporate limits is hereby declared to be dangerous and prejudicial to the public health or safety and
to constitute a public nuisance:
(A) Trees, shrubs and similar growths at street intersections where the growths so impair the
vision of drivers using the streets as to create a traffic hazard at the intersection;
17
18 Williamston - General Regulations
(B) Any accumulation of animal, vegetable matter or weeds and other uncontrolled growth which
is offensive by virtue of odors or vapors, or by the inhabitancy therein of rats, mice, snakes, insects or
vermin of any kind which is or may be dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or safety; or the
keeping of animals or pets in such a manner and in the location as to seriously interfere with the
reasonable use by neighboring residents or property owners of their property because of odor, habitual
barking, howling, whining, crying, growling or other noise making;
(C) Any accumulation of rubbish, trash or junk (including vehicles or parts thereof) causing or
threatening to cause a fire hazard, or causing or threatening to cause the accumulation of stagnant
water, or causing or threatening to cause the inhabitancy therein of rats, mice, snakes or vermin of any
kind or being a point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation, or a point of concentration
of gasoline, oil or other flammable material or being located so that there is a danger of falling or
turning over or a danger to children;
(D) Trees and any other overhanging above ground objects which, because of their deteriorated
condition or otherwise, pose a danger or threat of danger to the safety or health of adjoining property or
occupiers of adjoining property;
(E) Deteriorated or unmaintained buildings and structures, the condition of which adversely
affects other property or the public because of (but not limited to) improper drainage, leakage or decay;
(F) The accumulation of scrap materials which are not surrounded by a fence of sufficient height,
strength and construction to deny persons, especially children, access to the scrap materials and to
shield neighboring properties from the view of the materials. Scrap materials include, but are not
limited to:
(1) Fragments of metal, wood, glass, masonry, plastic, textiles, rope, leather, rubber, paper or
any substance which formerly was part of the construction of some useful object or thing or which
consists of the excess resulting from the creation of some useful object or thing;
(2) Objects or things, including but not limited to machines, tools, equipment, hardware,
furniture and appliances or parts of same which are no longer in serviceable condition or have value
only as raw material for reprocessing; and
(3) Remnants of junked motor vehicles.
(G) Any condition detrimental to the public health which violates the rules and regulations of the
County Health Department or any condition which is dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or
safety; and
(H) Any violation of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Williamston which adversely affects
the use and enjoyment of neighboring property.
(1992 Code, § 18-1) (Ord. passed 1-6-1996; Ord. passed 5-7-2007)
Nuisances 19
§ 93.02 COST OF REMOVAL TO BE CHARGED TO OWNER.
The nuisance may be removed in accordance with the procedure set out below. The actual cost
incurred by the town in removing or otherwise remedying a public nuisance shall be charged to the
owner of the lot or parcel of land, and it shall be the duty of the Town Administrator to mail a
statement of the charges to the owner or other person in possession of the premises with instructions
that the charges are due and payable within 30 days from the receipt thereof. Upon failure to pay the
charges within 30 days, the charges shall become a lien on the land or premises and shall be collected
as unpaid taxes.
(1992 Code, § 18-2) (Ord. passed 1-6-1996; Ord. passed 5-7-2007)
§ 93.03 NOTICE OF ABATEMENT.
(A) Upon a determination that the conditions constituting a public nuisance exist, the Town
Administrator or his or her designee shall notify in writing the owner, occupant or person in possession
of the premises in question of the condition constituting the nuisance and shall order the prompt
abatement thereof within ten days from the receipt of the written notice. If the owner, occupant or
person in possession of the premises cannot be ascertained with due diligence, then notice shall be
posted on the premises. The notice shall state the condition or situation constituting the nuisance that if
not removed within ten days, may be caused to be removed by the town, and that if the owner,
occupant or person in possession has not abated the nuisance within ten days, the town will cause the
nuisance to be abated and that the expense of removal, if not paid within 30 days after being billed by
the town, shall become a lien on the land or premises and shall be collected as unpaid taxes. Within ten
days of the receipt of the notice or the posting of the premises, an appeal of the determination of the
Town Administrator may be taken to the Town Board; except that if the conditions constituting the
nuisance are such that the danger is imminent and likely to occur before notice can be given, then the
nuisance may be abated summarily in which case the appeal may be heard on the question of whether
the cost of abatement shall be a lien upon the land or premises.
(B) Upon an appeal duly taken, the Town Board shall afford a hearing to the appellant or
appellants at which hearing the Town Administrator shall present evidence sufficient to substantiate a
finding of the nuisance. Appellant or appellants shall be given an opportunity to present evidence and
all parties may cross examine witnesses. The Town Board may consider all reliable evidence and need
not be bound by the strict rules of evidence applicable to courts of law, but all witnesses shall be
sworn. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Town Board shall make findings of fact, state its
conclusions and enter an appropriate order, which findings and order shall be mailed or delivered to
appellant or appellants. An order upholding the order of the Town Administrator may direct
appropriate town employees to remove, abate or remedy the nuisance and assess the costs as set out
above, to be paid within 30 days or to become a lien upon the land or premises where the nuisance
existed and to be collected as unpaid taxes.
(1992 Code, § 18-3) (Ord. passed 1-6-1996; Ord. passed 5-7-2007)
20 Williamston - General Regulations
§ 93.04 PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE.
(A) The procedure set forth in this chapter shall be in addition to any other remedies which may
now or hereafter exist under law for the abatement of nuisances, and this chapter shall not prevent the
town from proceeding by the use of other remedies as provided for in § 10.99.
(B) In the event the town subjects the offender to a civil penalty, the penalty shall be paid within
30 days after being the offender is cited for the violation. Each day that the violation continues after
notification of the violation and of the penalty shall constitute a separate offense. The citation shall
include:
(1) The name and address (if known) of the violator;
(2) The ordinance provision violated;
(3) The date and location of the violation;
(4) A description of the violation;
(5) The amount of the civil penalty; and
(6) A statement that if the penalty is not paid to the town within 30 days, a civil action will be
brought against the violator to recover the penalty. The Town Administrator is authorized to sign the
complaint on behalf of the town.
(C) The provision of this subchapter, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances adopted
prior to the adoption of this subchapter and included herein, shall be considered as continuations
thereof and not as new enactments, and this subchapter shall not affect nor otherwise excuse nor waive
the power to remove or abate any nuisance in existence at the time of the adoption of this subchapter.
(D) Should any part of this subchapter be declared by a court to be unconstitutional or invalid, the
declaration shall not affect the validity of this subchapter as a whole or any other part thereof.
(1992 Code, § 18-4) (Ord. passed 1-6-1996; Ord. passed 5-7-2007)
NOISES
§ 93.20 PROHIBITION; GENERALLY.
The production or emission of loud noises or amplified speech, music or other sounds that end to
annoy, disturb or frighten the citizens of the town are prohibited.
(1992 Code, § 17-1) Penalty, see § 93.99
Nuisances 21
§ 93.21 ENUMERATED.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be noises and sounds in violation of this
subchapter, but the enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(A) Blowing horns. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle,
bus or other vehicle, except as a danger signal, so as to create any unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or
the sounding of the device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;
(B) Radios, phonographs and the like. The playing of any radio, phonograph or other music
instrument in the manner or with the volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in any dwelling, hotel or
other type of residence;
(C) Use of vehicles. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded
or in the manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise;
(D) Pets and animals. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long
continued noises disturbs the comfort and repose of any citizen;
(E) Loudspeakers and the like. The use of any mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks,
automobiles or other vehicles for advertising or other purposes, except where specific license has been
procured from the Chief of Police of the town and then only under the terms and conditions set forth in
the license; and
(F) Drums and the like. The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the
purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show, sale or display of merchandise.
(1992 Code, § 17-2) Penalty, see § 93.99
MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 93.35 PERMITS FOR MOTOR VEHICLES NOT DISPLAYING CURRENT LICENSE
PLATES AND TAGS.
(A) No person may cause, suffer or permit, on premises under the control of the person, the
storage, outside a fully enclosed structure of a motor vehicle which does not display current license
plates and tags unless a permit has been issued for the vehicle under this section, provided that:
(1) The restrictions of this section shall not apply to any person until 45 days after the
Administrator initially notifies the responsible person that a permit is required under this section; and
(2) This section shall not apply to persons lawfully engaged in a business necessitating the
storage so long as the business has received all legally required state and local permits and licenses.
22 Williamston - General Regulations
(B) An application for an initial permit under this section shall be made to the Administrator on a
form prescribed by the town within 30 days after the Administrator notifies the responsible person that
a permit is required under this section. Permits shall be valid for one calendar year beginning January 1
and ending on December 31. An application or renewal permit shall be submitted in December of each
year on a form sent to the permitee by the Administrator prior to December 1.
(C) Any person who submits a completed permit application pursuant to division (B) above shall
be issued a permit under this section if:
(1) The applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the Administrator either that:
(a) The vehicle is operable; or
(b) The vehicle is capable of being made operable and the applicant is in the process of
repairing the vehicle such that it will be made operable within a period of not more than one year.
When a vehicle has remained inoperable for a continuous period of one year or more after the issuance
pursuant to this section of a permit that was premised upon a finding of compliance with division (B)
above, that shall be regarded in subsequent applications as conclusive evidence of the applicants,
inability to satisfy division (B) above.
(2) The applicant pays an annual permit fee of $25.
(D) For purposes of this section, the "administrator" shall be the Town Administrator or any
person designated by the Town Administrator to perform the functions and exercise the responsibilities
set out in this section.
(Ord. passed 1-2-1996)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed
shall be subject to § 10.99.
(B) In addition to other remedies provided by law and this code, a violation of § 93.35 may
subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $50, the penalty to be recovered by the town in a
civil action in the nature of a debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within 30 days after being
cited for the violation. Each day that any violation continues after notification of the violation and of
the penalty therefore shall constitute a separate offense.
(C) The citation shall include:
(1) The name and address (if known) of the violator;
(2) The ordinance provision violated;
Nuisances 23
(3) The date and location of the violation;
(4) A description of the violation;
(5) The amount of the civil penalty; and
(6) A statement that if the penalty is not paid to the town within 30 days, a civil action will be
brought against the violator to recover the penalty. The Town Administrator is authorized to sign the
complaint on behalf of the town.
(Ord. passed 1-2-1996)
24 Williamston - General Regulations
CHAPTER 94: CEMETERIES
Section
Supervision
94.001 Public Works Department supervision
94.002 General duties
Graves
94.015 Depth
94.016 Setback
94.017 Coping, curves and mounds; prohibited
Monuments
94.030 One per family lot
94.031 Head marker
94.032 Marker
94.033 Foundations
Removal and Destruction
94.050 Removal of unused building materials
94.051 Grading, landscaping and improvements
94.052 Removal or injury to structures
94.053 Destroying or injuring plants
Violations
94.070 Trespassing
94.071 Disturbing the peace
94.072 Vehicle speed
94.073 Littering
General Provisions
94.090 Purchase of burial rights
94.091 No transfer of lots
25
26 Williamston - General Regulations
94.092 Interment fees
94.093 Special section for infants and cremation urns
94.094 Repair or removal of mausoleums, monuments or tombs
94.095 Restoration of property by town
94.999 Penalty
Statutory reference:
As to authority of town as to cemeteries, see G.S. §§ 160A-341 et seq.
For state law as to cemeteries generally, see G.S. Chapter 65
SUPERVISION
§ 94.001 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT SUPERVISION.
The town cemetery, known as Woodlawn cemetery shall be a part of the Public Works Department
under the supervision of the Public Works Director or his or her designee.
(1992 Code, § 7-1)
§ 94.002 GENERAL DUTIES.
The Public Works Director or his or her designee shall have the powers and duties as shall be
conferred upon him or her by this chapter or any ordinance, resolution or order of the Board of
Commissioners. The Public Works Director or his or her designee shall have charge of the upkeep,
protection and preservation of the cemetery, shall supervise the digging of all graves, the interment and
disinterment of bodies and the erection of monuments and markers, shall supervise and approve the
planting of any and all shrubbery, trees and flowers and shall make provision for the entrance and exit
of persons and vehicles to and from the cemetery.
(1992 Code, § 7-2)
GRAVES
§ 94.015 DEPTH.
All graves in the cemetery shall be at least four feet in depth.
(1992 Code, § 7-3)
Cemeteries 27
§ 94.016 SETBACK.
No graves in the cemetery shall be dug nearer than 12 inches to any property line.
(1992 Code, § 7-4)
§ 94.017 COPING, CURVES AND MOUNDS; PROHIBITED.
No coping, curb, fencing, grave mound or border of any kind shall be allowed on any burial lot in
the cemetery.
(1992 Code, § 7-5)
MONUMENTS
§ 94.030 ONE PER FAMILY LOT.
Only one central or family monument shall be allowed on a family lot in the cemetery. When a
monument is not desired by the family, one head marker per grave may be authorized.
(1992 Code, § 7-6)
§ 94.031 HEAD MARKER.
When a head marker is used in place of a monument, it shall be laid flush with the ground and
shall not exceed two feet in length and one foot in width and shall be placed at the head of the grave.
(1992 Code, § 7-7)
§ 94.032 MARKER.
When a monument is used, a marker may also be placed at the end of each grave farthest from the
monument. The marker shall be laid flush with the ground and shall not exceed two feet in length and
one foot in width.
(1992 Code, § 7-8)
§ 94.033 FOUNDATIONS.
(A) No memorial shall be erected in the cemetery unless there shall first be a foundation to consist
of a concrete mixture as follows: One part cement of standard brand, two parts clean sharp sand and
three parts rock; size not to exceed one and one-half inches. The foundation shall be the full length of
the marker on top and in the center of the foundation.
28 Williamston - General Regulations
(B) The foundation for monuments shall be 12 inches longer than the length of the base of the
monument and 12 inches wider than the width of the base of the monument, thus making an extension
of six inches on each side of the monument base. The foundation will be 12 inches thick for
monuments weighing over 400 pounds and eight inches thick for monuments less than 400 pounds.
The finished grade of the foundation shall be flush with the ground. The foundation will not extend
over the property line. No portion of any monument or marker (excluding foundations) will be closer
than six inches from any property line.
(C) The foundation for markers shall extend two inches beyond the marker on all sides. The
thickness of the foundation shall be equal to the thickness of the marker or a minimum of four inches,
whichever is greater. The finished grade of the foundation shall be at a depth also equal to the thickness
of the marker. Thus, upon completion of construction, the top surface of the marker will be flush with
the ground.
(D) Any type of memorial, monument, marker or other structure to be placed, which will not
conform to the above conditions, is prohibited unless written approval is obtained from the Director of
Public Works.
(1992 Code, § 7-9)
REMOVAL AND DESTRUCTION
§ 94.050 REMOVAL OF UNUSED BUILDING MATERIALS.
Any tools, materials or debris remaining after the erection of monumental markers, or other lawful
structures authorized herein shall be promptly removed from the cemetery by the owner of the lot upon
which the monument, marker or structure is located.
(1992 Code, § 7-10)
§ 94.051 GRADING, LANDSCAPING AND IMPROVEMENTS.
All grading, landscaping and improvements of every kind in the cemetery shall be made or done
by the town only.
(1992 Code, § 7-11)
§ 94.052 REMOVAL OR INJURY TO STRUCTURES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any board, gravestone or other monument erected at
any grave, or to deface, injure or destroy any board, gravestone or monument in any manner.
(1992 Code, § 7-12) Penalty, see § 94.999
Cemeteries 29
§ 94.053 DESTROYING OR INJURING PLANTS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy or injure in any manner any flower, shrub, tree or
plant in the cemetery. All pruning or cutting of trees and shrubbery is prohibited except as done under
the supervision of the Public Works Director or his or her designee.
(1992 Code, § 7-13) Penalty, see § 94.999
VIOLATIONS
§ 94.070 TRESPASSING.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person, other than officers of the law engaged in the prosecution
of their duties as such, to enter the cemetery in the nighttime between one hour after sunset and one
hour before sunrise without prior authority to do so from the Public Works Director or his or her
designee.
(B) No person shall enter the cemetery at other times except for the purpose of attending funerals,
visiting graves or pursuing some other lawful mission.
(1992 Code, § 7-14) Penalty, see § 94.999
§ 94.071 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
No person shall disturb the quiet, repose and good order of the cemetery.
(1992 Code, § 7-15) Penalty, see § 94.999
§ 94.072 VEHICLE SPEED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle within the cemetery, except upon the
cemetery roadways, and then at a speed not in excess of 15 mph.
(1992 Code, § 7-17) Penalty, see § 94.999
§ 94.073 LITTERING.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, or cause to be deposited, garbage or other unclean or
offensive substance in the cemetery.
(1992 Code, § 7-18) Penalty, see § 94.999
30 Williamston - General Regulations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.090 PURCHASE OF BURIAL RIGHTS.
Upon payment of the appropriate fees, as set out in the regularly adopted fee schedule of the Town
of Williamston, evidence of burial rights shall be transferred to the purchaser from the town.
(1992 Code, § 7-19)
§ 94.091 NO TRANSFER OF LOTS.
No cemetery lot or burial rights may be sold or transferred by its owner to any other party. If the
owner finds that he or she has no use for a lot, the town will buy the lot from that person at the same
price originally paid for that lot; except that when more than one burial lot has been purchased in the
name of one person for the purpose of interment of other family members, it shall not be considered a
transfer for those other family members to be interred in the lots.
(1992 Code, § 7-20)
§ 94.092 INTERMENT FEES.
Except as otherwise specified herein, fees for interment shall be as set out in the town’s regularly
adopted schedule of fees.
(1992 Code, § 7-21)
§ 94.093 SPECIAL SECTION FOR INFANTS AND CREMATION URNS.
Section N-Northwest is designated a special section for infant and cremation urn graves. The
following rules apply in that section only:
(A) Plot size shall be two and one-half feet by five feet; and
(B) Grave marker size shall be no more than one foot by one and one-half feet.
(C) Notwithstanding the above, infants and cremation urns may be interred in family plots. The
number of infant and cremation urns which may be placed in one grave site shall be as determined
from time to time by the Board of Commissioners.
(1992 Code, § 7-22)
Cemeteries 31
§ 94.094 REPAIR OR REMOVAL OF MAUSOLEUMS, MONUMENTS OR TOMBS.
Should any mausoleum, monument or tomb in the cemetery become unsafe, unsightly or in need
of repair or resetting, the Superintendent of the Town Cemetery shall so notify the owner or any person
having an interest in the lot upon which the condition exists, and shall request the person to make the
needed repairs under the Superintendent’s supervision, and the person shall be required to make the
necessary repairs under the supervision of the Superintendent of the Town Cemetery. The town is not
responsible for replacing or restoring any monuments or marker.
(1992 Code, § 7-23)
§ 94.095 RESTORATION OF PROPERTY BY TOWN.
In the event of any violation of provisions of this chapter, the town shall have authority to restore
the property to its condition as authorized herein. Where repairs or maintenance are made, the
responsibility of the owner by this chapter and the activities are not undertaken by the party after
reasonable notice of an unacceptable condition, the town may undertake the repairs or maintenance and
assess the owner the cost of the repairs or maintenance.
(1992 Code, § 7-24)
§ 94.999 PENALTY.
The fine for violation of the provisions of §§ 94.052 through 94.053 and §§ 94.070 through 94.071
may exceed $50, up to a maximum of $500, as allowed by G.S. § 14-4.
(1992 Code, § 7-16)
32 Williamston - General Regulations
CHAPTER 95: PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES
Section
95.01 Definitions
95.02 Public assembly and parade permits
95.03 Public assembly and parade regulations
§ 95.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or
requires a different meaning.
APPEALS BOARD. The Board of Commissioners of the Town of Williamston.
DEMONSTRATION. A public display of sentiment for or against a person or cause, including
protesting.
FESTIVAL. A concert, fair, exhibit, promotion, community event, block party or similar event.
PARADE. An athletic event, march, ceremony, pageant, procession or other similar activity
consisting of persons, animals, vehicles or things, or any combination thereof, that disrupts the normal
flow of traffic upon any public street. A funeral procession is not a PARADE.
PERMIT OFFICIAL. The person or persons designated by the Board of Commissioners as being
responsible for issuing permits under this chapter. The Chief of Police or other officer acting in his or
her stead shall be the Permit Official unless and until another official is so designated by the Board.
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.
(1) A festival or demonstration which is reasonably anticipated to obstruct the normal flow of
traffic upon any public street and that is collected together in one place; and
(2) A festival on town property or any other town-controlled area.
(Ord. passed 6-20-2005)
33
34 Williamston - General Regulations
§ 95.02 PUBLIC ASSEMBLY AND PARADE PERMITS.
(A) Permit required. No public assembly or parade is permitted unless a permit allowing the
activity has been obtained pursuant to this section.
(B) Permit application. An application for a public assembly or parade permit shall be made in
writing on a form prescribed by the Permit Official at least 30 days before commencement of the event.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the Permit Official shall consider an application that is filed
less than 30 days before the commencement of the proposed event where the purpose of the event is a
spontaneous response to a current event or where other good and compelling causes are shown. The
application must contain the following:
(1) The name, address and telephone number for the person in charge of the proposed event,
and the name of the organization with which that person is affiliated or on whose behalf the person is
applying (collectively “Applicant”);
(2) The name, address and telephone number for an individual who shall be designated as the
responsible planner and on-site manager for the event;
(3) The date, time, place and route of the proposed event, including the location and time that
the event will begin to assemble and disband and any requested street closings;
(4) The anticipated number of persons and vehicles and the basis on which this estimate is
made;
(5) A list of the number and type of animals that will be at the event and all necessary health
certificates for the animal;
(6) The other attachments and submissions that are requested on the application form; and
(7) Payment of a non-refundable application fee as established from time to time by the
Board of Commissioners.
(C) Permitting criteria. An application may be denied for any of the following reasons:
(1) The application is not fully completed and executed;
(2) The applicant has not tendered the required application fee or has not tendered other
required user fees, indemnification agreements, insurance certificates or security deposits within times
prescribed;
(3) The application contains a material falsehood or misrepresentation;
(4) The applicant is legally incompetent to contract or to sue and be sued;
Public Assemblies 35
(5) The applicant has on prior occasions made material misrepresentations regarding the
nature or scope of an event;
(6) The applicant has previously permitted a violation or has violated the terms of a public
assembly or parade permit issued to or on behalf of the applicant;
(7) The applicant has on prior occasions damaged town property and has not paid in full for
the damage;
(8) A fully executed prior application for the same time and place has been received, and a
permit has been or will be granted to a prior applicant authorizing uses or activities which do not
reasonably permit multiple simultaneous events;
(9) The proposed event would conflict with previously planned programs organized,
conducted or sponsored by the town and previously scheduled at or near the same time and place;
(10) The proposed event would present an unreasonable danger to the public health or safety;
(11) The proposed event would substantially or unnecessarily interfere with traffic;
(12) The event would likely interfere with the movement of emergency equipment and police
protection in areas contiguous or in the vicinity of the event;
(13) There would not, at the time of the event, be sufficient law enforcement and traffic
control officers to adequately protect participants and non-participants from traffic related hazards in
light of the other demands for police protection at the time of the proposed event;
(14) The applicant has not complied or cannot comply with applicable licensure requirements,
ordinances or regulations concerning the sale or offering for sale any goods or services;
(15) The use or activity intended by the applicant is prohibited by law; and/or
(16) For non-first amendment protected public assemblies or parades, the following criteria
shall also apply:
(a) The cultural and/or educational significance of the event;
(b) The extent to which the event contributes to the economic revitalization and business
development of the town;
(c) The impact and/or cost of the event to town support services;
(d) The impact of the event to the public health, safety and welfare;
36 Williamston - General Regulations
(e) The impact of the event on business and resident populations within or adjacent to
the proposed event site;
(f) The evaluation of any previous event produced by the event organizer with regard to
planning, quality, public safety and payment of invoices; and
(g) The frequency and timing of the event or similar events. Unless subject to division
(C)(16) above, nothing in this section shall authorize the Permit Official to deny a permit based upon
political, social or religious grounds or reasons, or based upon the content of the views expressed. The
Permit Official may attach reasonable conditions to any permit approval. Violation of these conditions
shall be reason for immediate revocation of the permit.
(D) Costs and fees. The applicant shall be responsible for hiring and paying off-duty law
enforcement officers, or reimbursing the town for the costs of providing on-duty law enforcement
officers, to appropriately police street closures. For festivals, the applicant shall be additionally
responsible for hiring and paying off-duty law enforcement officers, or reimbursing the town for the
costs of providing on-duty law enforcement officers, to provide internal festival security and for hiring
and paying necessary emergency medical technicians. The Permit Official shall determine the number
of officers needed to appropriately police street closures and for internal security, and the number of
emergency medical technicians needed, and the time when the services shall commence and end,
taking into consideration the following:
(1) The proposed location of the special event or route of the parade;
(2) The time of day that the public assembly or parade is to take place;
(3) The date and day of the week proposed;
(4) The general traffic conditions in the area requested, both vehicular and pedestrian. Special
attention is given to the rerouting of the vehicles or pedestrians normally using the requested area;
(5) The number of marked and unmarked intersections along the route requested together
with traffic control devices present;
(6) If traffic must be completely rerouted from the area, then the number of marked and
unmarked intersections and the traffic control devices are to be taken into consideration;
(7) The estimated number of participants;
(8) The estimated number of viewers;
(9) The nature, composition, format and configuration of the special event or parade;
(10) The anticipated weather conditions;
Public Assemblies 37
(11) The estimated time for the special event or parade; and
(12) For festivals, whether alcohol will be served, live music offered or retail sales stations
provided and the number and location of alcohol service stands, music stages and retail stands. In
addition, the applicant shall reimburse the town for the costs of providing street and sidewalk cleaning,
trash receptacle placement, trash removal and trash disposal. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town
may provide the services required by this section at no cost, or at a reduced cost, to the applicant should
the town desire to provide the support to the public assembly or parade. The action is not a waiver of a
regulatory requirement based upon political, social or religious grounds or reasons, or based upon the
content of the views expressed, but instead is an affirmative act of town association or speech.
(E) Time and notice of decision. The Permit Official shall approve or deny an application within
20 days of receipt. A notice of denial shall clearly set forth the grounds upon which the permit was
denied and, where feasible, shall contain a proposal for measures by which the applicant may cure any
defects in the application or otherwise procure a permit. Where an application is denied because the
proposed event would conflict with another event that has or will be approved, the Permit Official shall
propose an alternative place, if available for the same time, or an alternative time, if available for the
same place.
(F) Appeals. An applicant may appeal the denial of an application in writing within ten days after
notice of the denial has been received. As soon as practicable, the Appeals Board shall hold a quasijudicial
hearing on whether to issue the permit or uphold the denial. The applicant shall have the right
to present evidence at the hearing. The decision to issue or uphold the denial shall be based solely on
the approval criteria set forth in this section. The Appeals Board shall render a decision on the appeal
within five business days after the date of the hearing. In the event that the purpose of the proposed
event is a spontaneous response to a current event, or where other good and compelling causes are
shown, the Appeals Board shall reasonably attempt to conduct the hearing and render a decision on the
appeal as expeditiously as is practicable.
(G) Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this section or to
violate any term or condition of a permit issued pursuant to this section.
(Ord. passed 6-20-2005) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.03 PUBLIC ASSEMBLY AND PARADE REGULATIONS.
(A) It shall be unlawful to unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with a public
assembly or parade, or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in the public assembly
or parade.
(B) It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle to drive between vehicles or persons
comprising a parade when the vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a
parade.
38 Williamston - General Regulations
(C) Spectators of a public assembly or parade and persons attending or participating in a public
assembly or parade picketing shall be subject to all applicable local, state and federal laws including,
but not limited to G.S. § 14-277.2 (Weapons).
(D) Nothing in this section prohibits a law enforcement officer from issuing a command to
disperse in accordance with G.S. § 14-288.5, in the event of a riot or disorderly conduct by an
assemblage of three or more persons.
(Ord. passed 6-20-2005) Penalty, see § 10.99
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
110. LICENSES
111. TAXICABS
112. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
113. PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
114. AMUSEMENTS
115. CLOSING OUT OR DISTRESS SALES
1
2 Williamston - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 110: LICENSES
Section
General Provisions
110.001 Definitions
110.002 Construction of chapter
110.003 Privilege License Ordinance
Levy
110.015 Levy of tax
110.016 Who must pay tax
110.017 Period of license; due date
110.018 Proration of tax
110.019 Refunds
110.020 Separate businesses
110.021 Exemptions
Licenses
110.035 Application
110.036 Reasons for refusal or revocation
110.037 Unqualified applicants; right to a conference
110.038 Tax Collector to issue license
110.039 Amount of tax disputed
110.040 Revocation
110.041 Form and contents of license
110.042 Assignments
110.043 Changes in business conducted by licensee
110.044 Tax Collector to furnish duplicates
110.045 Record of conferences
110.046 Providing notice to an applicant or licensee
Enforcement and Collection
110.060 Duty to determine whether tax due
110.061 Tax Collector to investigate
110.062 Duty to keep books
110.063 Duty to post license
3
4 Williamston - Business Regulations
110.064 Notice of deficiency
110.065 Request for a conference
110.066 Deficiency to become final
110.067 Conference held
110.068 Collection of deficiency
110.069 Enforcement
Electronic Video Games
110.080 Privilege license tax for electronic gaming operations
Statutory reference:
For state law as to authority of town to impose privilege license tax, see G.S. § 160A-211
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.001 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or
requires a different meaning.
BUSINESS.
(1) Includes each trade, occupation, profession, business and franchise taxed under this
chapter.
(2) A BUSINESS is “seasonal” in nature when it is conducted for profit six months out of the
year or less.
PERSON. Any individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary, corporation, unincorporated
association, partnership, sole proprietorship, company, firm or other legal entity.
(1992 Code, § 15-1)
§ 110.002 CONSTRUCTION OF CHAPTER.
(A) This chapter is enacted for revenue purposes only.
(B) Therefore it should be construed to require payment of the maximum tax permitted under its
terms.
2011 S-2
Licenses 5
(C) In addition, issuance of a license pursuant to this chapter does not excuse a licensee from
compliance with any other applicable ordinance or statute.
(D) This chapter does not prevent the town from imposing license taxes on additional businesses
from increasing or decreasing the amount of any license tax, or from regulating any business taxed.
(1992 Code, § 15-2)
§ 110.003 PRIVILEGE LICENSE ORDINANCE.
(A) The privilege license schedule is amended so that now the privilege license tax for restaurants
with seating capacity for fewer than five customers shall be $42.50.
(B) The privilege license schedule is amended to eliminate the distinction between in-town
laundries and out-of-town laundries and to tax both at the rate of $25.
(Ord. passed 7-1-1992)
LEVY
§ 110.015 LEVY OF TAX.
An annual privilege license tax is hereby levied on each business conducted within this town listed
in the privilege license schedule in the amount set forth in the schedule as may be filed in the offices of
the Town Clerk and Tax Collector amended from time to time.
(1992 Code, § 15-3)
§ 110.016 WHO MUST PAY TAX.
(A) Each person who conducts a business within the town is subject to this chapter.
(B) A person CONDUCTS BUSINESS when he or she engages in one act of business taxed under
this chapter.
(C) He or she conducts the business WITHIN THE TOWN if he or she maintain a business
location within the town, or if either personally or through agents, he or she:
(1) Solicits business within the town limit; or
(2) Picks up or delivers goods or delivers services within the town limit.
(1992 Code, § 15-4)
6 Williamston - Business Regulations
§ 110.017 PERIOD OF LICENSE; DUE DATE.
Unless specified otherwise herein, a license issued pursuant to this chapter is good for the 12
month period beginning July 1 and ending June 30. The tax is due on July 1 of each year. However, if a
person begins a business after July 1 of a year, the tax for that year is due before the business is begun.
(1992 Code, § 15-5)
§ 110.018 PRORATION OF TAX.
If a business is begun after January 31 and before July 1, the amount of tax due is half the
amount otherwise due. If a business is seasonal in nature and if the amount of tax is not based on gross
receipts, the amount of tax due is half the amount otherwise due.
(1992 Code, § 15-6)
§ 110.019 REFUNDS.
If for any reason a licensee discontinues his or her business during the license year, he or she is
not entitled to a refund.
(1992 Code, § 15-7)
§ 110.020 SEPARATE BUSINESSES.
A separate license is required and a separate privilege license tax must be paid for each place of
business unless two or more places of business under common ownership, each conducting a business
subject to the name tax under this chapter, communicate directly with and open into each other and are
operated as a unit. Once a business obtains a general license, such as a retail merchants license or a
chain store license (except for beer and wine sales), it is not required herein that it obtain an additional
license for each taxable activity conducted at the business.
(1992 Code, § 15-8)
§ 110.021 EXEMPTIONS.
(A) Generally. Except as otherwise provided in this section or by state law, no person is exempt
from the payment of a privilege license tax levied by this chapter.
(B) Charitable organizations. A person who operates a business for a religious, educational,
civic, patriotic, charitable or fraternal purpose, when the entire gross income of the business is used for
a purpose, is exempt from paying any privilege license tax levied by this chapter.
Licenses 7
(C) Blind persons. Blind persons are exempt from paying any privilege license tax levied by this
chapter to the extent provided by G.S. § 105-41.
(1992 Code, § 15-9)
LICENSES
§ 110.035 APPLICATION.
Unless first contacted by the Tax Collector, a person shall apply to the Tax Collector for each
license required by this chapter no less than 30 days before the date the tax is due. The application,
which shall be submitted on forms provided by the Tax Collector, shall contain:
(A) The name of the applicant and whether he, she or it is an individual, a partnership, a
corporation or some other entity;
(B) The nature of the business;
(C) Where the business is conducted;
(D) An address to which may be mailed notice and statements required by this chapter;
(E) Whether the business is one regulated by a state occupational licensing board subject to G.S.
Chapter 93B, and if so, the aerial number of the state license the applicant currently holds; and
(F) Any other information the Tax Collector determines to be necessary to compute the amount of
tax due.
(1992 Code, § 15-10)
§ 110.036 REASONS FOR REFUSAL OR REVOCATION.
The Tax Collector shall refuse to issue a license or shall revoke a license for either of the following
reasons:
(A) The applicant misrepresents a fact relevant to the amount of tax due or his or her
qualifications for a license; and
(B) The applicant refuses to provide information necessary to compute the amount of tax due.
(1992 Code, § 15-11)
8 Williamston - Business Regulations
§ 110.037 UNQUALIFIED APPLICANTS; RIGHT TO A CONFERENCE.
(A) If the Tax Collector believes that a reason exists for refusing a license under § 110.036 of this
chapter, he or she shall refuse to accept payment of the tax and shall not issue the license. At the
applicant’s request, the Tax Collector shall, pursuant to § 110.046, give him or her a written statement
of the reason for refusing the license. The applicant may, within ten days after the day he or she
receives this statement, request a conference to discuss the refusal. In his or her request, he or she shall
specify why his or her application for a license should not be refused. The Tax Collector shall arrange
the conferences within a reasonable time.
(B) If the Tax Collector refuses to issue a license, the applicant may reapply for a license at any
time thereafter. If the reason for which the application was refused no longer exists, and if no other
reason exists for refusing to issue a license, the Tax Collector shall issue the license pursuant to §
110.038.
(1992 Code, § 15-12)
§ 110.038 TAX COLLECTOR TO ISSUE LICENSE.
If the Tax Collector believes that no reason exists for refusal of a license under § 110.036, he or
she shall determine the amount of tax due and notify the applicant of that amount. The Tax Collector
shall not issue a license until the tax is paid.
(1992 Code, § 15-13)
§ 110.039 AMOUNT OF TAX DISPUTED.
If the applicant disputes the amount the Tax Collector determines to be due, he or she may either
refuse to pay and request a conference with the Tax Collector to discuss the determination, or pay the
amount and request a conference to discuss his or her right for a refund. If a conference is requested,
the Tax Collector shall arrange it within a reasonable time.
(1992 Code, § 15-14)
§ 110.040 REVOCATION.
(A) The Tax Collector shall revoke a license if a reason exists to revoke it as set forth in §
110.036. Before the Tax Collector may revoke a license, he or she shall give the licensee written notice
of the grounds for revocation, pursuant to § 110.046. The licensee may, within ten days after the day on
which notice is served, request a conference with the Tax Collector in writing. The request shall
specify the reasons why the license should not be revoked. The Tax Collector shall arrange the
conference within a reasonable time.
Licenses 9
(B) If the licensee fails to request a conference within ten days after the day on which notice
is served, the Tax Collector shall revoke the license. If the licensee requests a conference, the Tax
Collector may not revoke the license until after the conference.
(C) If the Tax Collector revokes a licence, the former licensee may apply for a new license
at any time thereafter. If the reason for which the license was revoked no longer exists and if no other
reason exists for refusing to issue a license, the Tax Collector shall issue the license pursuant to §
110.038.
(1992 Code, § 15-15)
§ 110.041 FORM AND CONTENTS OF LICENSE.
A license shall show the name of the person licensed, the place where the business is conducted
(if it is to be conducted at one place), the nature of the business licensed, the period for which the
license is issued and the amount of tax paid. In addition, if a machine is licensed, the license shall show
the identity of the machine. The Tax Collector shall keep a copy of each license issued.
(1992 Code, § 15-16)
§ 110.042 ASSIGNMENTS.
A license may be assigned if:
(A) A business licensed under this chapter and carried on at a fixed place is sold as a unit to
any person; and
(B) The purchaser is to carry on the same business at the same place. Such a change shall be
reported to the Tax Collector pursuant to § 110.043. Otherwise, each license issued under this chapter
is a personal privilege and is not assignable.
(1992 Code, § 15-17)
§ 110.043 CHANGES IN BUSINESS CONDUCTED BY LICENSEE.
A licensee, or his or her assignee, shall report a change in the information contained in the license
application to the Tax Collector within ten days after the change occurs. If information shown on the
license itself is affected thereby, the licensee, or his or her assignee, shall surrender the license to the
Tax Collector when reporting the change.
(A) Changes affecting the amount of tax due. If there are no reasons for revoking the license
under § 110.036 and the change results in the imposition of a separate or additional tax, the Tax
Collector shall reissue a license reflecting the change upon payment of the separate or additional tax.
10 Williamston - Business Regulations
(B) Changes not affecting the amount of tax due. If there are no reasons for revoking the license
under § 110.036 and the change does not result in an imposition of a separate or additional tax, the Tax
Collector shall reissue a license reflecting the change.
(C) Change requiring refusal of a licensee. If there is reason for revoking the license under §
110.036, the Tax Collector shall refuse to reissue a license and shall instead begin proceedings to
revoke the license pursuant to § 110.040.
(1992 Code, § 15-18)
§ 110.044 TAX COLLECTOR TO FURNISH DUPLICATES.
Upon satisfactory proof that a license has been lost or destroyed, the Tax Collector shall furnish a
duplicate for a fee of $5.
(1992 Code, § 15-19)
§ 110.045 RECORD OF CONFERENCES.
The Tax Collector shall maintain, for three years, a record of each conference held pursuant to this
subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 15-20)
§ 110.046 PROVIDING NOTICE TO AN APPLICANT OR LICENSEE.
Whenever this chapter requires the Tax Collector to give a written statement or notice to an
applicant or a licensee, he or she may do so in one of three ways:
(A) By personally delivering the statement or notice to the applicant or licensee;
(B) By mailing the statement or notice by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the address specified for that purpose in the license application; and
(C) By causing the statement or notice to be served on the applicant or licensee in accordance with
the procedures for service of process under Rule 4, North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure.
(1992 Code, § 15-21)
Licenses 11
ENFORCEMENT AND COLLECTION
§ 110.060 DUTY TO DETERMINE WHETHER TAX DUE.
Each person has the duty to determine whether the business he or she conducts is taxed under this
chapter and if so, whether the tax has been paid for the current tax year.
(1992 Code, § 15-22)
§ 110.061 TAX COLLECTOR TO INVESTIGATE.
If the Tax Collector has reason to believe that a person is conducting a business in the town in
violation of this chapter, he or she shall conduct an investigation to determine the person’s tax liability.
(1992 Code, § 15-23)
§ 110.062 DUTY TO KEEP BOOKS.
(A) Each person who conducts a business taxed under this chapter shall keep all records and books
necessary to compute his or her tax liability.
(B) If a person fails to keep books and records as required, the Tax Collector shall make his or her
own determination of that person’s tax liability from the information available to him or her.
(1992 Code, § 15-24)
§ 110.063 DUTY TO POST LICENSE.
(A) A licensee shall post his or her license or licenses conspicuously in the place of business
licensed. If he or she has no regular place of business, the license must be kept where it may be
inspected at all times by the proper town officials.
(B) If a machine is licensed, the license shall be affixed to the machine.
(1992 Code, § 15-26)
§ 110.064 NOTICE OF DEFICIENCY.
If the Tax Collector determines that a person has not paid the full amount of tax due under this
chapter, either for the current license year or for a prior license year, he or she shall give the person
written notice of the deficiency, pursuant to § 110.046. The notice of deficiency shall specify the total
12 Williamston - Business Regulations
amount of tax due, the section of this chapter upon which the tax is based, the amount of tax paid, any
interest due, the balance owed, the manner and time period in which the person may respond to the
notice of the deficiency and the consequences to the person if he or she fails to respond as specified.
(1992 Code, § 15-27)
§ 110.065 REQUEST FOR A CONFERENCE.
The person may, within ten days after the day on which notice is served, request a conference in
writing. The request shall specify the person’s objections to the notice of deficiency. By way of
illustration but not limitation, a person who receives notice of a deficiency may object on the following
grounds:
(A) The tax due has already been paid;
(B) The Tax Collector miscalculated the amount of tax due;
(C) The Tax Collector based his or her calculation on incorrect or insufficient information
concerning either the nature or the amount of business conducted; and
(D) The Tax Collector based his or her determination on an erroneous interpretation of a
section of this chapter that establishes category of business subject to a particular tax.
(1992 Code, § 15-28)
§ 110.066 DEFICIENCY TO BECOME FINAL.
If the taxpayer fails to requests a conference under § 110.065, the deficiency becomes final and
the Tax Collector shall proceed to collect the deficiency.
(1992 Code, § 15-29)
§ 110.067 CONFERENCE HELD.
If the taxpayer requests a conference, the Tax Collector shall not proceed to collect the deficiency
until he or she hears the taxpayer’s objections and determines that the deficiency should become final.
The Tax Collector shall maintain a record of each conference held.
(1992 Code, § 15-30)
§ 110.068 COLLECTION OF DEFICIENCY.
(A) The Tax Collector may use any of the following methods to collect a deficiency:
(1) Criminal prosecution in accordance with § 110.069(A);
Licenses 13
(2) Equitable relief in accordance with § 110.069(B);
(3) The remedies of levy, sale, attachment and garnishment, in accordance with G.S. § 160A-
207; and
(4) The remedies of levy and sale of real and personal property of the taxpayer within the
town in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 105-242.
(B) Any person who commences or continues to conduct a business taxed under this chapter
without payment of the tax is liable for the additional tax of 5% each 30 days, imposed by G.S. § 105-
236.
(1992 Code, § 15-31)
§ 110.069 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) Criminal remedies. Conducting business within the town without having paid the privilege
license tax imposed by this chapter, without a valid license issued pursuant to this chapter or without
posting a license pursuant to § 110.063, is a misdemeanor punishable as provided in G.S. § 105-236.
Each day that a person conducts business in violation of this chapter is a separate offense. Payment of a
fine imposed in violation of proceedings pursuant to this section does not relieve a person of his or her
liability for taxes imposed under this chapter.
(B) Equitable remedies. In addition to the criminal remedies set forth in division (A) above and
pursuant to G.S. § 160A-175(d), the town may seek an injunction against any person who conducts a
business in violation of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 15-32)
ELECTRONIC VIDEO GAMES
§ 110.080 PRIVILEGE LICENSE TAX FOR ELECTRONIC GAMING OPERATIONS.
(A) For the purposes of this section, the term ELECTRONIC GAMING OPERATION means the
following: A business enterprise, whether as a principal or accessory use where persons utilize
electronic machines, including but not limited to computers and gaming terminals, to conduct games of
chance, including sweepstakes, where cash, merchandise, or other items of value are redeemed or
otherwise distributed, whether or not value of such distribution is determined by electronic games
played or by predetermined odds. This term includes but is not limited to internet cafes, internet
sweepstakes, beach sweepstakes or cybercafes. This does not include any lottery approved by the State
of North Carolina.
2011 S-2
14 Williamston - Business Regulations
(B) Each electronic gaming operation shall pay an annual privilege license tax of $500 for each
electronic gaming machine used as part of the electronic gaming operation. The tax shall be due on or
before the first day of the privilege license tax year defined in division (C) of this section.
(C) The privilege license tax year for purposes of this section shall be the calendar year, that from
January 1 through December 31 of each year, except that the first payment due under this section shall
be from July 1, 2010 to December 31, 2010 on a one-half pro rated basis, due upon the adoption of the
ordinance codified herein.
(Ord. 2010-18, passed 7-12-2010)
2011 S-2
CHAPTER 111: TAXICABS
Section
General Provisions
111.01 Definitions
111.02 Fare; rate; rate card
111.03 Receipt
111.04 Refusal of passenger to pay
111.05 Solicitation, acceptance and discharge of passengers
111.06 Cruising
111.07 Additional passengers
111.08 Restriction on number of passengers
111.09 Refusal to carry orderly passenger prohibited
111.10 Compliance with state and local rules and regulations
111.11 Inspection; maintenance
111.12 Designation of vehicles as taxicab
111.13 Limitation on number of taxis
Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity
111.25 Required
111.26 Application; contents
111.27 Public hearing
111.28 Issuance; qualification generally
111.29 Contingent on proof of financial responsibility
111.30 Payment of license fees
111.31 Transfer
111.32 Suspension and revocation
Driver’s Licenses
111.50 Required
111.51 Application; contents
111.52 Fee
111.53 Investigation of applicant
111.54 Issuance
111.55 Term
15
16 Williamston - Business Regulations
111.56 Display
111.57 Suspension and revocation
111.99 Penalty
Statutory reference:
As to authority to license and regulate all vehicles operated for hire in town, see G.S. § 160A-304
As to proof of financial responsibility of taxicab driver, see G.S. § 20-280
For state law as to authority of town to license, regulate and control drivers and operators
of taxicabs, see G.S. § 20-37
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or
requires a different meaning.
CERTIFICATE. A certificate of public convenience and necessity, issued by the Town Board of
Commissioners, authorizing the holder thereof to conduct a taxicab business in the town.
CRUISING. The driving of a taxicab on the streets, alleys or public places of the town in search
of, or soliciting prospective passengers for hire.
DRIVER’S LICENSE. The permission granted by the Chief of Police to a person to drive a
taxicab upon the streets of the town.
HOLDER. A person to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity has been issued.
MANIFEST. A daily record prepared by a taxicab driver or dispatcher of all trips made by each
driver of the holder showing time and place of origin, destination, number of passengers and the
amount of fare for each trip.
RATE CARD. A card issued by the Chief of Police for display in each taxicab which contains the
rates of fare then in force.
TAXICAB. A motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire,
having a seating capacity of not more than six passengers as prescribed by G.S. § 62-260(2) and not
operated on a fixed route.
Taxicabs 17
WAITING TIME. The time when a taxicab is not in motion from the time of acceptance of a
passenger or passengers to the time of discharge, but does not include any time that the taxicab is not in
motion if due to any cause other than the request, act or fault of the passenger or passengers.
(1992 Code, § 27-1)
§ 111.02 FARE; RATE; RATE CARD.
(A) No owner or driver of a taxicab shall charge a sum for the use of a taxicab within the
corporate limits of the town or within a five mile radius in excess of the rates approved by the Town
Board of Commissioners, a copy of which will be furnished by the Police Department to each holder
upon request.
(B) The rate card is to be conspicuously displayed inside the taxicab in such a place as to be
in full view of the passengers occupying the rear seat.
(1992 Code, § 27-2)
§ 111.03 RECEIPT.
The driver of any taxicab shall, upon demand by any passenger, render to the passenger a
receipt for the amount charged, on which shall be the name of the owner, license number, amount of
charges and the date of the transaction.
(1992 Code, § 27-3)
§ 111.04 REFUSAL OF PASSENGER TO PAY.
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any of the vehicles
mentioned in this chapter after having hired the same, and it shall be unlawful for any person to hire
any vehicle herein defined with intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of the
service.
(1992 Code, § 27-4) Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.05 SOLICITATION, ACCEPTANCE AND DISCHARGE OF PASSENGERS.
(A) No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or annoying tone of voice or by sign or in any
manner annoy any person or obstruct the movement of any person for the purpose of soliciting
passengers.
(B) No driver shall receive or discharge passengers except on the right-hand sidewalk or the
extreme right-hand side of the roadway, and shall at no time receive or discharge passengers on the
traveled portion or traffic lane of any street or roadway.
(1992 Code, § 27-5) Penalty, see § 111.99
18 Williamston - Business Regulations
§ 111.06 CRUISING.
No driver shall cruise in search of passengers except in the areas and at the time as shall be
designated by the Town Board of Commissioners. The areas and times shall only be designated when
the Board of Commissioners determines that taxicab cruising would not congest traffic or be dangerous
to pedestrians and other vehicles.
(1992 Code, § 27-6) Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.07 ADDITIONAL PASSENGERS.
No driver shall permit any other person to occupy or ride in the taxicab, unless the person or
persons first occupying and employing the taxicab shall consent to the acceptance of an additional
passenger or passengers.
(1992 Code, § 27-7) Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.08 RESTRICTION ON NUMBER OF PASSENGERS.
No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a taxicab than as seated in the license for the
vehicle issued by the Police Department. A child in arms shall not be counted as a passenger.
(1992 Code, § 27-8) Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.09 REFUSAL TO CARRY ORDERLY PASSENGER PROHIBITED.
(A) No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person or persons upon request, unless
previously engaged, unable or forbidden by the provisions of this chapter to do so.
(B) The holder of a certificate of public convenience shall be responsible for maintaining a
manifest for each vehicle. The manifest shall be made available for inspection at reasonable times by
the Chief of Police or Town Administrator.
(1992 Code, § 27-9) (Ord. passed 8-4-1997) Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.10 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND LOCAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
Vehicles used as taxicabs must be properly licensed. Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle
under the provisions of this chapter, the vehicle shall be thoroughly examined by the Police
Department and found to comply with all rules and regulations that are now or later prescribed by the
state or the town. These rules and regulations shall be promulgated to provide safe transportation and
the safety devices as the state and the town may require.
(1992 Code, § 27-26)
Taxicabs 19
§ 111.11 INSPECTION; MAINTENANCE.
(A) Every vehicle operating under this chapter shall be periodically inspected by the Police
Department quarterly before January 16, April 15, July 16 and October 16 to insure the continued
maintenance of safe operating conditions and sanitary conditions.
(B) Vehicles must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(1992 Code, § 27-27)
§ 111.12 DESIGNATION OF VEHICLES AS TAXICAB.
Each taxicab shall bear on the outside of each side of the vehicle a sign of the proportions so as to
be legible from a distance of 50 feet. The sign is to contain the company name, the word taxi, the name
of the holder and the telephone number of the company.
(1992 Code, § 27-28)
§ 111.13 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF TAXIS.
The number of taxi franchises shall be as from time to time determined by the Board of
Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 7-6-1992)
CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY
§ 111.25 REQUIRED.
No person shall operate, or permit to be operated, a taxicab owned or controlled by him or her as a
vehicle for hire upon the streets of the town without having first obtained a certificate of public
convenience and necessity from the Board of Commissioners.
(1992 Code, § 27-10) Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.26 APPLICATION; CONTENTS.
An application for a certificate shall be filed with the Town Administrator upon forms provided by
the town, and the applicant shall have verified, under oath, the following information:
(A) The name and address of the applicant;
(B) The financial status of the applicant;
20 Williamston - Business Regulations
(C) The experience of the applicant in transporting passengers;
(D) The number of vehicles to be operated by the applicant;
(E) A full and accurate statement as to the criminal record of the applicant;
(F) The proposed color scheme or insignia to be used on the vehicle or vehicle; or
(G) The further information as the Board of Commissioners may require.
(1992 Code, § 27-11)
§ 111.27 PUBLIC HEARING.
Upon filing of an application, the Town Administrator shall fix a time and place for a public
hearing thereon. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the applicant and to all persons to whom
certificates have been theretofore issued. Due notice shall be given to the general public by posting a
notice of the hearing in the Town Hall. Any interested person may file with the Town Administrator a
memorandum in support of or opposition to the issuance of a certificate.
(1992 Code, § 27-12)
§ 111.28 ISSUANCE; QUALIFICATION GENERALLY.
(A) If the Town Board of Commissioners finds that further taxicab service is required by the
public convenience and necessity and that the applicant is properly qualified to operate a taxicab
business, certificate may be issued.
(B) The certificate shall be in effect from the time of issuance until midnight on the
following January 31 at which time it will be subject to renewal for one year periods from February 1
to January 31 of each succeeding year.
(1992 Code, § 27-13) (Ord. passed 8-4-1997)
§ 111.29 CONTINGENT ON PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
No certificate shall be issued or continued until and unless the person or holder has complied or
continues to comply with the provisions of G.S. § 20-280 relating to financial responsibility as now
written or hereafter amended.
(1992 Code, § 27-14)
Taxicabs 21
§ 111.30 PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEES.
No certificate shall be issued or continued in effect unless the holder thereof has paid an annual
license fee in an amount as from time to time set by the Town Board for the right to engage in the
business of taxicab services. That annual license fee in an amount as from time to time set by the Town
Board shall cover the use of one vehicle and an additional $15 shall be paid for each additional vehicle
operated under the issued certificate. The fees shall be due and paid yearly in advance on or before
February 1 of the yearly period of the certificate.
(1992 Code, § 27-15) (Ord. passed 8-4-1997)
§ 111.31 TRANSFER.
No certificate of public convenience and necessity may be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise
transferred without the consent of the Town Board of Commissioners.
(1992 Code, § 27-16)
§ 111.32 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
A certificate issued under the provisions of this subchapter may be revoked or suspended by the
Town Board of Commissioners if the holder thereof has:
(A) Violated any of the provisions of this subchapter, including the failure to pay any fee required
by this chapter;
(B) Discontinued operations for a period of more than 30 days without the permission of the
Board of Commissioners;
(C) Has violated any of the ordinances of the town or the laws of the state or the United States, the
violations of which reflect unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to offer public transportation; and
(D) No revocation or suspension shall occur until reasonable notice and an opportunity for hearing
has been given to the holder.
(1992 Code, § 27-17) (Ord. passed 8-4-1997)
22 Williamston - Business Regulations
DRIVER’S LICENSES
§ 111.50 REQUIRED.
No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the town, person who owns or
controls a taxicab shall permit it to be so driven and no taxicab licensed by the town shall be driven at
any time for hire, unless the driver of the taxicab shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a
taxicab driver’s license issued under the provisions of this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 27-18) Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.51 APPLICATION; CONTENTS.
An application for a driver’s license shall be filed with the Chief of Police on forms provided by
the town which shall contain the following information:
(A) The names and addresses of five residents of the town for the purpose of character references;
(B) The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers;
(C) The educational background of the applicant;
(D) A concise history of the applicant’s employment;
(E) All information regarding state driver’s license and chauffeur’s license; and
(F) A reliable statement as the applicant’s physical and mental condition. (This may be
required to be substantiated by reputable physician’s examination, in the discretion of the Chief of
Police.)
(1992 Code, § 27-19)
§ 111.52 FEE.
A fee of in an amount as from time to time set by the Town Board for processing the
application for a taxicab driver’s license shall be paid by the driver at the time of application.
(1992 Code, § 27-20) (Ord. passed 8-4-1997)
2009 S-1 Repl.
Taxicabs 23
§ 111.53 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.
The Chief of Police shall be responsible for conducting an investigation of the applicant’s
background including all information furnished by the applicant, and a copy of the investigation report
shall be attached to the application for the consideration of the Board of Commissioners, along with the
Chief of Police’s recommendation.
(1992 Code, § 27-21)
§ 111.54 ISSUANCE.
Upon approval of an application for a taxicab driver’s license, the Chief of Police shall issue a
license to the applicant which will bear the name, address, color, age, date of birth, fingerprint,
photograph and signature of the applicant.
(1992 Code, § 27-22)
§ 111.55 TERM.
The license shall be in effect from time to time of issuance until midnight on the following January
31, at which time it will be subject to renewal of one year periods from February 1 through January 31
of each succeeding year. An annual license fee in an amount as from time to time set by the Town
Board shall be due in advance on or before February 1 of the yearly licensing period.
(1992 Code, § 27-23) (Ord. passed 8-4-1997)
§ 111.56 DISPLAY.
Every driver licensed under this subchapter shall post his or her driver’s license in such a place as
to be in full view of all passengers while the driver is operating the taxicab.
(1992 Code, § 27-24)
§ 111.57 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
(A) Upon reasonable notice given and an opportunity for a hearing, the Chief of Police may
suspend, for up to 60 days, any driver’s license issued under this chapter for failure to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, the ordinances of the Town of Williamston and the laws of the State of
North Carolina relating to the fitness of the licensee to provide public transportation and to the
regulation of public transportation. The suspension may be appealed to the Town Administrator within
ten days of the notice of suspension.
(B) Upon reasonable notice given and an opportunity for a hearing, the Town Administrator may
revoke any driver’s license issued under this chapter for failure to comply with the provisions of this
2009 S-1 Repl.
24 Williamston - Business Regulations
chapter, the ordinances of the Town of Williamston and the laws of North Carolina relating to the
fitness of the licensee to provide public transportation and to the regulation of public transportation.
The revocation or the affirmance of any suspension by the Town Administrator may be appealed to the
Town Board of Commissioners within ten days of the notice of revocation or suspension.
(1992 Code, § 27-25) (Ord. passed 8-4-1997)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed
shall be subject to § 10.99.
(B) The fine for violation for provisions of § 111.13 may exceed $50, up to a maximum of $500,
as allowed by G.S. § 14-4.
(Ord. passed 7-6-1992)
2009 S-1 Repl.
CHAPTER 112: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
112.01 Regulating the consumption and possession of malt beverages and unfortified wine
§ 112.01 REGULATING THE CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF MALT BEVERAGES
AND UNFORTIFIED WINE.
(A) Pursuant to G.S. § 18B-300, no person (not an occupant of a motor vehicle) shall consume
malt beverages and unfortified wine on the public streets of the Town of Williamston or on property
owned, occupied or controlled by the Town of Williamston.
(B) No person (not an occupant of a motor vehicle) shall possess open containers of malt
beverages and unfortified wine on the public streets of the Town of Williamston or on property owned,
occupied or controlled by the Town of Williamston.
(C) No person shall possess malt beverages and unfortified wine on the public streets, alleys or
parking lots of the Town of Williamston which are temporarily closed to regular traffic for special
events. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and subject to a fine
of up to $50 for each violation.
(Ord. passed 9-22-1997) Penalty, see § 10.99
25
26 Williamston - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 113: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
113.01 Permitting of activities
113.02 Application for permit
113.03 Regulations controlling door-to-door activities
Statutory reference:
For state law as to power of town to regulate solicitation campaigns, itinerant merchants,
peddlers and the like, see G.S. § 160A-178
§ 113.01 PERMITTING OF ACTIVITIES.
Prior to conducting any residential door-to-door sales or solicitation, an itinerant merchant,
salesperson, promoter, peddler or other person must obtain from the Town Administrator a permit to do
so.
(1992 Code, § 21-1)
§ 113.02 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
The application for a permit to sell or solicit door-to-door shall contain the following information:
(A) Evidence that all applicable licenses have been purchased, including those required by the
Town of Williamston under Chapter 110 of this code of ordinances;
(B) Name, address, phone number and driver’s license number of the salesperson;
(C) Identification of the company or organization the salesperson or solicitor will be promoting,
and a description of any products or services sold;
(D) Signature of the applicant, signifying knowledge of all regulations covering his or her activity;
and
(E) The applicant must pay an application processing fee as set out in the duly adopted schedule
of fees of the Town of Williamston.
(1992 Code, § 21-2)
27
28 Williamston - Business Regulations
§ 113.03 REGULATIONS CONTROLLING DOOR-TO-DOOR ACTIVITIES.
The following regulations shall apply to all residential door-to-door sales and solicitations:
(A) No door-to-door sales or solicitations may take place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m; and
(B) The salesperson or solicitor must display the Town of Williamston permit at a residence prior
to entering that residence.
(1992 Code, § 21-3)
CHAPTER 114: AMUSEMENTS
Section
Poolrooms, Bowling Alleys and the Like
114.01 Betting prohibited
114.02 License required
114.03 Application
114.04 Bond
114.05 Fee
114.06 Investigation and approval
114.07 Assignment or transfer; changes of premises
114.08 Conducting of business on licensed premises other than that for which license issued
114.09 Duties of licensee and his or her employees
114.10 Revocation; authority
114.11 Process
Carnivals, Rides and the Like
114.30 Authorization required
114.31 Authority of Chief of Police to regulate
114.32 Fees
114.99 Penalty
POOLROOMS, BOWLING ALLEYS AND THE LIKE
§ 114.01 BETTING PROHIBITED.
No person shall bet upon any game played on any table or in any alley of any kind mentioned in §
114.02.
(1992 Code, § 3-1) Penalty, see § 114.99
29
30 Williamston - Business Regulations
§ 114.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall maintain or operate any pool or billiard table, bowling alley, video or electronic
game, or any other table or alley for any game or play, for which a charge is directly or indirectly
made, without a license therefore being issued by the Board of Commissioners. It is the intent of this
section that the tables and alleys, except those in private homes, shall not be operated unless licensed
by the Board.
(1992 Code, § 3-2) Penalty, see § 114.99
§ 114.03 APPLICATION.
Applications, for the licenses shall be made to the Board on forms prepared and furnished by the
Board Administrator. The forms shall be information necessary to enable the applications shall be
made to the Board on forms and shall be filed with the town so prepared as to furnish all Boards to act
intelligently on the applications.
(1992 Code, § 3-3)
§ 114.04 BOND.
Each application filed with the Board for the purpose of obtaining a license for any business, as
described in § 114.02, shall be accompanied by a bond in the sum as may be required by the Board and
with the sureties as may be approved by them and conditioned upon the faithful observance by the
licensee and his or her employees of each and every provision of this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 3-4)
§ 114.05 FEE.
Applications shall be accompanied by the license tax required by the License Tax Ordinance.
(1992 Code, § 3-5)
§ 114.06 INVESTIGATION AND APPROVAL.
(A) No license for the operation of a pool or billiard hall shall be issued by the town to any firm or
individual unless the applicant shall be investigated by the Police Department or some other
representative of the Board of Commissioners.
(B) A report of the investigation shall be made to the Town Administrator. Issuance of a license
shall not take place until approval is given by the Board of Commissioners.
(1992 Code, § 3-6)
Amusements 31
§ 114.07 ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER; CHANGES OF PREMISES.
No license issued hereunder shall be assignable or transferable. No license issued hereunder shall
cover any change of premises without the written permission of the Board.
(1992 Code, § 3-7)
§ 114.08 CONDUCTING OF BUSINESS ON LICENSED PREMISES OTHER THAN THAT
FOR WHICH LICENSE ISSUED.
No business other than that for which the license is issued shall be conducted on the premises of
any of the businesses named in § 114.02.
(1992 Code, § 3-8)
§ 114.09 DUTIES OF LICENSEE AND HIS OR HER EMPLOYEES.
No licensee nor employee of any license shall permit the licensed premises to become disorderly
or to otherwise violate laws of the State of North Carolina.
(1992 Code, § 3-9)
§ 114.10 REVOCATION; AUTHORITY.
The town shall have full authority to revoke a license issued under this chapter when it appears
that the operation of the business involves or results in the violation of federal or state law, or local
ordinance, or where it appears that the operator fails to exercise control over the activities on the
premises, or when it is deemed in the best interests of the health, safety, welfare or morals of the people
of the town.
(1992 Code, § 3-10)
§ 114.11 PROCESS.
(A) When the Town Administrator is informed of cause to revoke a license issued pursuant to this
chapter, he or she shall schedule and notify the licensee in writing of a hearing before the
Administrator concerning revocation of the license. At that hearing, the Administrator shall hear
evidence of cause to revoke or not to revoke the license. The Administrator shall render a decision in
writing within three days after the hearing. Both the notice of hearing and the written decision shall be
served upon the licensee in person or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested to the
licensee’s residence or place of business. In addition, written notice of the hearing shall be posted on
the premises.
32 Williamston - Business Regulations
(B) The licensee may appeal the Administrator’s decision to the Board of Commissioners by
written notice of appeal delivered to the Clerk to the Board within ten days after the Administrator
issues the written decision. The Board of Commissioners shall consider the appeal at its next regularly
scheduled meeting or may schedule a special meeting for that purpose prior to the next regularly
scheduled meeting in its discretion.
(C) During the pendency of the appeal, the business may continue to operate unless prohibited to
do so for some reason other than the action to revoke its license.
(D) In the event the license is revoked, the licensee shall be reimbursed the pro rata part of the
license fee theretofore collected by the town.
(1992 Code, § 3-11)
CARNIVALS, RIDES AND THE LIKE
§ 114.30 AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED.
Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-181, it shall be unlawful for any circus, carnival, itinerant show and
exhibition, ride or combination of rides to set up or do business in the town without first receiving
authorization from the Board of Commissioners. Any person desiring to set up and operate any of the
above listed forms of amusement shall first file an application with the Town Administrator who shall
then direct the Chief of Police or acting Chief of Police, or his or her representative, to investigate the
applicant. The Chief of Police, or acting Chief of Police, shall cause an investigation to be made and
shall recommend to the Board of Commissioners as to hours, days, number of days and location of
operation. Any operations under any approval issued by the Board of Commissioners shall thereafter
be supervised by the Chief of Police, or acting Chief of Police.
(1992 Code, § 3-12)
§ 114.31 AUTHORITY OF CHIEF OF POLICE TO REGULATE.
(A) Pursuant to the authority granted to the Chief of Police in § 114.30, the Chief of Police shall
supervise the operation of the circus, carnival, itinerant show or exhibition, ride or combination of
rides, and he or she shall have authority to stop the operations of all or any part of the activity upon a
finding that, in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare, it is necessary to do so. Such an
order of abatement by the Chief of Police shall last until the close of business that day and may be
renewed daily until the nuisance is abated. The operator of a business may appeal the order to the Clerk
to the Board. The Commissioners shall hold a hearing at which the operator may be heard and render a
decision on the appeal within three days after notice of appeal.
(B) The abatement of the subject activity shall continue under hearing on the appeal.
(1992 Code, § 3-13) Penalty, see § 114.99
Amusements 33
§ 114.32 FEES.
No activity listed in § 114.30 shall begin operation before paying to the town a fee of $150 to
defray costs of sanitation, water, fire and police protection.
(1992 Code, § 3-14)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
The fine for violation of the provisions of this chapter may exceed $50, up to a maximum of $500,
as allowed by G.S.§ 14-4.
(1992 Code, § 3-15)
34 Williamston - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 115: CLOSING OUT OR DISTRESS SALES
Section
115.01 State mandate
115.02 Definitions
§ 115.01 STATE MANDATE.
G.S. §§ 66-76 through 66-83 require all towns to provide for and issue licenses to those persons
conducting “closing out sales” and “distress sales”. The Town Clerk shall take applications under oath,
make a determination that the application is for the appropriate type of sale for issuance of a license
and issue a license upon payment of fees and accruing a bond, and meeting all other requirements set
forth in the General Statutes.
(1992 Code, § 15-36)
§ 115.02 DEFINITIONS.
As set out in G.S.§ 66-76, these terms shall be defined as follows.
CLOSING OUT SALES. All sales advertised, represented or held forth under the designation of
“going out of business”, discontinuance of business”, “selling out”, “liquidation”, “lost our lease”,
“must vacate”, “forced out”, “removal” or any other designation of like meaning.
DISTRESS SALES. All sales in which it is represented or implied that going out of business is
possible or anticipated, in which closing out is referred to in any way, or in which it is implied that
business conditions are so difficult that the seller is forced to conduct the sale.
(1992 Code, § 15-37)
35
2009 S-1 Repl.
36 Williamston - Business Regulations
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
130. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
131. MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
1
2 Williamston - General Offenses
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
Section
130.01 Signs prohibiting carrying firearms on certain municipal property
130.02 Curfew for minors
130.99 Penalty
§ 130.01 SIGNS PROHIBITING CARRYING FIREARMS ON CERTAIN MUNICIPAL
PROPERTY.
(A) Posting of signs required. The Town Administrator is hereby authorized and instructed to
post conspicuous signage at appropriate locations on or within each park and each building or portion
of a building owned, leased as lessee, operated, occupied, managed or controlled by the town, as well
as the appurtenant premises to the buildings, indicating that carrying a concealed handgun is prohibited
therein.
(B) Location of signs. Signs on buildings shall be visibly posted on the exterior of each entrance
by which the general public can access the building. The Town Administrator shall exercise discretion
in determining the number and appropriate location of signs to be placed on or within appurtenant
premises and parks.
(Ord. passed 12-4-1995)
§ 130.02 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
(A) The purpose of this section shall be to establish a curfew for minors in the Town of
Williamston.
(B) Unsupervised minors are particularly vulnerable to being induced to participate in drug abuse
and other criminal activities during the nighttime.
(C) Minors often lack the ability to make informed, mature decisions when faced with the
temptation to engage in criminal activities.
3
4 Williamston - General Offenses
(D) Also, it is important that parents be encouraged to take an active role in the proper upbringing
of their children. Furthermore, there is a need to protect businesses and other persons from vandalism
and other types of criminal activities frequently committed by minors.
(E) This section will assist parents in the difficult task of child rearing and the Town of
Williamston, in regulating those activities which are detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of its
citizens, and to the peace and dignity of the town.
(1) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context indicates or requires a different meaning.
CUSTODIAN. A parent, guardian, step-parent, foster parent, house parent or other
person legally responsible for the care and custody of a minor as defined by this section.
MINOR. Any person who has not reached his or her sixteenth birthday and is not
married, emancipated or a member of the armed services of the United States.
PUBLIC PLACE. Any place which is generally open to and used by the public, whether
it be publicly or privately owned, including but not limited to streets, highways, public vehicular areas,
places of business and amusement parks, and other common areas open to the public.
(2) Time limits. It is unlawful for any minor to be or remain upon any public place as defined
in this section within the Town of Williamston, or on any property or right-of-way belonging to the
town and located outside the corporate limits of the Town of Williamston between the hours of
midnight Friday and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday, between midnight Saturday and 5:00 a.m. on Sunday, or
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following morning on Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday or Friday. The times as set out herein shall mean Eastern Standard Time or
Daylight Savings Time, whichever is in effect.
(3) Exceptions. The restrictions provided by division (B) above shall not apply to a minor
who is:
(a) Accompanied by his or her custodian as defined in division (A) above;
(b) Accompanied by a responsible person over 18 years of age who has the written
permission of the minor's custodian to have the minor under his or her supervision;
(c) Traveling in connection with his or her employment, religious activity or attendance
at a function sponsored by the town or a school;
(d) Temporarily within the town or on town property while engaged in interstate travel;
or
(e) Attempting to obtain assistance in a medical emergency;
Offenses Against Public Morals 5
(f) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or
stop;
(g) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a nextdoor
neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence;
(h) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such
as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or
(i) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance
with state law.
(4) Responsibility of adults. It is unlawful for any custodian to allow or permit any minor to
be in or upon, or remain in or upon a public place within the Town of Williamston or any property or
right-of-way belonging to the town and located outside the corporate limits of the Town of
Williamston, within the curfew hours set by division (B) above, except as provided in division (C)
above.
(5) Responsibility. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation operating a place of
business or amusement to allow or permit any minor to be in or upon, or to remain in or upon, the
premises of the place of business or amusement within the curfew hours set by division (B) above,
except as provided in division (C) above.
(6) Enforcement.
(a) When a minor is found to be in violation of this section, a police officer will, by
telephone, check with the Communications Center of the Town of Williamston Police Department to
determine if the minor is a first offender. If the minor is a first offender, he or she will be taken to the
residence of his or her custodian. A written warning will be given to the custodian and an information
report will be taken by the officer. The report shall include the name of the minor and the custodian, the
time, date and location of the offense. This report will be turned in to the Communications Center and
entered into the Police Department computer system.
(b) If, upon checking with the Communications Center, the minor is found to be a repeat
offender, he or she will be taken to the residence of his or her custodian, and the custodian may be
issued a criminal citation charging him or her with a violation of this section. A report will be turned in
to the Communications Center and entered into the Police Department computer system.
(c) If the minor is found to be a repeat offender, the minor may be treated as a delinquent
juvenile.
(d) If the minor is under 12 years of age, a report will be made and a copy forwarded to
the Martin County Department of Social Services.
6 Williamston - General Offenses
(7) Aiding and abetting by adult, guardian or parent. It shall be a violation of this section for
any person over 18 years of age to aid or abet a minor in the violation of division (B) above.
(8) Refusal of custodian to take custody of a minor. If the custodian of a minor found to be in
violation of this section refuses to take custody of the minor, the officer, having custody of the minor,
shall contact the Martin County Department of Social Services and release the minor to that agency,
pending further investigation by the Police Department and the Department of Social Services. The
custodian may be issued a criminal citation charging him or her with a violation of this section.
(Ord. passed 8-7-1995) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
(A) General. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is
prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.
(B) Curfew for minors; punishment. Any person who violates § 130.02 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $50, or imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
(Ord. passed 8-7-1995)
CHAPTER 131: MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
Section
131.01 Disorderly conduct
131.02 Firearms; use unlawful; generally
131.03 Molotov cocktail; definitions
131.04 Manufacture, possession and the like; unlawful
131.05 Sling shot, air rifles and the like, prohibited; archery exception
131.06 Prohibition of loitering for purpose of engaging in drug related activities
131.99 Penalty
§ 131.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
(A) Any person who shall do or engage in any of the following shall be guilty of disorderly
conduct:
(1) Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any
person is placed in danger of safety of his or her life, limb or health;
(2) Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby
public property or property of any other person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged;
(3) Any person who shall endanger lawful pursuits of another by note of violence or threats
of bodily harm;
(4) Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so
as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or public property;
(5) Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and cause, provoke
or engage in any fight or brawl;
(6) Any persons who shall collect in bodies or in crowds and engage in unlawful activities;
(7) Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and engage or
attempt to engage in gaming;
7
8 Williamston - General Offenses
(8) Any person who shall frequent any public place and obtain money from another by an
illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice or device, or attempt to do so;
(9) Any person who assembles with another or others and engages in any fraudulent scheme,
device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person, or attempts to do so;
(10) Any person who utters, in a public place or any place open to the public, any obscene
words or epithets;
(11) Any person who frequents any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of
alcoholic beverages, narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated;
(12) Any person who shall use “fighting words” directed towards any person who becomes
outraged, and thus creates turmoil;
(13) Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and do bodily harm
to another;
(14) Any person who shall, by acts of violence, interfere with another’s pursuit of a lawful
occupation; and
(15) Any person who shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to
halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuse to clear the public way when ordered to do so
by a peace officer or other person having authority.
(B) Any person convicted of disorderly conduct, as defined in this section, shall be punished as
provided in § 10.99.
(1992 Code, § 19-1) Penalty, see 131.99
Statutory reference:
For state law as to disorderly conduct, see G.S. § 14-288.4
§ 131.02 FIREARMS; USE UNLAWFUL; GENERALLY.
It shall be unlawful of any person to shoot or discharge any air rifle, bullet rifle, pistol or shotgun
or other device designated to project a missile by compressed air or mechanical action with less than
deadly force, or other firearm, at any time or place within the town, except when used in defense of
person or property, or pursuant to lawful directions of law enforcement officers.
(1992 Code, § 19-2) Penalty, see § 131.99
Miscellaneous Offenses 9
§ 131.03 MOLOTOV COCKTAIL; DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or
requires a different meaning.
FIREBOMB. Any type of object designed or constructed so that upon being propelled it will
explode or ignite its area of impact.
MOLOTOV COCKTAIL. Any breakable container or any container, filled with a flammable fluid
or substance and fitted with a fuse or wick which is designed in such a manner that upon being
propelled, it will, at impact, empty its contents.
(1992 Code, § 19-3)
§ 131.04 MANUFACTURE, POSSESSION AND THE LIKE; UNLAWFUL.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to manufacture, posses or transport any Molotov
cocktail or other firebomb.
(1992 Code, § 19-4) Penalty, see § 131.99
§ 131.05 SLING SHOT, AIR RIFLES AND THE LIKE, PROHIBITED; ARCHERY
EXCEPTION.
No person shall shoot or project any stone, rock shot or other hard substance by means of a sling
shot, bean shooter, shot shooter, pop gun, bow or other similar contrivance; provided, that archery may
be engaged in on the ranges as may be set aside and approved therefore by the Board of
Commissioners.
(1992 Code, § 19-5) Penalty, see § 131.99
§ 131.06 PROHIBITION OF LOITERING FOR PURPOSE OF ENGAGING IN DRUG
RELATED ACTIVITIES.
(A) For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC PLACE means any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley or
alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or transportation facility or the doorways and entranceway
to any building which fronts on any of those places, or a motor vehicle in or on any of those places or
any property owned by the Town of Williamston.
(B) For the purpose of this section, a KNOWN UNLAWFUL DRUG USER, POSSESSOR or
SELLER is a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any
court within this state of any violation involving the use, possession or sale of any of the substances
referred to in the North Carolina Controlled Substances Act, G.S. Chapter 90, Article 5, or has been
convicted of any violation of any substantially similar laws of any positional subdivision of this state,
any other state or of federal law.
10 Williamston - General Offenses
(C) It shall be unlawful for a person to remain or wander about in a public place in a manner and
under circumstance manifesting the purpose to engage in a violation of any subdivision of the North
Carolina Controlled Substances Act, G.S. Chapter 90, Article 5. When done with the intent of violation
of the aforementioned statutes, each circumstances shall include:
(1) Repeatedly beckoning, stopping or attempting to stop passerby, or repeatedly attempting
to engage passerby in conversation;
(2) Repeatedly stopping or attempting to stop motor vehicles;
(3) Repeatedly interfering with the free passage of other persons;
(4) The person being a known unlawful drug user or seller;
(5) The person behaving in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he or she is
about to engage in, or is engaged in an unlawful drug related activity;
(6) The person repeatedly pausing to or receiving from passerby whether on foot or in a
vehicle, money or objects;
(7) The person taking flight upon the approach or appearance of a police officer;
(8) The person being at a location frequented by persons who use, possess or sell drugs; or
(9) Any vehicle involved being registered to a known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller,
or being known to be or have been involved in drug related activities.
(1992 Code, § 19-6) Penalty, see § 131.99
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor as provided by G.S. § 14-4. The
offender may be subject to a fine in excess of $50, up to a maximum of $500.
(1992 Code, § 19-7) Penalty, see § 10.99
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter
150. BUILDINGS
151. FLOOD PROVISIONS
152. SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
153. ZONING
154. HOUSING
1
2 Williamston - Land Usage
CHAPTER 150: BUILDINGS
Section
General Provisions
150.01 Permits; required
150.02 Application for and issuance of building, plumbing and heating permits; County Building
Inspector named
150.03 Fees
150.04 Fire District
Regulatory Codes
150.20 Applicability of subchapter and of regulatory codes
150.21 Building Code; adopted
150.22 Fire resistance rating; adopted
150.23 Uniform Residential Building Code; adopted
150.24 Plumbing Code; adopted
150.25 Heating and the like Code; adopted
150.26 Effect of amendments to adopted codes
150.27 Filing of copies with Zoning Administrator
150.28 Compliance
Statutory reference:
As to applicability of North Carolina State Building Code within all municipalities,
see G.S. § 143-138(e)
For state law as to power of town to adopt certain technical or regulatory codes by reference,
see G.S. § 160A-76
3
4 Williamston - Land Usage
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 PERMITS; REQUIRED.
Building, plumbing, electrical, heating, air conditioning, refrigeration and ventilation permits and
any other permit required by the regulatory codes adopted in this chapter, or any permits required by
state law shall be obtained from the appropriate authority prior to beginning any construction, repair or
alteration regulated by the codes or state law.
(1992 Code, § 6-1)
Statutory reference:
For state law as to building permits, see G.S. §§ 160A-417 to 160A-423
§ 150.02 APPLICATION FOR AND ISSUANCE OF BUILDING, PLUMBING AND HEATING
PERMITS; COUNTY BUILDING INSPECTOR NAMED.
(A) Applications for building, plumbing and heating, air conditioning, refrigeration and ventilation
permits shall be made to the Building Inspector who shall issue the permit upon payment of the
appropriate fees and proof of compliance with applicable regulations by the applicant, including
production of a zoning permit.
(B) For purposes of this chapter, the County Building Inspector shall serve as the Town Building
Inspector.
(1992 Code, § 6-2)
Statutory reference:
For state law as to Building Inspectors and inspections, see G.S. §§ 160A-411 et seq.
§ 150.03 FEES.
The fees to be paid for the appropriate permit required by § 150.01 and inspection fees shall be as
determined by Martin County.
(1992 Code, § 6-3)
§ 150.04 FIRE DISTRICT.
The Fire District of the town shall be determined by the Board of Commissioners from time to
time.
(1992 Code, § 6-4)
Statutory reference:
For state law requiring establishment of fire limits, see G.S. § 160A-435
Buildings 5
REGULATORY CODES
§ 150.20 APPLICABILITY OF SUBCHAPTER AND OF REGULATORY CODES.
The provisions of this subchapter, and of the regulatory codes adopted in this subchapter, shall
apply to the following:
(A) The location, design, materials, equipment, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
maintenance, moving, demolition, removal, use and occupancy of every building of structure or any
appurtenance connected or attached to the building or structure;
(B) The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance or plumbing systems
consisting of house sewers, building drains, waste and vent systems, hot and cold water supply systems
and all fixtures and appurtenances thereof;
(C) The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of mechanical systems
consisting of heating, ventilating, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, fuel burning equipment
and appurtenances thereof; and
(D) The installation, creation, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of electrical systems and
appurtenances thereof.
(1992 Code, § 6-5)
§ 150.21 BUILDING CODE; ADOPTED.
The North Carolina State Building Code, Volume I, “General Construction”, as adopted by the
North Carolina Building Code Council and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as
though set forth in this subchapter as the Building Code of the town to the extent the code is applicable
for safe and stable design, methods of construction, minimum standards and use of materials in
buildings or structures hereafter erected, enlarged, altered, repaired or otherwise constructed or
reconstructed.
(1992 Code, § 6-6)
§ 150.22 FIRE RESISTANCE RATING; ADOPTED.
The North Carolina State Building Code, Volume I-A, “Fire Resistance Ratings”, as adopted by
the North Carolina Building Code Council and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference.
(1992 Code, § 6-7)
6 Williamston - Land Usage
§ 150.23 UNIFORM RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE; ADOPTED.
The North Carolina Uniform Residential Building Code, as adopted and amended by the North
Carolina Building Inspectors Association and as published by the North Carolina Building Code
Council, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth in this subchapter as the Residential
Building Codes for one-and two-family residential buildings of the town.
(1992 Code, § 6-8)
§ 150.24 PLUMBING CODE; ADOPTED.
The North Carolina Plumbing Code (North Carolina State Building Code, Volume II,
“Plumbing”), as adopted and published by the North Carolina Building Code Council and as amended,
is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth in this subchapter as the Plumbing Code for
the town.
(1992 Code, § 6-9)
§ 150.25 HEATING AND THE LIKE CODE; ADOPTED.
The North Carolina Heating, Air Conditioning, Refrigeration and Ventilation Code (North
Carolina State Building Code, Volume III, “Heating”), as adopted and published by the North Carolina
Building Code Council and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth in
this subchapter as the Heating Code for the town.
(1992 Code, § 6-10)
§ 150.26 EFFECT OF AMENDMENTS TO ADOPTED CODES.
Amendments to the regulatory codes adopted by reference in this subchapter, which are from
time to time adopted and published by the agencies or organizations referred to herein, shall be
effective in the town at the time the amendments are filed with the Zoning Administrator as provided in
§ 150.27.
(1992 Code, § 6-11)
§ 150.27 FILING OF COPIES WITH ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
(A) An official copy of each regulatory code adopted in this subchapter, and official copies of all
amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator.
(B) The copies shall be the official copies of the codes and the amendments.
(1992 Code, § 6-12)
Buildings 7
§ 150.28 COMPLIANCE.
(A) Building Codes. All buildings or structures that are hereafter constructed, reconstructed,
emoted, altered, extended, enlarged, repaired, demolished or moved shall conform to the requirements,
minimum standard, and other provisions of the building codes adopted by §§ 150.21 through 150.23.
(B) Plumbing Code. Every building or structure intended for human habitation, occupancy or use
shall have plumbing, plumbing systems or plumbing fixtures installed, constructed, altered, extended,
repaired or reconstructed in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements and other
provisions of the Plumbing Code adopted by § 150.24.
(C) Heating and the like Code. All mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air
conditioning and refrigeration systems, fuel burning equipment and appurtenances shall be installed,
erected, altered, repaired, used and maintained in accordance with the minimum standards,
requirements and other provisions of the Heating, Air Conditioning, Refrigeration and Ventilation
Code adopted by § 150.25.
(1992 Code, § 6-13)
8 Williamston - Land Usage
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD PROVISIONS
Section
151.01 Flood provisions; adopted by reference
§ 151.01 FLOOD PROVISIONS; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
The Town of Williamston’s flood provisions are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated
herein as if set out in full.
(Ord. -, passed 9-4-2007; Ord. -, passed 10-19-2008)
9
10 Williamston - Land Usage
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
152.01 Subdivision regulations; adopted by reference
§ 152.01 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
The Town of Williamston’s subdivision regulations are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Ord. -, passed 4-6-1992)
11
12 Williamston - Land Usage
CHAPTER 153: ZONING
Section
153.01 Zoning provisions; adopted by reference
§ 153.01 ZONING PROVISIONS; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
The Town of Williamston’s zoning provisions are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated
herein as if set out in full.
(Ord. -, passed 12-2-1968; Ord. -, passed 6-19-2000)
13
14 Williamston - Land Usage
CHAPTER 154: HOUSING
Section
General Provisions
154.01 Legislative findings; purpose of subchapter
154.02 Definitions
154.03 Conflict with other provisions
154.04 Extraterritorial application
Minimum Standards of Fitness
154.20 Responsibilities of owners and occupants as to cleanliness and maintenance
154.21 Compliance with subchapter, chapter and the like
154.22 Structural condition
154.23 Basic equipment and facilities
154.24 Ventilation
154.25 Area, height and use requirements
154.26 Safety, sanitation and maintenance
154.27 Control of insects, rodents and infestations; rubbish and garbage storage and disposal
154.28 Rooming houses
Enforcement
154.45 Zoning Administrator; duties generally
154.46 Powers generally
154.47 Right of entry for purpose of inspections; right of entry of owner and the like for purpose
of making repairs
154.48 Procedure for determination, repair, demolition and the like of unfit dwellings generally;
appeals and petitions
154.49 Service of complaints and orders
154.50 In rem action by Zoning Administrator; placarding; recordation of ordinances authorizing
in rem action
154.51 Cost of repairs, demolition and the like, lien on real property affected
154.52 Sale of materials after demolition
154.53 Alternative remedies
154.54 Duties of Zoning Board of Adjustment
15
16 Williamston - Land Usage
Fair Housing
154.70 Discrimination unlawful
154.71 Construction and application of article
Statutory reference:
For North Carolina Fair Housing Law, see G.S. §§ 41A-1 et seq.
For state law as to minimum housing standards, see G.S. §§ 160A-441 to 160A-450
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS; PURPOSE OF SUBCHAPTER.
(A) Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-441, it is hereby found and declared that there exists in the town,
dwellings which are unfit for human habitation due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of
fire, accidents and other calamities, lack of ventilation, light and sanitary facilities and due to other
conditions rendering the dwellings unsafe or insanitary, and dangerous and detrimental to the health,
safety and morale and otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the town.
(B) In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the town as authorized by
G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 19, it is the purpose of this subchapter to establish minimum standards of
fitness for the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings used for human habitation, are expressly
authorized by G.S. § 160A-444.
(1992 Code, § 14-1)
§ 154.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or
requires a different meaning.
BASEMENT. A portion of a building which is located partly underground, having direct access to
light and air from windows located above the level of the adjoining ground.
CELLAR. A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, having an inadequate
access to light and air from windows located partly or wholly below the level of the adjoining ground.
DETERIORATED. Unfit for human habitation and capable of being repaired, altered or
improved to comply with all of the minimum standards established by this subchapter, at a cost not in
excess of 50% of its value, as determined by findings of the Zoning Administrator.
Housing 17
DILAPIDATED. Unfit for human habitation and incapable of being repaired, altered or
improved to comply with all of the minimum standards established by this subchapter, at a cost not in
excess of 50% of its value, as determined by findings of the Zoning Administrator.
DWELLING. Any building, structure, manufactured home or mobile home, which is wholly or
partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants and includes any
outhouses or appurtenance belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith. Temporary housing as
defined in this section shall not be regarded as a dwelling. The term shall include within its meaning
the terms ROOMING HOUSE and ROOMING UNIT, as hereinafter defined.
DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a
single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking
and eating.
EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents and other pests by
eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as
their food, by poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest
elimination methods approved by the Zoning Administrator.
GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
and consumption of food.
HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living,
sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries,
heater rooms, foyers or communicating corridors, closets and storage space.
INFESTATION. The presence within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents or other
pests in such number as to constitute a menace to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or to the
public.
MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
OCCUPANT. Any person over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or eating in or having
actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part thereof, in
which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
OR ANY PART THEREOF. Whenever the words “dwelling”, “dwelling unit”, “rooming
house”, “rooming unit” or “premises” are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they
were followed by the words OR ANY PART THEREOF.
OWNER. Any person who, alone, jointly or severally with others shall have title to any
dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof, or shall have
charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor,
administrator,
18 Williamston - Land Usage
trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner, or shall be a mortgagee of record for any dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit. Any person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply
with the provisions of this chapter and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto to the game
extent as if he or she were the owner.
PERSON. Any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or other legal
entity.
PLUMBING. Any of the following supplied facilities and equipment. Gas pipes, gas burning
equipment, water pipes, mechanical garbage disposal units (mechanical sink grinder), waste pipes,
water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing
machines, catch basins, drains, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all
connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY. The Town Housing Authority or any officer who is in charge of any
department or branch of the government of the town, the county or the state, relating to health, fire and
building regulations or other activities concerning dwellings in the town.
ROOMING HOUSE. Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming
units in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband and
wife, son or daughter, mother or father or sister or brother of the owner or operator.
ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit based or intended
to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes.
RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage and ashes. The
term shall include paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard
trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust.
SUPPLIED. Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of the owner or operator.
TEMPORARY HOUSING. Any tent, trailer or other structure used for human shelter, which is
designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure or to any
utilities system on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days.
UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION. Applied to a dwelling having conditions which violate or
do not comply with one or more of the minimum standards of fitness or one or more of the
requirements established by this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 14-2)
Housing 19
§ 154.03 CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.
In the event any provision, standard or requirement of this subchapter is found to be in conflict
with any provision of any other ordinance or code of the town, the provision which establishes the
higher standard or more stringent requirement for the promotion and protection of the health and safety
of the residents of the town shall prevail.
(1992 Code, § 14-3)
§ 154.04 EXTRATERRITORIAL APPLICATION.
This subchapter shall apply also to the extraterritorial area of the town.
(1992 Code, § 14-4)
MINIMUM STANDARDS OF FITNESS
§ 154.20 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS AS TO CLEANLINESS
AND MAINTENANCE.
(A) Public areas. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall be
responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling
and promises thereof.
(B) Individual dwelling units and premises. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises which he or
she occupies and controls.
(C) Rubbish and garbage. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling units shall dispose of all his
or her rubbish and garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the supplied storage
facilities. In all cases, the owner shall be responsible for the availability of rubbish and garbage storage.
(D) Supplied plumbing fixtures. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all supplied
plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care in the proper use and operation of same.
(E) Care of facilities, equipment and structure. No occupant shall willfully destroy, deface or
impair any of the facilities or equipment, or any part of the structure, of a dwelling or dwelling unit.
(1992 Code, § 14-5) Penalty, see § 10.99
20 Williamston - Land Usage
§ 154.21 COMPLIANCE WITH SUBCHAPTER, CHAPTER AND THE LIKE.
(A) Every dwelling and dwelling unit used as a human habitation or held out for use and as human
habitation, shall comply with all of the minimum standards of fitness for human habitation and all of
the requirements of this division.
(B) No person shall occupy as owner or occupant, or let to another for occupancy or use as a
human habitation, any dwelling or dwelling unit which does not comply with all of the minimum
standards of fitness for human habitation and all of the requirements of this division.
(1992 Code, § 14-6) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.22 STRUCTURAL CONDITION.
(A) Walls, partitions, sills and the like. Walls or partitions or supporting members, sills, joists,
rafters or other structural members shall not list, lean or buckle, shall not be rotted, deteriorated or
damaged and shall not have holes or cracks which might admit rodents.
(B) Supporting of floors or roofs. Floors or roofs shall have adequate supporting members and
strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
(C) Foundations and the like. Foundation walls, piers or other foundation supports shall not be
deteriorated or damaged.
(D) Steps, porches and the like. Steps, stairs, landings, porches or other parts or appurtenances
shall be maintained in the condition that they will not fall or collapse.
(E) Fire exits and the like. Adequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic shall be provided.
(F) Finishing of interior walls and ceilings. Interior walls and ceilings of all rooms, closets and
hallways shall be finished of suitable materials, which will, by use of reasonable household methods,
promote sanitation and cleanliness, and shall be maintained in such a manner so as to enable the
occupants to maintain reasonable privacy between various spaces.
(G) Waterproofing of roof, exterior walls and the like. The roof, flashings, exterior walls,
basement walls, floors and all doors and windows exposed to the weather shall be constructed and
maintained so as to be weather tight and watertight.
(H) Chimneys. There shall be no chimney or parts thereof which are defective, deteriorated or in
danger of falling, or in the condition or location as to constitute a fire hazard.
(I) Use of ground for floors. There shall be no use of the ground for floors or wood floors on the
ground.
(1992 Code, § 14-7) Penalty, see § 10.99
Housing 21
§ 154.23 BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.
(A) Plumbing system.
(1) Each dwelling unit shall be connected to a potable water supply and to the public sewer or
other approved sewage disposal system.
(2) Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than one kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower
and water closet and an adequate supply of both cold and hot water. All water shall be supplied through
an approved pipe distribution system connected to a potable water supply.
(3) All plumbing fixtures shall meet the standards of the North Carolina Building Code,
Volume II, “Plumbing” and shall be maintained in a state of good repair and in good working order.
(4) All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling unit and be accessible
to the occupants of same. The water closet and tub or shower shall be located in a room affording
privacy to the user.
(B) Heating system. Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall have facilities for providing heat in
accordance with either divisions (B)(1) or (2) below.
(1) Every central or electric heating system shall be of sufficient capacity so as to heat all
habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit to which it is
connected with a minimum temperature of 70°F, measured at a point three feet above the floor during
ordinary winter conditions.
(2) Where a central or electric heating system is not provided, each dwelling and dwelling
unit shall be provided with sufficient fireplaces, chimneys, flues or gas vents whereby heating
appliances may be connected so as to heat all habitable rooms with a minimum temperature of 70°F,
measured three feet above the floor during ordinary winter conditions.
(C) Electrical systems.
(1) Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall be wired for electric light and convenience
receptacles. Every habitable room shall contain at least two floor or wall type electric convenience
receptacles, connected in the manner as determined by the North Carolina State Building Code,
Volume IV, “Electrical”. There shall be installed in every bathroom, water closet room, laundry room
and furnace room at least one supplied ceiling or wall type electric light fixture. In the event wall or
ceiling light fixtures are not provided in any habitable room, each habitable room shall contain at least
three floor or wall type electric convenience receptacles.
(2) Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be adequately lighted by
electric lights at all times when natural daylight is not sufficient.
22 Williamston - Land Usage
(3) All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring shall be maintained in a state of good
repair, safe, capable of being used and installed in accordance with the North Carolina State Building
Code, Volume IV “Electrical”.
(1992 Code, § 14-8)
§ 154.24 VENTILATION.
(A) Generally. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly to
the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall
be 10% of the floor area of the room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of
any room and the light obstructing structures are located less than five feet from the window and
extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face
directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window
area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight type window in the top of the room, the total
window area of the a skylight shall equal at least 15% of the total floor area of the room.
(B) Openable windows. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which
can easily be opened, or the other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total openable
window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum window area size
or minimum skylight type window size as required, or the room shall have other approved, equivalent
ventilation.
(C) Bathroom and water closet rooms. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall
comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms; except, that no window or
skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet rooms equipped with an
approved ventilation system.
(1992 Code, § 14-9)
§ 154.25 AREA, HEIGHT AND USE REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Room size.
(1) Every dwelling unit shall contain at least the minimum room size in each habitable room
as required by the North Carolina Uniform Residential Building Code. Every dwelling unit shall
contain at least 150 square feet of habitable floor area for the first occupant, at least 100 square feet of
additional habitable area for each or the next three occupants and at least 75 square feet of additional
habitable floor area for each additional occupant.
(2) In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by one occupant shall contain 70 square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each
occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of floor area for each occupant under 12
years of age.
Housing 23
(B) Calling height. At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling
height of not less than seven and one-half feet.
(C) Floor area calculation. Floor area shall be calculated on the basis of habitable room area.
However, closet area and wall area within the dwelling unit may count for not more than 10% of the
required habitable floor area. The floor area of any part of any room where the ceiling height is less
than four and one-half feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total area
of the room to determine maximum permissible occupancy.
(D) Cellar. No cellar shall be used for living purposes.
(E) Basement. No basement shall be used for living purposes, unless:
(1) The floor and walls are substantially watertight;
(2) The total window area, total openable window area and ceiling height are equal to those
required for habitable rooms; and
(3) The required minimum window area of every habitable room is entirely above the grade
adjoining the window area, except where the windows face a stairwell, window wall or accessway.
(1992 Code, § 14-10) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.26 SAFETY, SANITATION AND MAINTENANCE.
(A) Exterior foundation, walls and roof. Every foundation wall, exterior wall and exterior roof
shall be substantially weather tight and rodent proof, shall be kept in sound condition and good repair,
shall be capable of affording privacy and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which
normal use may cause to be placed thereon. Every exterior wall shall be protected with paint or other
protective covering to prevent the entrance or penetration of moisture or the weather.
(B) Interior floor, walls and ceilings. Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be substantially
rodent proof, shall be kept in sound condition and good repair and shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
(C) Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door, basement or cellar door and hatchway
shall be substantially weather tight, watertight and rodent proof and shall be kept in sound working
condition and good repair.
(D) Stairs, porches and appurtenances. Every inside and outside stairs, porches and any
appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause
to be placed thereon, and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
24 Williamston - Land Usage
(E) Bathroom floors. Every bathroom floor surface and water closet compartment floor surface
shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit the
floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(F) Supplied facilities. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required
under this subchapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively, and
shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.
(G) Drainage. Every yard shall be properly graded so as to obtain thorough drainage and so as to
prevent the accumulation of stagnant water.
(H) Noxious weeds. Every yard and all exterior property areas shall be kept free of species of
weeds or plant growth which are noxious or detrimental to health.
(I) Egress. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with adequate means of egress as required by
the Town Building Code.
(1992 Code, § 14-11)
§ 154.27 CONTROL OF INSECTS, RODENTS AND INFESTATIONS; RUBBISH AND
GARBAGE STORAGE AND DISPOSAL.
(A) Screens. In every dwelling unit, for protection against mosquitoes, flies and other insects,
every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to an outdoor space shall have supplied and installed
screens and a self-closing device. Every window or other device with openings to outdoor space, used
or intended to be used for ventilation, shall likewise be supplied with screens installed.
(B) Rodent control. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation
and every other opening to a basement which might provide an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with
screens installed or such other approved device as will effectively prevent their entrance.
(C) Infestation. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests therein or on the premises, and
every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination whenever his or her dwelling unit is the only one infested. Whenever
infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a rodent-proof or reasonably
insect-proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation
exists, in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared or public parts, of any
dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
(D) Rubbish storage and disposal. Every dwelling and every dwelling unit shall be supplied with
approved containers, and covers, for storage of rubbish as required by this code and other town
ordinances and the owner, operator or agent in control of the dwelling or dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the removal of rubbish.
Housing 25
(E) Garbage, storage and disposal. Every dwelling and every dwelling unit shall be supplied
with an approved garbage disposal facility, which may be an adequate mechanical garbage disposal
unit (mechanical sink grinder) in each dwelling unit or an incinerator unit, to be approved by the
inspector, in the structure for the use of the occupants of each dwelling unit or an approved outside
garbage can as required by this code and other town ordinances.
(1992 Code, § 14-12)
§ 154.28 ROOMING HOUSES.
All of the provisions of this subchapter, and all of the minimum standards and requirements of this
subchapter, shall be applicable to rooming houses and to every person who operates a rooming house,
or who occupies or lets to another for occupancy, any rooming unit in any rooming house, except as
provided in the following sections.
(A) Water closet, hand lavatory and bath facilities; generally. At least one water closet, lavatory
basin and bathtub or shower, properly connected to an approved water and sewer system and in good
working condition, shall be supplied for each four rooms; within a rooming house wherever the
facilities are shared. All facilities shall be located within the residence building served, shall be directly
accessible from a common hall or passageway and shall be not more than one story removed from any
of the persons sharing the facilities. Every lavatory basin, bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot
and cold water at all times. The required facilities shall not be located in a cellar.
(B) Location of sanitary facilities. Every water closet, flush urinal, lavatory basin and bathtub or
shower required by division (A) above shall be located within the rooming house and within rooms
which afford privacy and are separate from the habitable rooms, and which are accessible from a
common hall and without going outside the rooming house or through any other room in the rooming
house.
(C) Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every room for sleeping purposes
by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant 12 years
of age and over and at least 35 square feet of floor area for each occupant under 12 years of age.
(D) Sanitary conditions. The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary
maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings, and for the sanitary maintenance of every other part of the
rooming house. He or she shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire
premises where the entire structure or building within which the rooming house is contained is leased
or occupied by the operator.
(1992 Code, § 14-13)
26 Williamston - Land Usage
ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.45 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR; DUTIES GENERALLY.
The Zoning Administrator is hereby designated as the officer to enforce the provisions of this
subchapter and to exercise the duties and powers herein prescribed. It shall be the duty of the Zoning
Administrator:
(A) To investigate the dwelling conditions and to inspect dwellings and dwelling units located in
the town, in order to determine which dwellings and dwelling units are unfit for human habitation, and
for the purpose of carrying out the objectives of this subchapter with respect to the dwelling and
dwelling units;
(B) To take action, together with other appropriate departments and agencies, public and private,
as may be necessary to effect rehabilitation of housing which is deteriorated;
(C) To keep a record of the results of inspections made under this subchapter and an inventory of
those dwellings that do not meet the minimum standards of fitness herein proscribed; and
(D) To perform the other duties as may be herein prescribed.
(1992 Code, § 14-14)
§ 154.46 POWERS GENERALLY.
The Zoning Administrator is authorised to exercise the power as may be necessary or convenient
to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this subchapter, including the following
powers in addition to others herein granted:
(A) To investigate the dwelling condition in the town in order to determine which dwellings
therein are unfit for human habitation;
(B) To administrator oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence;
(C) To enter upon premises for the purposes of making examinations and inspections; provided,
the entries shall be made in accordance with § 154.47 and state law, and shall be made in the manner as
to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;
(D) To appoint and fix the duties of the officers, agents and employees as he or she deems
necessary to carry out the purposes of this subchapter; and
(E) To perform the other duties as may be prescribed herein or by the Board of Commissioners.
(1992 Code, § 14-15)
Housing 27
§ 154.47 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR PURPOSE OF INSPECTIONS; RIGHT OF ENTRY OF
OWNER AND THE LIKE FOR PURPOSE OF MAKING REPAIRS.
Upon issuance of an administrative search warrant for the area, for the purpose of making
inspections to determine whether the buildings are dangerous buildings within the provisions of this
chapter, the Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey all dwellings,
dwelling units, rooming units and premises listed in the administrative warrant. The owner or occupant
of every dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Zoning
Administrator free access to the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, and its premises at all
reasonable times for the purposes of the inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant of a
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall give the owner thereof, or his or her agent or employee,
access to any part of the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, and its premises for the purpose of
making the repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 14-16)
§ 154.48 PROCEDURE FOR DETERMINATION, REPAIR, DEMOLITION AND THE LIKE
OF UNFIT DWELLINGS GENERALLY; APPEALS AND PETITIONS.
(A) Preliminary investigation; notice; hearing. Whenever a petition is filed with the Zoning
Administrator by a public authority or by at least five residents of the town charging that any dwelling
or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the Zoning Administrator,
upon inspection, that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, he or she shall, if his
or her preliminary investigation discloses a basis for the charges, issue and cause to be served upon the
owner of and parties in interest in the dwelling or dwelling unit, a complaint stating the charges and
containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the Zoning Administrator at a place therein fixed
not less than ten nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint. The owner or any party in
interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and
give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. (Notice of the hearing shall also be given to
at least one of the persons signing a petition relating to the dwelling.) Any person desiring to do so may
attend the hearing and give evidence relevant to the matter being heard. The rules of evidence
prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Zoning
Administrator.
(B) Procedure after hearing.
(1) After the notice and hearing, the Zoning Administrator shall state in writing his or her
determination whether the dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, and, if so, whether it
is deteriorated or dilapidated.
(2) If the Zoning Administrator determines that the dwelling or dwelling unit is deteriorated,
he or she shall state in writing his or her findings of fact in support of the determination, and shall issue
and cause to be served upon the owner thereof, an order directing and requiring the owner to repair,
alter and improve the dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with the minimum standards of fitness
established
28 Williamston - Land Usage
by this subchapter within a specified period of time, not to exceed 90 days. The order may also direct
and require the owner to vacate and close the dwelling or dwelling unit until the repairs, alterations and
improvements have been made.
(3) If the Zoning Administrator determines that the dwelling is dilapidated, he or she shall
state in writing his or her findings of fact to support the determination and shall issue and cause to be
served upon the owner thereof, an order directing and requiring the owner to vacate and close the
dwelling, and to remove or demolish the game within a specified period of time, not to exceed 90 days.
(C) Failure to comply with order of Zoning Administrator.
(1) In personam remedy. If the owner of any deteriorated dwelling or dwelling unit shall fail
to comply with an order of the Zoning Administrator to repair, alter or improve the same within the
time specified therein, or if the owner of a dilapidated dwelling shall fail to comply with an order of the
Zoning Administrator to vacate, close and remove or demolish the same within the time specified
therein, the Zoning Administrator may submit to the Board of Commissioners, at its next regular
meeting, a resolution directing the Town Attorney to petition the Superior Court for an order directing
the owner to comply with the order of the Zoning Administrator, as authorized by G.S. § 160A-446(g).
(2) In rem remedy. After failure of an owner of a deteriorated dwelling or dwelling unit, or
of a dilapidated dwelling, to comply with an order of the Zoning Administrator within the time
specified therein, if injunctive relief has not been sought or has not been granted, as provided in the
preceding paragraph, the Zoning Administrator shall submit to the Board of Commissioners an
ordinance ordering the Zoning Administrator to cause the dwelling or dwelling unit to be repaired,
altered, improved or vacated, closed and removed or demolished, as provided in the original order of
the Zoning Administrator, and pending the removal or demolition to placard the dwelling as provided
by G.S. § 160A-443(4) and § 154.50.
(3) Summary of ejectment of occupant. If an occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate
a dwelling, the Zoning Administrator may file a civil action in the name of the town to remove the
occupant. The action to vacate the dwelling shall be in the nature of summery ejectment and shall be
commenced by filing a complaint naming as parties-defendant any person occupying the dwelling. The
Clerk of Superior Court shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before a magistrate at
a certain time, date and place not to exceed ten days from the issuance of the summons to answer the
complaint. The summons and complaint shall be served as provided in G.S. § 42-29. The summons
shall be returned according to its tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been duly served, and if at
the hearing the Zoning Administrator produces a certified copy of an ordinance adopted by the
governing body pursuant to division (E) authorizing the Zoning Administrator to proceed to vacate the
occupied dwelling, the magistrate shall enter judgment ordering that the premisses be vacated and that
all persons be removed. The judgment ordering that the dwelling be vacated shall be enforced in the
same manner as the judgment for summary ejectment under G.S. § 42-30. An appeal from any
judgment entered hereunder by the magistrate as be taken as provided in G.S. § 7A-228 and the
execution of the judgment may be stayed as provided in G.S. § 7A-227. An action to remove an
occupant of a dwelling who is a
Housing 29
tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of a summary ejectment proceeding pursuant to this
paragraph unless the occupant was served with notice at least 30 days before the filing of the summary
ejectment proceeding that the Town Board of Commissioners has ordered the Zoning Administrator to
initiate.
(D) Appeals from orders of Zoning Administrator.
(1) An appeal from any decision or order of the Zoning Administrator may be taken by any
person aggrieved thereby. Any appeal from the Zoning Administrator shall be taken within ten days
from the rendering of the decision or service of the order and shall be taken by filing with the Zoning
Administrator and with the Board of Adjustment, notice of appeal which shall specify the grounds
upon which the appeal is based. Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the Zoning Administrator shall
forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed
from was made. When an appeal is from a decision of the Zoning Administrator refusing to allow the
person aggrieved thereby to do any act, his or her decision shall remain in force until modified or
reversed. When any appeal is from a decision of the Zoning Administrator requiring the person
aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing
by the Board, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal is filed
with him or her, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a copy of which shall be furnished
the appellant, a suspension of his or her requirement would cause imminent peril to life or property, in
which case the requirement shall not be suspended except by a restraining order, which may be granted
for due cause shown upon not less than one days’ written notice to the Zoning Administrator, by the
Board or by a Court of Record upon petition made pursuant to G.S. § 160A-446(f) and division (E)
below.
(2) The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of all appeals, shall give due notice
to all the parties and shall render its decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person
or by agent or attorney. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision
or order appealed from and may make the decision and order as in its opinion ought to be made in the
matter, and to that end it shall have all the powers of the Zoning Administrator, but the concurring vote
of four members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the
Zoning Administrator. The Board shall have power also in passing upon appeals, in any case where
there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this
subchapter, to adapt the application of this subchapter to the necessities of the case to the end that the
spirit of this subchapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice
done.
(3) Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review by proceedings in the nature of
certiorari instituted within 15 days of the decision of the Board, but not otherwise.
(E) Petition to Superior Court by owner. Any person aggrieved by a decision rendered by the
Board shall have the right within 30 days after issuance of the order or rendering of the decision, to
petition the Superior Court for a temporary injunction. restraining the Zoning Administrator pending a
final disposition of the cause, as provided by G.S. § 160A-446(f).
(1992 Code, § 14-17)
30 Williamston - Land Usage
§ 154.49 SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.
Complaints or orders issued by the Zoning Administrator shall be served upon persons either
personally or by registered or certified mail, but if the whereabouts of the person are unknown and the
same cannot be ascertained by the Zoning Administrator in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the
Zoning Administrator shall make an affidavit to that effect and the serving of the complaint or order
upon the person may be made by publishing the same at least once, no later than the time at which
personal service would be required by the provisions of this chapter, in a newspaper having general
circulation in the town. Where service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall
be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order.
(1992 Code, § 14-18)
§ 154.50 IN REM ACTION BY ZONING ADMINISTRATOR; PLACARDING;
RECORDATION OF ORDINANCES AUTHORIZING IN REM ACTION.
(A) After failure of an owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with an order of the Zoning
Administrator issued pursuant to the provisions of this division, and upon adoption by the Board of
Commissioners of an ordinance authorizing and directing him or her to do so, as provided by G.S. §
160A-443(5) and § 154.48, the Zoning Administrator shall proceed to cause the dwelling or dwelling
unit to be repaired, altered or improved to comply with the minimum standards of fitness established
by this division, or to be vacated and closed and removed or demolished, as directed by the ordinance
of the Board of Commissioners and shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the dwelling or
dwelling unit, a placard with the following words: “This building is unfit for human habitation; the use
or occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful”. Occupation of a
building as posted shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(B) Each ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of Martin County and
shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index, as provided by G.S. § 160A-
443(5).
(1992 Code, § 14-19)
§ 154.51 COST OF REPAIRS, DEMOLITION AND THE LIKE, LIEN ON REAL PROPERTY
AFFECTED.
As provided in G.S. § 160A-443(8), the amount of the cost of any repairs, alterations or
improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, caused to be made or done by the
Zoning Administrator pursuant to § 154.50, shall be a lien against the real property upon which the cost
was incurred. The lien shall be filed, have the same priority and be enforced and the costs collected as
provided by G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 10.
(1992 Code, § 14-20)
Housing 31
§ 154.52 SALE OF MATERIALS AFTER DEMOLITION.
As provided in G.S. § 160A-443(6), if the dwelling is removed or demolished by the Zoning
Administrator, he or she shall sell the materials of the dwelling, and any personal property, fixtures or
appurtenances found in or attached to the dwelling, and shall credit the proceeds of the sale against the
cost of the removal or demolition. Any balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by
the Zoning Administrator shall be secured in a manner directed by the court, and shall be disbursed by
the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the court.
(1992 Code, § 14-21)
§ 154.53 ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.
Neither this subchapter nor any of its provisions shall be construed to impair or limit in any way
the power of the town to define and declare nuisances and to cause their abatement by summery action
or otherwise, or to enforce this subchapter by criminal processes as authorized by G.S. § 14-4, and the
enforcement of any remedy provided herein shall not prevent the enforcement of any other remedy
provided in this subchapter or in other ordinances or laws.
(1992 Code, § 14-22)
§ 154.54 DUTIES OF ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
All appeals which may be taken from decisions or orders of the Zoning Administrator pursuant to
§ 154.48 shall be heard and determined by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. As the appeals body, the
Board shall have power to fix the times and places of its meetings, to adopt necessary rules of
procedure and any other rules and regulations which may be necessary for the proper discharge of its
duties. The Board shall perform the duties prescribed by § 154.48 and shall keep an accurate journal of
all its proceedings.
(1992 Code, § 14-23)
FAIR HOUSING
§ 154.70 DISCRIMINATION UNLAWFUL.
(A) No owner of real property shall discriminate against any other person because of the religion,
race, color or national origin or ancestry of the other person, or because of the religion, race, color,
national origin or ancestry of the friends or associates of the other person in regard to the sale or rental
of, or dealings concerning real property located within the town.
(B) Any discrimination shall be considered an unlawful housing practice.
(1992 Code, § 14-24)
32 Williamston - Land Usage
§ 154.71 CONSTRUCTION AND APPLICATION OF ARTICLE.
(A) Nothing in this subchapter shall require an owner to offer property to the public at-large
before selling or renting it, nor shall this subchapter be deemed to prohibit owners from giving
preference to prospective tenants or buyers for any reason other than religion, race, color or national
origin.
(B) Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to bar any religious or denominational
institution or organization, or any organization operated for charitable or educational purposes, which
is operated, supervised or controlled by or in connection with a religious organization, from limiting
admission to or giving preference to persons of the same religion or denomination or from taking the
selection as in calculated by the organization to promote the religious principles for which it has been
established or maintained.
(C) The provisions of this subchapter relative to discrimination in housing shall not apply to the
rental of a room or rooms to four or less persons in a single dwelling unit, nor to the rental or lease of a
portion of a dwelling house containing accommodation for not more than three families, when the
remainder of the dwelling is occupied by the owner or a member of his or her immediate family, or a
lessee of the entire dwelling or members of his or her immediate family.
(1992 Code, § 14-25)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
[Reserved]
1
2 Williamston - Table of Special Ordinances
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to North Carolina General Statutes
References to 1992 Code
References to Ordinances
References to Resolutions
1
2 Williamston - Parallel References
REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES
G.S. Cite Code Section
1A-1, Rule 6(a) 10.05
1-593 10.05
1-597 52.08
7A-227 154.48
7A-228 154.48
12-3 10.05
14-4 10.99, 37.04, 38.01, 73.01, 94.999,
111.57, 114.99, 131.99, 154.53
14-4(a) 10.99
14-127 Ch. 92
14-277.2 95.03
14-288.1 et seq. Ch. 37
14-288.4 131.01
14-288.5 95.03
14-288.12 Ch. 37
18B-300 112.01
Ch. 20 70.001
20-7.5 70.083
20-37 Ch. 111
20-37.6 70.083, 70.999
20-37.6(d) 70.083
20-79.4 70.083
20-97 Ch. 70
20-129(e) 72.02
20-138.1 et seq. Ch. 70
20-140.2 70.012
20-145 70.007
20-156 70.007, 70.038
20-157 70.046
20-158 70.030
20-161 – 20.163 Ch. 70
20-168 70.006
20-219.11 70.124
20-280 Ch. 111, 111.29
3
2011 S-2
4 Williamston - Parallel References
G.S. Cite Code Section
41A-1 et seq. 153.01
42-29 154.48
42-30 154.48
Ch. 44A, Art. I 70.126
62-260(2) 111.01
Ch. 65 Ch. 94
66-76 115.02
66-76 – 66-83 115.01
69-1 et seq. Ch. 91
Ch. 90, Art. 5 131.06
Ch. 93B 110.035
105-41 110.021
105-236 110.068, 110.069
105-242 110.068
105-271 et seq. 70.095
Ch. 113, Art. 22A 90.03
113-274(c)(1a) 90.03
132-1 36.01
136-141 et seq. 70.129
136-143 70.129
Ch. 143, Art. 33C 32.001
143-138(e) Ch. 150
143-318.9 – 143-318.18 31.01
154.50 154.48
Ch. 159, Art. 3 30.33
159-7, et seq. 30.47
Ch. 160A, Art. 7, Part 3 30.01
Ch. 160A, Art. 10 154.51
Ch. 160A, Art. 19 11.01, 154.01
160A-68 31.01
160A-70 30.17
160A-71 31.01
160A-76 Ch. 50, 91.01, Ch. 150
160A-81 31.01
160A-101(7)(b) 35.02
160A-101(8)(a) 30.16
160A-168 38.02
160A-171 33.01
160A-175 10.99, 51.99, 52.08
160A-175(d) 110.069
160A-178 Ch. 113
2011 S-2
References to North Carolina General Statutes 5
G.S. Cite Code Section
160A-181 114.30
160A-184 Ch. 93
160A-186 Ch. 90
160A-188 Ch. 90, 90.03
160A-193 52.02, 52.06, 52.07, Ch. 70
160A-207 110.068
160A-209 Ch. 51
160A-211 36.01, Ch. 110
160A-213 Ch. 70
160A-215.1 36.01
160A-281 34.01
160A-281 – 160A-289 Ch. 34
160A-284 34.01
160A-285 34.02
160A-291 – 160A-293 Ch. 91
160A-292 33.02
160A-293 Ch. 91
160A-296 Ch. 92
160A-299 Ch. 92, 92.48
160A-301 Ch. 70
160A-301(d) 70.074
160A-303 Ch. 70, 70.117, 70.999
160A-303.2 Ch. 70, 70.117
160A-304 Ch. 111
160A-341 et seq. Ch. 94
160A-360 11.01
160A-362 32.016
160A-411 et seq. 150.02
160A-417 – 160A-423 150.01
160A-435 150.04
160A-441 154.01
160A-441 – 160A-450 153.01
160A-443(4) 154.48
160A-443(5) 154.50
160A-443(6) 154.52
160A-443(8) 154.51
160A-444 154.01
160A-446(f) 154.48
160A-446(g) 154.48
163-285(2) 35.02
163-292 35.02
164-7 10.14
2011 S-2
6 Williamston - Parallel References
REFERENCES TO 1992 CODE
1992 Code 2008 Code
1-2 10.05
1-3 10.19
1-10 11.01
1-11 11.02
1-12 11.03
2-6 31.01
2-7 31.02
2-8 31.03
2-9 31.04
2-10 31.05
2-14 30.30
2-15 30.31
2-17 30.33
2-18 30.34
2-24 32.015
3-1 114.01
3-2 114.02
3-3 114.03
3-4 114.04
3-5 114.05
3-6 114.06
3-7 114.07
3-8 114.08
3-9 114.09
3-10 114.10
3-11 114.11
3-12 114.30
3-13 114.31
3-14 114.32
3-15 114.99
4-1 90.01
4-2 90.02
4-3 90.03
4-4 90.04
4-6 90.21
7
8 Williamston - Parallel References
1992 Code 2008 Code
6-1 150.01
6-2 150.02
6-3 150.03
6-4 150.04
6-5 150.20
6-6 150.21
6-7 150.22
6-8 150.23
6-9 150.24
6-10 150.25
6-11 150.26
6-12 150.27
6-13 150.28
7-1 94.001
7-2 94.002
7-3 94.015
7-4 94.016
7-5 94.017
7-6 94.030
7-7 94.031
7-8 94.032
7-9 94.033
7-10 94.050
7-11 94.051
7-12 94.052
7-13 94.053
7-14 94.070
7-15 94.071
7-16 94.999
7-17 94.072
7-18 94.073
7-19 94.090
7-20 94.091
7-21 94.092
7-22 94.093
7-23 94.094
7-24 94.095
8-1 37.01
8-2 37.02
8-3 37.03
8-4 37.04
9-1 35.01
References to 1992 Code 9
1992 Code 2008 Code
9-2 35.02
10-1 50.01
10-2 50.02
10-3 50.03
10-4 50.04
11-1 36.02
12-1 91.01
12-2 91.02
12-3 91.03
12-4 91.04
12-5 91.20
12-6 91.21
13-1 51.01
13-2 51.02
13-3 51.03
13-4 51.04
13-5 51.05
13-6 51.06
13-7 51.06
13-8 51.20
13-9 51.21
13-10 51.22
13-11 51.23
13-12 51.24
13-13 51.25
13-14 52.01
13-15 52.02
13-16 52.03
13-17 52.04
13-18 52.05
13-19 52.06
13-20 52.07
13-21 52.08
13-22 51.99
13-22 52.08
14-1 154.01
14-2 154.02
14-3 154.03
14-4 154.04
14-5 154.20
14-6 154.21
14-7 154.22
10 Williamston - Parallel References
1992 Code 2008 Code
14-8 154.23
14-9 154.24
14-10 154.25
14-11 154.26
14-12 154.27
14-13 154.28
14-14 154.45
14-15 154.46
14-16 154.47
14-17 154.48
14-18 154.49
14-19 154.50
14-20 154.51
14-21 154.52
14-22 154.53
14-23 154.54
14-24 154.70
14-25 154.71
15-1 110.001
15-2 110.002
15-3 110.015
15-4 110.016
15-5 110.017
15-6 110.018
15-7 110.019
15-8 110.020
15-9 110.021
15-10 110.035
15-11 110.036
15-12 110.037
15-13 110.038
15-14 110.039
15-15 110.040
15-16 110.041
15-17 110.042
15-18 110.043
15-19 110.044
15-20 110.045
15-21 110.046
15-22 110.060
15-23 110.061
15-24 110.062
References to 1992 Code 11
1992 Code 2008 Code
15-26 110.063
15-27 110.064
15-28 110.065
15-29 110.066
15-30 110.066
15-31 110.068
15-32 110.069
15-36 115.01
15-37 115.02
16-1 70.001
16-2 70.002
16-3 70.003
16-4 70.004
16-5 70.005
16-6 70.006
16-7 70.007
16-8 70.008
16-9 70.009
16-10 70.010
16-11 70.011
16-12 70.012
16-13 70.013
16-14 71.01
16-15 71.02
16-16 71.03
16-17 71.04
16-18 71.05
16-19 71.06
16-20 71.07
16-21 70.030
16-22 70.031
16-23 70.032
16-24 70.033
16-25 70.034
16-26 70.035
16-27 70.036
16-28 70.037
16-29 70.038
16-30 70.039
2011 S-2
12 Williamston - Parallel References
1992 Code 2008 Code
16-31 70.040
16-32 70.041
16-33 70.042
16-34 70.043
16-37 70.045
16-38 70.046
16-39 70.047
16-40 70.048
16-41 70.049
16-42 70.050
16-43 70.051
16-44 70.052
16-45 70.053
16-46 70.070
16-47 70.071
16-48 70.072
16-49 70.073
16-50 70.074
16-51 70.999
16-52 70.075
16-53 70.076
16-54 70.077
16-55 70.078
16-56 70.079
16-57 70.080
16-58 70.081
16-59 70.082
16-60 70.095
16-61 70.096
16-64 70.115
16-65 70.116
16-66 70.117
16-67 70.118
16-68 70.119
16-69 70.120
16-70 70.121
16-71 70.122
16-72 70.123
16-73 70.124
16-74 70.125
16-75 70.126
2011 S-2
References to 1992 Code 13
1992 Code 2008 Code
16-76 70.126
16-77 70.128
16-78 70.129
16-79 70.130
16-80 72.01
16-81 72.02
17-1 93.20
17-2 93.20
18-1 93.01
18-2 93.02
18-3 93.03
18-4 93.04
19-1 131.01
19-2 131.02
19-3 131.03
19-4 131.04
19-5 131.05
19-6 131.06
19-7 131.9
21-1 113.01
21-2 113.02
21-3 113.03
22-1 39.01
23-1 34.01
23-2 34.02
23-3 34.03
25-1 53.30
26-1 92.01
26-2 92.02
26-3 92.03
26-4 92.04
26-5 92.05
26-6 92.06
26-7 92.07
26-8 92.08
26-9 92.09
26-10 92.10
26-11 92.25
26-12 92.26
26-13 92.27
26-14 92.27
26-15 92.27
14 Williamston - Parallel References
1992 Code 2008 Code
26-16 92.30
26-17 92.45
26-18 92.46
26-19 92.47
26-20 92.48
27-1 111.01
27-2 111.02
27-3 111.03
27-4 111.04
27-5 111.05
27-6 111.06
27-7 111.07
27-8 111.08
27-9 111.09
27-10 111.25
27-11 111.26
27-12 111.27
27-13 111.28
27-14 111.29
27-15 111.30
27-16 111.31
27-17 111.32
27-18 111.50
27-19 111.51
27-20 111.51
27-21 111.53
27-22 111.53
27-23 111.55
27-24 111.56
27-25 111.57
27-26 111.10
27-27 111.11
27-28 111.12
28-1 53.15
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
- 12-2-1968 153.01
- 7-1-1991 51.20
- 4-6-1992 152.01
- 7-1-1992 110.003
- 7-6-1992 111.13, 111.57
- 11-19-1992 70.074, 70.999
- 7-12-1993 53.01
- 10-4-1993 38.01
- 5-1-1995 30.16
- 8-7-1995 130.02, 130.99
- 12-4-1995 130.01
- 1-2-1996 93.35, 93.99
- 1-6-1996 93.01 – 93.04
- 8-4-1997 111.09, 111.28, 111.30, 111.32,
111.51, 111.55, 111.57
- 9-22-1997 112.01
- 6-19-2000 153.01
- 5-17-2004 73.01
- 6-20-2005 95.01 – 95.03
- 3-6-2006 36.01, 36.99
- 5-7-2007 93.01 – 93.04
- 8-6-2007 10.99
- 9-4-2007 151.01
- 4-7-2008 51.20
- 10-6-2008 90.05, 90.06, 90.20, 90.22 – 90.27,
90.40, 90.99
- 10-19-2008 151.01
2009-4 9-21-2009 38.02
2009-6 9-21-2009 Adopting Ordinance
2009-07 12-16-2009 53.15
2010-09 3-1-2010 Adopting Ordinance
2010-12 5-3-2010 53.54 – 53.54
2010-14 5-24-2010 70.083, 70.999
2010-15 7-12-1010 70.054, 70.999
15
2009 S-1
16 Williamston - Parallel References
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
2010-18 7-12-2010 110.080
2010-21 10-4-2010 70.044
2012-40 9-4-2012 31.01
2013 S-3
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
- 8-4-2008 90.28
17
18 Williamston - Parallel References
INDEX
1
2 Williamston- Index
INDEX
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES (See also MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC)
Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized, 70.118
Administration, 70.116
Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property, 70.127
Definitions, 70.117
Exceptions, 70.129
Exceptions to prior notice requirement, 70.122
Junked motor vehicle regulated; removal authorized, 70.120
Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized, 70.119
Objectives, 70.115
Penalty, 70.999
Protection against criminal or civil liability, 70.128
Redemption of vehicle during proceedings, 70.125
Removal of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles; pre-towing notice
requirements, 70.121
Removal of vehicles; post towing notice requirements, 70.123
Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final disposition of vehicles, 70.124
Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicles, 70.126
Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle, 70.130
ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANIZATION
Form of Government
Mayor-Council form, 30.01
Mayor
Duties, 30.16
Mayor Pro Tem, 30.17
Term of office, 30.15
Town Administrator
Appointment, 30.31
Creation of office, 30.30
Duties, 30.33
Relation to Charter, 30.34
Term; compensation, 30.32
Town Officials
Finance Officer, 30.47
Town Attorney, 30.45
Town Clerk, 30.46
Town Tax Collector, 30.48
3
4 Williamston- Index
ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT, 33.01
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Regulating the consumption and possession of malt beverages and unfortified wine,
112.01
AMUSEMENTS
Carnivals, Rides and the Like
Authority of Chief of Police to regulate, 114.31
Authorization required, 114.30
Fees, 114.32
Penalty, 114.99
Poolrooms, Bowling Alleys and the Like
Application, 114.03
Assignment or transfer; changes of premises, 114.07
Betting prohibited, 114.01
Bond, 114.04
Conducting of business on licensed premises other than that for which license
issued, 114.08
Duties of licensee and his or her employees, 114.09
Fee, 114.05
Investigation and approval, 114.06
License required, 114.02
Process, 114.11
Revocation; authority, 114.10
ANIMALS AND FOWL
Animal waste, 90.06
Animals running-at-large, 90.02
Bird sanctuary, 90.03
Cats
Prolonged howling, whining prohibited, 90.40
Dogs
Abatement, 90.24
Barking dogs, 90.21
Consent to application of Martin County Dangerous Dog Ordinance, 90.28
Dangerous dogs, 90.20
Dogs running-at-large, 90.22
Impoundment and destruction of dog, 90.25
Nuisance dogs, 90.26
Rabies; confinement, 90.27
Vaccination and tags/collars required, 90.23
Keeping animals prohibited, 90.01
Index 5
ANIMALS AND FOWL (Cont’d)
Keeping bees prohibited, 90.04
Penalty, 90.99
Regulation of number and size of animals, 90.05
ASSEMBLIES, PUBLIC
Definitions, 95.01
Public assembly and parade permits, 95.02
Public assembly and parade regulations, 95.03
BICYCLES
Lights required on bicycles, 72.02
Responsibility of operator, 72.01
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT (See also BOARDS AND COMMITTEES)
Appointment; terms, 32.016
Board of Adjustment, 32.018
Comprehensive studies, 32.017
Creation; power, 32.015
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
Enforcement of decorum, 31.05
Meetings; time, 31.01
Motion to reconsider, 31.03
Procedure; Robert’s Rules of Order, 31.02
Rules of decorum, 31.04
BOARDS AND COMMITTEES
Designation of Boards and Committees
Appointment process, 32.002
Public bodies, 32.001
Martin Memorial Library Board of Trustees
Appointment; terms, 32.091
Purpose/function, 32.090
Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
Appointment; terms, 32.031
Purpose/function, 32.030
Planning Board/Board of Adjustment
Appointment; terms, 32.016
Board of Adjustment, 32.018
Comprehensive studies, 32.017
Creation; power, 32.015
Police Advisory Board
Appointment; terms, 32.046
Purpose/function, 32.045
6 Williamston- Index
BOARDS AND COMMITTEES (Cont’d)
Williamston Community Appearance Commission
Appointment; terms, 32.076
Purpose/function, 32.075
Williamston Housing Authority
Appointment; terms, 32.061
Purpose/function, 32.060
BOWLING ALLEYS AND POOLROOMS (See also AMUSEMENTS)
Application, 114.03
Assignment or transfer; changes of premises, 114.07
Betting prohibited, 114.01
Bond, 114.04
Conducting of business on licensed premises other than that for which license issued,
114.08
Duties of licensee and his or her employees, 114.09
Fee, 114.05
Investigation and approval, 114.06
License required, 114.02
Penalty, 114.99
Process, 114.11
Revocation; authority, 114.10
BUILDINGS
Application for and issuance of building, plumbing and heating permits; County
Building Inspector named, 150.02
Fees, 150.03
Fire District, 150.04
Permits; required, 150.01
Regulatory Codes
Applicability of subchapter and of regulatory codes, 150.20
Building Code; adopted, 150.21
Compliance, 150.28
Effect of amendments to adopted codes, 150.26
Filing of copies with Zoning Administrator, 150.27
Fire resistance rating; adopted, 150.22
Heating and the like Code; adopted, 150.25
Plumbing Code; adopted, 150.24
Uniform Residential Building Code; adopted, 150.23
BUSINESS LICENSES
Construction of chapter, 110.002
Definitions, 110.001
Index 7
BUSINESS LICENSES (Cont’d)
Electronic Video Games
Privilege license tax for electronic gaming operations, 110.080
Enforcement and Collection
Collection of deficiency, 110.068
Conference held, 110.067
Deficiency to become final, 110.066
Duty to post license, 110.063
Duty to keep books, 110.062
Duty to determine whether tax due, 110.060
Enforcement, 110.069
Notice of deficiency, 110.064
Request for a conference, 110.065
Tax Collector to investigate, 110.061
Levy
Exemptions, 110.021
Levy of tax, 110.015
Period of license; due date, 110.017
Proration of tax, 110.018
Refunds, 110.019
Separate businesses, 110.020
Who must pay tax, 110.016
Licenses
Amount of tax disputed, 110.039
Application, 110.035
Assignments, 110.042
Changes in business conducted by licensee, 110.043
Form and contents of license, 110.041
Providing notice to an applicant or licensee, 110.046
Reasons for refusal or revocation, 110.036
Record of conferences, 110.045
Revocation, 110.040
Tax Collector to furnish duplicates, 110.044
Tax Collector to issue license, 110.038
Unqualified applicants; right to a conference, 110.037
Privilege License Ordinance, 110.003
CARNIVALS (See also AMUSEMENTS)
Authority of Chief of Police to regulate, 114.31
Authorization required, 114.30
Fees, 114.32
Penalty, 114.99
2011 S-2
8 Williamston - Index
CATS (See also ANIMALS AND FOWL)
Penalty, 90.99
Prolonged howling, whining prohibited, 90.40
CEMETERIES
Graves
Coping, curves and mounds; prohibited, 94.017
Depth, 94.015
Setback, 94.016
Interment fees, 94.092
Monuments
Foundations, 94.033
Head marker, 94.031
Marker, 94.032
One per family lot, 94.030
No transfer of lots, 94.091
Penalty, 94.999
Purchase of burial rights, 94.090
Removal and Destruction
Destroying or injuring plants, 94.053
Grading, landscaping and improvements, 94.051
Removal of unused building materials, 94.050
Removal or injury to structures, 94.052
Repair or removal of mausoleums, monuments or tombs, 94.094
Restoration of property by town, 94.095
Special section for infants and cremation urns, 94.093
Supervision
General duties, 94.002
Public Works Department supervision, 94.001
Violations
Disturbing the peace, 94.071
Littering, 94.073
Trespassing, 94.070
Vehicle speed, 94.072
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Extension, alteration and the like, of proclamation; violation of restorations prohibited,
37.04
Issuance of proclamation by Mayor, 37.02
Restorations during emergency, 37.03
When state of emergency deemed to exist, 37.01
CLOSING OUT SALES
Definitions, 115.02
State mandate, 115.01
Index 9
CODE OF ORDINANCE; GENERAL PROVISIONS
Application to future ordinances, 10.03
Captions, 10.04
Definitions, 10.05
Effective date of ordinances, 10.15
Errors and omissions, 10.10
General penalty; enforcement of ordinances; continuing violations, 10.99
Interpretation, 10.02
Official time, 10.11
Ordinances repealed, 10.13
Ordinances unaffected, 10.14
Ordinances which amend code; effect of new ordinances, 10.17
Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances, 10.19
Reasonable time; computing time, 10.12
Reference to offices, 10.09
Reference to other sections, 10.08
Repeal or modification of ordinances, 10.16
Rules of interpretation, 10.06
Section histories; section headings; statutory references, 10.18
Severability, 10.07
Title of code, 10.01
COMMITTEES AND BOARDS
Designation of Boards and Committees
Appointment process, 32.002
Public bodies, 32.001
Martin Memorial Library Board of Trustees
Appointment; terms, 32.091
Purpose/function, 32.090
Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
Appointment; terms, 32.031
Purpose/function, 32.030
Planning Board/Board of Adjustment
Appointment; terms, 32.016
Board of Adjustment, 32.018
Comprehensive studies, 32.017
Creation; power, 32.015
Police Advisory Board
Appointment; terms, 32.046
Purpose/function, 32.045
Williamston Community Appearance Commission
Appointment; terms, 32.076
Purpose/function, 32.075
10 Williamston- Index
COMMITTEES AND BOARDS (Cont’d)
Williamston Housing Authority
Appointment; terms, 32.061
Purpose/function, 32.060
COMMUNITY APPEARANCE COMMISSION, WILLIAMSTON (See also BOARDS AND
COMMITTEES)
Appointment; terms, 32.076
Purpose/function, 32.075
CRIMINAL HISTORY CHECKS, 38.02
CURFEW (See also OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS)
Curfew for minors, 130.02
Penalty, 130.99
DEPARTMENTS, TOWN
Administration Department, 33.01
Fire and EMS Department, 33.02
Planning and Development Department, 33.03
Police Department, 33.04
Public Works Department, 33.06
Recreation Department, 33.05
DISTRESS SALES
Definitions, 115.02
State mandate, 115.01
DOGS (See also ANIMALS AND FOWL)
Abatement, 90.24
Barking dogs, 90.21
Consent to application of Martin County Dangerous Dog Ordinance, 90.28
Dangerous dogs, 90.20
Dogs running-at-large, 90.22
Impoundment and destruction of dog, 90.25
Nuisance dogs, 90.26
Penalty, 90.99
Rabies; confinement, 90.27
Vaccination and tags/collars required, 90.23
ELECTIONS
Conducted by County Board of Elections, 35.02
Method adopted for election of Mayor and Commissioners, 35.01
2009 S-1
Index 11
ELECTRICITY
Compliance, 50.04
Effect of amendments to adopt code, 50.02
Electrical Code; adopted, 50.01
Filing of copies with Zoning Administrator, 50.03
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Extension, alteration and the like, of proclamation; violation of restorations prohibited,
37.04
Issuance of proclamation by Mayor, 37.02
Restorations during emergency, 37.03
When state of emergency deemed to exist, 37.01
EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION
How determined; scope, 11.01
Map; adoption by reference, 11.02
Where filed, 11.03
FAIR HOUSING (See also HOUSING)
Construction and application of article, 154.71
Discrimination unlawful, 154.70
FINANCE AND TAXATION
Levying tax; retail short-term lease or rental of motor vehicles, 36.01
Penalty, 36.99
Tax discount, 36.02
FINANCE OFFICER (See also ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION)
Office of, 30.47
FIRE AND EMS DEPARTMENT, 33.02
FIRE DEPARTMENT (See also FIRE PROTECTION)
Chief; appointment; supervision, 91.20
Duties, 91.21
FIRE PROTECTION
Applied to extraterritorial jurisdiction, 91.02
Fire Department
Chief; appointment; supervision, 91.20
Duties, 91.21
Fire Prevention Code; adopted, 91.01
Inspection of self-service gasoline pump, 91.04
Use of fireworks prohibited, 91.03
12 Williamston- Index
FLOOD PROVISIONS
Flood provisions; adopted by reference, 151.01
FORM OF GOVERNMENT (See also ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION)
Mayor-Council form, 30.01
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Clean and ordinary condition of premises; compliance with chapter, 51.02
Collection
Appeal, 51.25
Collection practices; generally, 51.20
Containers; generally, 51.22
No collection on weekends and holidays, 51.23
Preparation of certain materials for collection, 51.21
Violation, 51.24
Construction site to be maintained in sanitary condition; construction refuse not to be
deposited on street, sidewalk and the like, 51.06
Definitions, 51.01
Disposal; throwing, dropping or depositing on public lands or in waters, 51.03
Obstruction of drainage ditch, 51.05
Penalty, 51.99
Permitted areas and methods, 51.04
Transportation, 51.07
HOUSING
Conflict with other provisions, 154.03
Definitions, 154.02
Enforcement
Alternative remedies, 154.53
Cost of repairs, demolition and the like, lien on real property affected, 154.51
Duties of Zoning Board of Adjustment, 154.54
In rem action by Zoning Administrator; placarding; recordation of ordinances
authorizing in rem action, 154.50
Powers generally, 154.46
Procedure for determination, repair, demolition and the like of unfit dwellings
generally; appeals and petitions, 154.48
Right of entry for purpose of inspections; right of entry of owner and the like
for purpose of making repairs, 154.47
Sale of materials after demolition, 154.52
Service of complaints and orders, 154.49
Zoning Administrator; duties generally, 154.45
Extraterritorial application, 154.04
Index 13
HOUSING (Cont’d)
Fair Housing
Construction and application of article, 154.71
Discrimination unlawful, 154.70
Legislative findings; purpose of subchapter, 154.01
Minimum Standards of Fitness
Area, height and use requirements, 154.25
Basic equipment and facilities, 154.23
Compliance with subchapter, chapter and the like, 154.21
Control of insects, rodents and infestations; rubbish and garbage storage and
disposal, 154.27
Responsibilities of owners and occupants as to cleanliness and maintenance,
154.20
Rooming houses, 154.28
Safety, sanitation and maintenance, 154.26
Structural condition, 154.22
Ventilation, 154.24
HOUSING AUTHORITY, WILLIAMSTON (See also BOARDS AND COMMITTEES)
Appointment; terms, 32.061
Purpose/function, 32.060
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES (See also MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC)
Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized, 70.118
Administration, 70.116
Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property, 70.127
Definitions, 70.117
Exceptions, 70.129
Exceptions to prior notice requirement, 70.122
Junked motor vehicle regulated; removal authorized, 70.120
Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized, 70.119
Objectives, 70.115
Penalty, 70.999
Protection against criminal or civil liability, 70.128
Redemption of vehicle during proceedings, 70.125
Removal of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles; pre-towing notice
requirements, 70.121
Removal of vehicles; post towing notice requirements, 70.123
Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final disposition of vehicles, 70.124
Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicles, 70.126
Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle, 70.130
14 Williamston- Index
JURISDICTION, EXTRATERRITORIAL
How determined; scope, 11.01
Map; adoption by reference, 11.02
Where filed, 11.03
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES (See also BOARDS AND COMMITTEES)
Appointment; terms, 32.091
Purpose/function, 32.090
MARTIN MEMORIAL LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES (See also BOARDS AND
COMMITTEES)
Appointment; terms, 32.091
Purpose/function, 32.090
MAYOR (See also ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION)
Duties, 30.16
Mayor Pro Tem, 30.17
Term of office, 30.15
MEETINGS (See also BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS)
Enforcement of decorum, 31.05
Meetings; time, 31.01
Motion to reconsider, 31.03
Procedure; Robert’s Rules of Order, 31.02
Rules of decorum, 31.04
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
Disorderly conduct, 131.01
Firearms; use unlawful; generally, 131.02
Manufacture, possession and the like; unlawful, 131.04
Molotov cocktail; definitions, 131.03
Penalty, 131.99
Prohibition of loitering for purpose of engaging in drug related activities, 131.06
Sling shot, air rifles and the like, prohibited; archery exception, 131.05
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Abandoned, Nuisance and Junked Motor Vehicles
Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized, 70.118
Administration, 70.116
Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property, 70.127
Definitions, 70.117
Exceptions, 70.129
Exceptions to prior notice requirement, 70.122
Junked motor vehicle regulated; removal authorized, 70.120
Index 15
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC (Cont’d)
Abandoned, Nuisance and Junked Motor Vehicles (Cont’d)
Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized, 70.119
Objectives, 70.115
Protection against criminal or civil liability, 70.128
Redemption of vehicle during proceedings, 70.125
Removal of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles; pre-towing notice
requirements, 70.121
Removal of vehicles; post towing notice requirements, 70.123
Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final disposition of vehicles,
70.124
Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicles, 70.126
Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle, 70.130
Authority of Police and Fire Department officials in special cases, 70.005
Bicycles
Lights required on bicycles, 72.02
Responsibility of operator, 72.01
Boarding or alighting from vehicles, 70.008
Definitions, 70.001
Duty to stay inside moving vehicles; hanging onto vehicles, 70.011
Entering, jumping on or riding vehicles without permission, 70.010
Exemptions for authorized emergency vehicles, 70.007
Limitation on number of persons in front seat, 70.012
Maintenance of Official Traffic Ordinance Book, 70.003
Motor Vehicle Tax
Administration of Motor Vehicle Tax, 70.096
Annual Motor Vehicle Tax, 70.095
Obedience to police, 70.004
Operation of Vehicles
Approaching emergency vehicles, 70.048
Clinging to moving vehicles, 70.042
Coasters, roller skates and the like, 70.044
Driving on roadways laned for traffic, 70.050
Driving over fire hose, 70.046
Driving through funeral processions, 70.034
Emerging from alley or private driveway, 70.038
Following fire apparatus, 70.047
Golf carts, 70.054
Heavy vehicles; prohibited generally, 70.051
Left turns, 70.035
Limitations on backing, 70.037
Local deliveries, 70.052
Moving cars from parked position, 70.045
One-way street, 70.033
Operation of bicycle on sidewalk, 70.040
2011 S-2
16 Williamston- Index
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC (Cont’d)
Operation of Vehicles (Cont’d)
Riding on handlebars, 70.043
Speed limits, 70.053
Squealing tires unlawful, 70.049
Stop before entering through street, 70.030
Stop before entering stop intersection, 70.031
Turns prohibited at certain intersections, 70.036
Use of handlebars on bicycles or motorcycles, 70.041
Vehicles not to block intersections or crosswalks, 70.032
Vehicles not to be driven on sidewalks; exception, 70.039
Penalty, 70.999
Persons propelling push carts, riding animals or bicycles to obey regulations, 70.013
Public employees to obey traffic regulations, 70.006
Stopping, Standing and Parking
Designation, 70.072
Double diagonal parking, 70.078
Handicapped parking spaces, 70.083
Left side to curb, 70.077
Method of parking; parallel generally, 70.075
Moving vehicles owned by other operators into restricted areas, 70.082
On certain streets at certain times, 70.073
Parking in designated places; prohibited at all times, 70.071
Parking lots, 70.074
Parking within lines, 70.079
Prohibited for primary purposes of advertising, 70.081
Prohibited for certain purposes, 70.080
Vehicle backed to curb, 70.076
Vehicles not to stop in streets; exceptions, 70.070
Traffic and parking regulations, 70.002
Traffic Control Devices
Flashing signals, 71.03
No parking zone and safety zone markers, 71.05
No turn signs and turning markers, 71.04
Obedience to official traffic control devices, 71.01
Play zones, 71.06
School zone, 71.07
Traffic control signal legend, 71.02
Unlawful riding, 70.009
MUNICIPAL POLICIES
Criminal history checks, 38.02
Penalty, 38.99
Regulating smoking in municipal buildings and vehicles, 38.01
2011 S-2
Index 17
NOISES (See also NUISANCES)
Enumerated, 93.21
Penalty, 93.99
Prohibition; generally, 93.20
NUISANCE MOTOR VEHICLES (See also MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC)
Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized, 70.118
Administration, 70.116
Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property, 70.127
Definitions, 70.117
Exceptions, 70.129
Exceptions to prior notice requirement, 70.122
Junked motor vehicle regulated; removal authorized, 70.120
Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized, 70.119
Objectives, 70.115
Penalty, 70.999
Protection against criminal or civil liability, 70.128
Redemption of vehicle during proceedings, 70.125
Removal of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles; pre-towing notice
requirements, 70.121
Removal of vehicles; post towing notice requirements, 70.123
Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final disposition of vehicles, 70.124
Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicles, 70.126
Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle, 70.130
NUISANCES
Cost of removal to be charged to owner, 93.02
Motor Vehicles
Permits for motor vehicles not displaying current license plates and tags, 93.35
Noises
Enumerated, 93.21
Prohibition; generally, 93.20
Notice of abatement, 93.03
Penalty, 93.99
Provisions cumulative, 93.04
What constitutes a nuisance, 93.01
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
Curfew for minors, 130.02
Penalty, 130.99
Signs prohibiting carrying firearms on certain municipal property, 130.01
18 Williamston- Index
OFFENSES, MISCELLANEOUS
Disorderly conduct, 131.01
Firearms; use unlawful; generally, 131.02
Manufacture, possession and the like; unlawful, 131.04
Molotov cocktail; definitions, 131.03
Penalty, 131.99
Prohibition of loitering for purpose of engaging in drug related activities, 131.06
Sling shot, air rifles and the like, prohibited; archery exception, 131.05
ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION
Form of Government
Mayor-Council form, 30.01
Mayor
Duties, 30.16
Mayor Pro Tem, 30.17
Term of office, 30.15
Town Administrator
Appointment, 30.31
Creation of office, 30.30
Duties, 30.33
Relation to Charter, 30.34
Term; compensation, 30.32
Town Officials
Finance Officer, 30.47
Town Attorney, 30.45
Town Clerk, 30.46
Town Tax Collector, 30.48
PARADES
Definitions, 95.01
Public assembly and parade permits, 95.02
Public assembly and parade regulations, 95.03
PARKING (See also MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC)
Designation, 70.072
Double diagonal parking, 70.078
Handicapped parking spaces, 70.083
Left side to curb, 70.077
Method of parking; parallel generally, 70.075
Moving vehicles owned by other operators into restricted areas, 70.082
On certain streets at certain times, 70.073
Parking in designated places; prohibited at all times, 70.071
Parking lots, 70.074
Parking within lines, 70.079
Penalty, 70.999
2011 S-2
Index 19
PARKING (Cont’d)
Prohibited for certain purposes, 70.080
Prohibited for primary purposes of advertising, 70.081
Vehicle backed to curb, 70.076
Vehicles not to stop in streets; exceptions, 70.070
PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD (See also BOARDS AND
COMMITTEES)
Appointment; terms, 32.031
Purpose/function, 32.030
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Application for permit, 113.02
Permitting of activities, 113.01
Regulations controlling door-to-door activities, 113.03
PERSONNEL POLICIES
Personnel policies, 39.01
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT, 33.03
PLANNING BOARD (See also BOARDS AND COMMITTEES)
Appointment; terms, 32.016
Board of Adjustment, 32.018
Comprehensive studies, 32.017
Creation; power, 32.015
POLICE
Chief of Police; appointment; removal, 34.01
Duties of police, 34.03
Duties; generally, 34.02
POLICE ADVISORY BOARD (See also BOARDS AND COMMITTEES)
Appointment; terms, 32.046
Purpose/function, 32.045
POLICE DEPARTMENT, 33.04
POOLROOMS AND BOWLING ALLEYS (See also AMUSEMENTS)
Application, 114.03
Assignment or transfer; changes of premises, 114.07
Betting prohibited, 114.01
Bond, 114.04
20 Williamston- Index
POOLROOMS AND BOWLING ALLEYS (Cont’d)
Conducting of business on licensed premises other than that for which license issued,
114.08
Duties of licensee and his or her employees, 114.09
Fee, 114.05
Investigation and approval, 114.06
License required, 114.02
Penalty, 114.99
Process, 114.11
Revocation; authority, 114.10
PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES
Definitions, 95.01
Public assembly and parade permits, 95.02
Public assembly and parade regulations, 95.03
PUBLIC MORALS, OFFENSES AGAINST
Curfew for minors, 130.02
Penalty, 130.99
Signs prohibiting carrying firearms on certain municipal property, 130.01
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT, 33.06
RAILROADS
Regulating the use of rail trail, 73.01
RECREATION DEPARTMENT, 33.05
REFUSE AND GARBAGE
Clean and ordinary condition of premises; compliance with chapter, 51.02
Collection
Appeal, 51.25
Collection practices; generally, 51.20
Containers; generally, 51.22
No collection on weekends and holidays, 51.23
Preparation of certain materials for collection, 51.21
Violation, 51.24
Construction site to be maintained in sanitary condition; construction refuse not to be
deposited on street, sidewalk and the like, 51.06
Definitions, 51.01
Disposal; throwing, dropping or depositing on public lands or in waters, 51.03
Obstruction of drainage ditch, 51.05
Penalty, 51.99
Permitted areas and methods, 51.04
Transportation, 51.07
Index 21
REGULATORY CODES (See also BUILDING)
Applicability of subchapter and of regulatory codes, 150.20
Building Code; adopted, 150.21
Compliance, 150.28
Effect of amendments to adopted codes, 150.26
Filing of copies with Zoning Administrator, 150.27
Fire resistance rating; adopted, 150.22
Heating and the like Code; adopted, 150.25
Plumbing Code; adopted, 150.24
Uniform Residential Building Code; adopted, 150.23
SALES, CLOSING OUT OR DISTRESS
Definitions, 115.02
State mandate, 115.01
SEWERS AND WATER
Sewers
Sanitary sewer use ordinance, 53.30
Town required connection to water and sewer lines, 53.01
Water
Water use ordinance, 53.15
Water Shortage Response Plan
Conservation measures, 53.54
Definitions, 53.46
Interruption of service, 53.53
Monitoring and enforcement, 53.48
Plan effectiveness and revision, 53.51
Plan implementation, 53.47
Purpose, 53.45
Variance requests, 53.50
Violations, surcharges and penalties, 53.49
Water use classifications, 53.52
SIDEWALKS AND STREETS
Awnings, 92.08
Changes or Alterations
Approval of town required, 92.45
Barricades, 92.46
Permanent closing of streets by town, 92.48
Restoration of street, 92.47
Duty of lot occupant as to cleanliness of sidewalk and gutters, 92.01
Erection of posts and the like, 92.04
Fences and hedges, 92.09
2011 S-2
22 Williamston- Index
SIDEWALKS AND STREETS (Cont’d)
Obstruction
Application, 92.29
Bricks, boxes, building materials and the like, 92.25
Display or sale of merchandise on sidewalk; permit, 92.28
Ditches, 92.27
Issuance, 92.30
Public alley, 92.26
Porches or balconies, 92.07
Regulations, 92.06
Signs; erection prohibited without Commissioners permission, 92.05
Skating prohibited, 92.10
Sweeping trash on streets prohibited, 92.02
Throwing glass and the like, 92.03
SMOKING POLICY
Penalty, 38.99
Regulating smoking in municipal buildings and vehicles, 38.01
SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
Application for permit, 113.02
Permitting of activities, 113.01
Regulations controlling door-to-door activities, 113.03
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Awnings, 92.08
Changes or Alterations
Approval of town required, 92.45
Barricades, 92.46
Permanent closing of streets by town, 92.48
Restoration of street, 92.47
Duty of lot occupant as to cleanliness of sidewalk and gutters, 92.01
Erection of posts and the like, 92.04
Fences and hedges, 92.09
Obstruction
Application, 92.29
Bricks, boxes, building materials and the like, 92.25
Display or sale of merchandise on sidewalk; permit, 92.28
Ditches, 92.27
Issuance, 92.30
Public alley, 92.26
Porches or balconies, 92.07
2011 S-2
Index 22A
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS (Cont’d)
Regulations, 92.06
Signs; erection prohibited without Commissioners permission, 92.05
Skating prohibited, 92.10
Sweeping trash on streets prohibited, 92.02
Throwing glass and the like, 92.03
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Subdivision regulations; adopted by reference, 152.01
TAXATION AND FINANCE
Levying tax; retail short-term lease or rental of motor vehicles, 36.01
Penalty, 36.99
Tax discount, 36.02
2011 S-2
22B Williamston - Index
Index 23
TAXICABS
Additional passengers, 111.07
Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity
Application; contents, 111.26
Contingent on proof of financial responsibility, 111.29
Issuance; qualification generally, 111.28
Payment of license fees, 111.30
Public hearing, 111.27
Required, 111.25
Suspension and revocation, 111.32
Transfer, 111.31
Compliance with state and local rules and regulations, 111.10
Cruising, 111.06
Definitions, 111.01
Designation of vehicles as taxicab, 111.12
Driver’s Licenses
Application; contents, 111.51
Display, 111.56
Fee, 111.52
Investigation of applicant, 111.53
Issuance, 111.54
Required, 111.50
Suspension and revocation, 111.57
Term, 111.55
Fare; rate; rate card, 111.02
Inspection; maintenance, 111.11
Limitation on number of taxis, 111.13
Penalty, 111.99
Receipt, 111.03
Refusal of passenger to pay, 111.04
Refusal to carry orderly passenger prohibited, 111.09
Restriction on number of passengers, 111.08
Solicitation, acceptance and discharge of passengers, 111.05
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR (See also ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION)
Appointment, 30.31
Creation of office, 30.30
Duties, 30.33
Relation to Charter, 30.34
Term; compensation, 30.32
TOWN ATTORNEY (See also ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION)
Office of, 30.45
24 Williamston- Index
TOWN CLERK (See also ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION)
Office of, 30.46
TOWN DEPARTMENTS
Administration Department, 33.01
Fire and EMS Department, 33.02
Planning and Development Department, 33.03
Police Department, 33.04
Public Works Department, 33.06
Recreation Department, 33.05
TOWN OFFICIALS (See also ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION)
Finance Officer, 30.47
Town Attorney, 30.45
Town Clerk, 30.46
Town Tax Collector, 30.48
TOWN TAX COLLECTOR (See also ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION)
Office of, 30.48
TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES
Abandoned, Nuisance and Junked Motor Vehicles
Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized, 70.118
Administration, 70.116
Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property, 70.127
Definitions, 70.117
Exceptions, 70.129
Exceptions to prior notice requirement, 70.122
Junked motor vehicle regulated; removal authorized, 70.120
Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized, 70.119
Objectives, 70.115
Protection against criminal or civil liability, 70.128
Redemption of vehicle during proceedings, 70.125
Removal of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles; pre-towing notice
requirements, 70.121
Removal of vehicles; post towing notice requirements, 70.123
Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final disposition of vehicles,
70.124
Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicles, 70.126
Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle, 70.130
Authority of Police and Fire Department officials in special cases, 70.005
Bicycles
Lights required on bicycles, 72.02
Responsibility of operator, 72.01
Index 25
TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES (Cont’d)
Boarding or alighting from vehicles, 70.008
Definitions, 70.001
Duty to stay inside moving vehicles; hanging onto vehicles, 70.011
Entering, jumping on or riding vehicles without permission, 70.010
Exemptions for authorized emergency vehicles, 70.007
Limitation on number of persons in front seat, 70.012
Maintenance of Official Traffic Ordinance Book, 70.003
Motor Vehicle Tax
Administration of Motor Vehicle Tax, 70.096
Annual Motor Vehicle Tax, 70.095
Obedience to police, 70.004
Operation of Vehicles
Approaching emergency vehicles, 70.048
Clinging to moving vehicles, 70.042
Coasters, roller skates and the like, 70.044
Driving on roadways laned for traffic, 70.050
Driving over fire hose, 70.046
Driving through funeral processions, 70.034
Emerging from alley or private driveway, 70.038
Following fire apparatus, 70.047
Golf carts, 70.054
Heavy vehicles; prohibited generally, 70.051
Left turns, 70.035
Limitations on backing, 70.037
Local deliveries, 70.052
Moving cars from parked position, 70.045
One-way street, 70.033
Operation of bicycle on sidewalk, 70.040
Riding on handlebars, 70.043
Speed limits, 70.053
Squealing tires unlawful, 70.049
Stop before entering through street, 70.030
Stop before entering stop intersection, 70.031
Turns prohibited at certain intersections, 70.036
Use of handlebars on bicycles or motorcycles, 70.041
Vehicles not to block intersections or crosswalks, 70.032
Vehicles not to be driven on sidewalks; exception, 70.039
Penalty, 70.999
Persons propelling push carts, riding animals or bicycles to obey regulations, 70.013
Public employees to obey traffic regulations, 70.006
2011 S-2
26 Williamston- Index
TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES (Cont’d)
Stopping, Standing and Parking
Designation, 70.072
Double diagonal parking, 70.078
Handicapped parking spaces, 70.083
Left side to curb, 70.077
Method of parking; parallel generally, 70.075
Moving vehicles owned by other operators into restricted areas, 70.082
On certain streets at certain times, 70.073
Parking in designated places; prohibited at all times, 70.071
Parking lots, 70.074
Parking within lines, 70.079
Prohibited for primary purposes of advertising, 70.081
Prohibited for certain purposes, 70.080
Vehicle backed to curb, 70.076
Vehicles not to stop in streets; exceptions, 70.070
Traffic and parking regulations, 70.002
Traffic Control Devices
Flashing signals, 71.03
No parking zone and safety zone markers, 71.05
No turn signs and turning markers, 71.04
Obedience to official traffic control devices, 71.01
Play zones, 71.06
School zone, 71.07
Traffic control signal legend, 71.02
Unlawful riding, 70.009
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES (See also MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC)
Flashing signals, 71.03
No parking zone and safety zone markers, 71.05
No turn signs and turning markers, 71.04
Obedience to official traffic control devices, 71.01
Play zones, 71.06
School zone, 71.07
Traffic control signal legend, 71.02
TRASH, COLLECTION OF
Appeal, 51.25
Collection practices; generally, 51.20
Containers; generally, 51.22
No collection on weekends and holidays, 51.23
Penalty, 51.99
Preparation of certain materials for collection, 51.21
Violation, 51.24
2011 S-2
Index 27
VEGETATION AND WEEDS
Abatement of nuisance by town; upon request, 52.06
Investigation of conditions by Town Administrator, 52.04
Maximum permitted height of growth, 52.02
Notice to abate nuisance, 52.05
Penalty, 52.99
Plantings on right-of-way between curbs and sidewalk near intersections, 52.01
Upon failure of property owner to obey notice, 52.07
When deemed public nuisance, 52.03
When notice cannot be given, 52.08
VIDEO GAMES, ELECTRONIC (See also BUSINESS LICENSES)
Privilege license tax for electronic gaming operations, 110.080
WATER AND SEWERS
Sewers
Sanitary sewer use ordinance, 53.30
Town required connection to water and sewer lines, 53.01
Water
Water use ordinance, 53.15
Water Shortage Response Plan
Conservation measures, 53.54
Definitions, 53.46
Interruption of service, 53.53
Monitoring and enforcement, 53.48
Plan effectiveness and revision, 53.51
Plan implementation, 53.47
Purpose, 53.45
Variance requests, 53.50
Violations, surcharges and penalties, 53.49
Water use classifications, 53.52
WEEDS AND VEGETATION
Abatement of nuisance by town; upon request, 52.06
Investigation of conditions by Town Administrator, 52.04
Maximum permitted height of growth, 52.02
Notice to abate nuisance, 52.05
Penalty, 52.99
Plantings on right-of-way between curbs and sidewalk near intersections, 52.01
Upon failure of property owner to obey notice, 52.07
When deemed public nuisance, 52.03
When notice cannot be given, 52.08
2011 S-2
28 Williamston- Index
WILLIAMSTON COMMUNITY APPEARANCE COMMISSION (See also BOARDS AND
COMMITTEES)
Appointment; terms, 32.076
Purpose/function, 32.075
WILLIAMSTON HOUSING AUTHORITY (See also BOARDS AND COMMITTEES)
Appointment; terms, 32.061
Purpose/function, 32.060
ZONING
Zoning provisions; adopted by reference, 153.01
2011 S-2

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
SECTION 1 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY 1
SECTION 2 INTERPRETATION AND DEFINTION OF WORDS USED 3
IN THIS ORDINANCE
SECTION 3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 11
SECTION 4 EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 13
SECTION 5 NONCONFORMING LOTS, STRUCTURES, AND 15
USE OF LAND OR STRUCTURES
SECTION 6 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS 17
Section 6-1 R-4 Residential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Section 6-2 R-8 Residential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Section 6-3 R-10 Residential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Section 6-4 R-15 Residential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Section 6-5 R-20 Residential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Section 6-6 CUD Conditional Use District . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
Section 6-7 MHO Mobile Home Overlay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Section 6-8 AO Agricultural Overlay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Section 6-9 SHO Special Highway Overlay . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Section 6-10 PRD Planned Residential Development . . . . . 40
Section 6-11 HO Reserved for Historic Overlay . . . . . . . . 47
Section 6-12 O&I Office & Institutional . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Section 6-13 CN Neighborhood Commercial . . . . . . . . . . . 52
Section 6-14 CBD Central Business District . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
Section 6-15 CD Downtown Commercial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Section 6-16 CH Highway Commercial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Section 6-17 Reserved . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
Section 6-18 M-1 Restricted Manufacturing . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
Section 6-19 M-2 Mixed Manufacturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
Section 6-20 TRD Tourism Redevelopment District . . . . . . . .75
SECTION 7 SPECIAL USE PROVISIONS 78
SECTION 8 SCREENING AND LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS 84
SECTION 9 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS 94
SECTION 10 SIGN REGULATIONS 98
SECTION 11 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 104
SECTION 12 ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND 106
PENALTIES
SECTION 13 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND PLANNING BOARD 109
SECTION 14 AMENDMENTS TO THE ORDINANCE 112
SECTION 15 LEGAL PROVISIONS 116
SECTION 16 SUMMARY TABLE OF DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 117
AND APPENDIX
1
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING ZONING REGULATIONS FOR WILLIAMSTON, NORTH
CAROLINA AND THE LEGALLY ADOPTED EXTRATERRITORIAL AREA*: PROVIDING
FOR THE ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND AMENDMENT THEREOF: AND
CREATING A BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE STATUES OF
NORTH CAROLINA GOVERNING MUNICIPAL ZONING
BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED BY THE TOWN COMMISSIONERS OF WILLIAMSTON,
STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA, AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION ONE (1) – PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
1-1 Purpose
This ordinance is designed to encourage the growth of the various physical elements of the Town, to
guide the future development of the Town in accordance with a comprehensive plan of land use and
population density so that the town may realize its potentialities as a place to live and work. These
general goals include the specific purposes set forth in the definitions of the respective districts in
Section Six (6).
1-2 Authority
The provisions of this ordinance are adopted under the authority granted by the General Statutes to
North Carolina municipalities (General Statutes 160A, Article 19, Part 3, Zoning). The city may adopt
zoning and development regulation ordinances and these ordinances may be adopted as part of a unified
development ordinance or as a separate ordinance (General Statutes 160A-381).
1-3 Intent
It is the general intent of this Ordinance to:
Regulate and restrict the use of all structures, lands, and waters within Williamston;
And regulate and restrict lot coverage, population density and distribution, and the location and size of
all structures within Williamston; implement those community, county, watershed, or regional
comprehensive plans, or their components, adopted by the community so as to:
1-3.1 Secure Safety from fire, flooding, panic, and other dangers,
1-3.2 Provide Adequate light, air, sanitation, drainage;
1-3.3 Further the Appropriate use of land, and conservation of natural resources;
1-3.4 Obtain the Wise Use, conservation, development, and protection of the Community’s
water, soil, wetland, woodland, and wildlife resources and attain a balance between
land uses and the ability of the natural resources base to support and sustain such
uses;
1-3.5 Prevent Overcrowding and avoid undue population concentration and urban sprawl;
1-3.6 Stabilize and Protect the natural beauty and property values;
1-3.7 Lessen Congestion in and promote the safety and efficiency of the streets and
Highways;
1-3.8 Facilitate the Adequate provision of public facilities and utilities;
2
1-3.9 Preserve Natural Growth and Cover and promote the natural beauty of the
Community.
*Map is available from the Office of the Zoning Administrator, Town Hall, Williamston, NC
1-4 Conflicting Ordinances
All prior ordinances, or parts of ordinances, and amendments thereto conflicting with
this Ordinance are hereby suspended.
1-5 Adoption and Effective Date
This Ordinance shall be effective after review and recommendation by the Planning
Board, publication or posting as provided by law, public hearing, and adoption by the Board of
Commissioners.
Originally adopted this 7th day of August 1978.
And as subsequently amended according to statutory and procedural authority, amendments to the
Ordinance are listed and described individually in the front of this book.
Readopted this 19th day of June 2000.
_________________________________________
Mayor
ATTEST:
__________________________________________
Clerk, Town of Williamston
3
SECTION TWO (2) – INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS OF WORDS
USED IN THIS ORDINANCE
2.1 Word Interpretation
For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain words shall be interpreted as follows. Except as defined
herein, all other words used in this Ordinance shall have their customary dictionary definitions.
2-1.1 The word “person” includes a “firm, association, organization, partnership trust,
company, or corporation as well as an individual.”
2-1.2 The word “may” is permissive.
2-1.3 The word “shall” is mandatory and not merely directory.
2-1.4 The words “used” or “occupies” include the words “intended, designed, and arranged
to be used or occupied.”
2-1.5 The word “lot” includes the words “plots, parcel, site, and premises.”
2-1.6 The word “building” includes the word “structure.”
2-1.7 The words “Map,” “Zoning Map,” and “Williamston Zoning Map” shall mean the
“Official Zoning Map” for the Town of Williamston, North Carolina.
2-1.8 The word “Town” shall mean the “Town of Williamston, a municipal corporation of
the State of North Carolina.”
2-1.9 The words “Ordinance” and “Regulation” shall mean the “Official Zoning Ordinance
for the Town of Williamston, North Carolina.
2-1.10 The words “Planning Board” shall mean the “Planning Board of the Town of
Williamston, North Carolina.”
2-1.11 The words “Town Board” shall mean the “Town Board of Commissioners of the
Town of Williamston, North Carolina.”
2-1.12 The words “Board of Adjustment” shall mean the “Board of Adjustment of the Town
of Williamston, North Carolina.”
2-2 Tense and Number
2-2.1 The present tense includes the future tense, and the future tense includes the present
tense.
2-2.2 The singular number includes the plural number, and the plural number includes the
singular number.
2-3 Word Definitions
2-3.1 Accessory Building and Use: A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
primary use or building, and located on the same lot with such use or building, but not
including open-air storage or facilities accommodating more than four (4) animals of
any kind (Refer to Town Code of Laws relating to animal ordinance).
2-3.2 Administrative Officer: See Zoning Administrator.
2-3.3 Adult Use/Sexually oriented Business: Any principal or accessory use which
excludes minors by reason of age. This definition does not apply to applicable
alcohol beverage laws or voluntary restrictions of the motion picture industry.
4
2-3.4 Alley: A secondary public thoroughfare through the middle or in the rear of a block,
affording access on the rear or side of property or buildings.
2-3.5 Animal Storage: See Kennel.
2-3.6 Apartment: See Dwelling, Multi-Family.
2-3.7 Bed and Breakfast: A private residence in which a maximum of four (4) guest rooms
are set aside for overnight guests whose paid accommodations include breakfast.
2-3.8 Billboard: See Sign, Outdoor Advertising.
2-3.9 Boarding House: A building where, for compensation, lodging with or without meals
is provided.
2-3.10 Building: Any structure which has a roof and is designed for the shelter, support , or
enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. See Structure.
2-3.11 Building, Height of: The vertical distance measured from the grade to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof; or to the mean
height level between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof.
2-3.12 Building Line: See Setback Line.
2-3.13 Church, Club, or Private Lodge: An incorporated or unincorporated association for
civic, social, cultural, religious, fraternal, literary, political, recreational, or like
activities operated on a nonprofit basis for the primary benefit of its members.
2-3.14 Curb Cut: A lowered or cut-away curb for purposes of ingress or egress to property
abutting a public street.
2-3.15 District, Zoning: A section of the Town of Williamston or its extraterritorial area
within which the zoning regulations are uniform.
2-3.16 Duplex: See Dwelling, Two-Family (Duplex).
2-3.17 Dwelling, Single-Family: A detached residence designed to be occupied by one (1)
family only. This does not include mobile homes.
2-3.18 Dwelling, Two-Family (Duplex): A residence designed for or occupied by two (2)
families only, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. Duplexes
must be located on a single lot with frontage on a public street. Multiple Duplexes
may not be placed on a single property. Multiple duplexes on a single property will be
considered under multi-family development standards.
2-3.19 Dwelling, Multi-Family: A residence designed for or occupied by three (3) or more
families, with separate housing and cooking facilities for each, including apartments,
hotel apartments, and group housing.
5
2-3.20 Dwelling Unit: A building, or portion thereof, providing complete living facilities for
one (1) family; inclusive of eating, sleeping, and bath facilities.
2-3.21 Extraterritorial Area: That land coming under the jurisdiction of this Ordinance and
lying beyond the corporate limits as delineated on the Official Zoning Map for the
Town of Williamston, and adopted in accordance with N.C.G.S. 160A-360.
2-3.22 Family: One (1) or more persons occupying a premise(s) and living as a single
housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house,
fraternity, or sorority house, or hotel.
2-3.23 Family Care Home: See Group Home.
2-3.24 Handicapped Person: See Person with Disabilities.
2-3.25 Group Home: A group home as used throughout this ordinance means a “family care
home” with support and supervisory personnel that provides room and board,
personal care and habilitation service in a family environment for a maximum of six
(6) resident persons with disabilities. In addition, a group home shall also mean a
residential use licensed by the state, designed to provide various services, living
assistance, or supervision to persons with disabilities suffering from a variety of long
term or acute disabilities. Group homes must be separated from existing group homes
in a residential district by a distance of one-quarter mile (1,320’) radius.
2-3.26 Home Occupation: An occupation for gain customarily conducted on the premises
by a person or family residing therein.
2-3.27 Hotel: A commercial structure in which sleeping accommodations are provided or
offered to transient visitors for compensation.
2-3.28 Intensive Livestock Operations: The keeping or raising of livestock in such
numbers as require waste disposal systems approved by the Division of
Environmental Management.
2-3.29 Junk Yard: Use of more than 200 square feet of any property for indoor/outdoor
storage, keeping, abandonment, sale or resale of junk including scrap metal, rags,
paper, or other scrap materials, used lumber, salvaged house wrecking, and structural
steel, materials and equipment, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of
automobiles and boats or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof.
2-3.30 Kennels: A fenced in or enclosed structure or structures or facilities in which actual
or intended use is to domicile or board more than four domesticated animals. Dogs
and cats shall be included with the meaning of “domesticated animals.”
2-3.31 Lot: A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a main building or group of main
buildings and accessory buildings, together with such yards, open spaces, lot width
and lot area as are required by this ordinance, and having not less than the minimum
6
required frontage upon a street, either shown on a plat of record or considered as a
unit of property and described by metes and bounds.
2-3.32 Lot Depth: The average distance between front and rear lot lines.
2-3.33 Lot Frontage: The distance between the two (2) side lot lines as measured along the
street right-of-way.
2-3.34 Lot of Record: A lot which is a part of a subdivision or plat which has been recorded
in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Martin County, or a lot described by metes
and bounds, the Description of which has been so recorded.
2-3.35 Lot Width: The distance between side lot lines measured at the front building line.
2-3.36 Mobile Home: A dwelling unit that:
a. is not constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the North Carolina
State Building Code for site-built homes and
b. is composed of one (1) or more components, each of which was substantially
assembled in a manufacturing plant and designed to be transported to the home
site for its own chassis, and
c. in traveling mode is forty (40) feet or more in length and eight (8) feet or more in
width.
d. bears a permanent label or seal of compliance in accordance with N.C.G.S. 143-
149.
Mobile Home Class A: A mobile home constructed after July 1, 1976, that meets
or exceeds the construction standards promulgated by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development that were in effect at the time of construction
and that satisfies each of the following additional criteria:
1. The minimum width (the width being the narrower of the two [2] overall
dimensions) of the main body of the manufactured home as assembled on the
site shall be at least twenty-two (22) feet. The length (the length being the
longer of the two [2] overall dimensions) shall be at least one and threefourths
(1 ¾) times the width.
2. The pitch of the mobile home’s roof has a minimum vertical rise of one (1)
foot for each five (5) feet of horizontal run, and the roof is finished with a type
of shingle that is commonly used in standard residential construction;
3. The exterior siding consists of wood, hardboard, aluminum or vinyl (that does
not exceed the reflectivity of gloss white paint) comparable in composition,
appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in standard
residential construction;
7
4. A continuous, permanent masonry foundation, unpierced except for required
ventilation and access, is installed under the home.
5. Stairs, porches, entrance platforms and other means of entrance and exit to the
home shall be installed or constructed in accordance with the standard set by
the North Carolina Department of Insurance;
6. The moving hitch, wheels and axles, and transporting lights have been
removed;
7. The home must be set-up on poured concrete footers supporting installations
piers; and
8. The manufactured home is to be oriented on the site in such a manner that the
side having the main entrance, and by design intended to be the front of the
manufactured home, is generally parallel to a public street abutting the site.
Mobile Home Class B: A mobile home constructed after July 1, 1976, that meets
or exceeds the construction standards promulgated by the Department of Housing
and Urban Development that were in effect at the time of construction and does
not satisfy all of the additional criteria necessary to qualify the house as a Class A
mobile home, but satisfies each of the following criteria:
1. A continuous underpinning of durable all-weather, rot-resistant material,
unpierced except for ventilation and access, is installed under the home;
2. Stairs, porches, entrance platforms and other means of entrance and exit to the
home shall be installed or constructed in accordance with the standard set by
the North Carolina Department of Insurance; and
3. The moving hitch and transporting lights have been removed or screened from
view.
Mobile Home Class C: Any mobile home that does not meet the definitional
criteria of a Class A or Class B.
2-3.37 Modular Home or Sectional Home: A factory-fabricated, transportable building
designed to be used by itself or, in the case of a sectional home, to be joined with
similar residential units into a modular whole, placed on a permanent foundation and
used for purposes in accordance with North Carolina Building Code Volume 7
Residential, 93 NEC with current NC Amendments.
2-3.38 Mobile Home Park: Any place or tract of land maintained, offered, or used for the
parking of two (2) or more mobile homes used or intended to be used for permanent
living purposes.
2-3.39 Motel: See Hotel.
8
2-3.40 Nonconforming Use: A structure or land lawfully occupied by an existing use which
does not conform with the permitted uses for the zoning district in which it is situated,
either at the effective date of this Ordinance, or as a result of subsequent amendments
to this Ordinance.
2-3.41 Nursing Home: Inclusive of convalescent home, rest home, and elderly home,
described as a health facility where persons are housed and furnished with meals and
continuing nursing care for compensation, either on a part-time or full-time basis.
2-3.42 Open-Air Storage: The keeping of materials in any yard without the benefit of a
roofed shelter.
2-3.43 Person with Disabilities: A person with a temporary or permanent physical,
emotional, or mental disability including but not limited to mental retardation,
cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, hearing and sight impairments, emotional
disturbances and orthopedic impairments but not including mentally ill persons who
are dangerous to others.
2-3.44 Principal Building or Use: The principal purpose for which a lot or the main
structure thereon is designed, arranged, or intended.
2-3.45 Rooming House: See Boarding House.
2-3.46 Service Station: A building or lot dedicated to the rendering of services such as the
sale of gasoline, oil, grease, and accessories, and the minor repair of automobiles such
as tune-ups, brake adjustments, and tire changing, and excluding body working,
overhauling, and painting.
2-3.47 Setback Line: The line on the front, rear and sides of a lot, set according to zoning
district regulations, which delineates the area upon which a structure may be built and
maintained.
2-3.48 Shopping Center: Two (2) or more commercial establishments planning and
constructed as a single unit with off-street parking and loading facilities provided on
the property and related in location, size and type of shops to the trade area which the
unit serves.
2-3.49 Sight Triangle: (Also sight angle.) The area of unobstructed visibility required for
safe egress of driveways and street intersections. Plants, walls or other visual barriers
may not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in height above street level in this triangle. The
area shall be derived by locating point “A” at the intersection of roadways (roadway
shall include driveways in this definition), “A” shall be the point at the back of the
roadway curbing; if no curbing, then the pavement edge of the roadway intersects.
Then locating point “B” by measuring fifty (50) feet along the intersection street edge
of the through street and point “C” by measuring fifteen (15) feet outward from the
through street along the intersecting street edge. The sight triangle shall be completed
by connecting lines between these three (3) points. The area inside the triangle is
defined as the area of unobstructed visibility.
9
2-3.50 Sign: Any devise designed to inform, or attract the attention of persons not on the
premises on which the sign is located; provided, however, that the following shall not
be included in the application of the regulations here:
a. Signs not exceed two (2) square feet in area and bearing only property numbers,
post office box numbers, names of occupants of premises, or other identification
of premises not having commercial connotations;
b. Flags and insignias of any government except where displayed in connection with
commercial promotion;
c. Legal notices, identification, information, or directional signs erected or required
by governmental bodies;
d. Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except letters,
trademarks, moving lights, or moving parts; and
e. Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property, but bearing no
advertising matter.
2-3.51 Sign, Principal Use: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, entertainment, or other activity, conducted, sold, or offered exclusively on the
premises upon which said sign is located.
2-3.52 Sign, Outdoor Advertising: Any sign, including a standard poster panel either free
standing or attached to a structure, which directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, entertainment, or other activity, conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than on
the premises on which said sign is located.
2-3.53 Sign, Temporary: A sign permitted for a period not exceeding twelve (12) months
including for sale, for rent, construction company’s name, subcontractor’s names, and
architects’ and planners’ names.
2-3.54 Street: A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic which
affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
2-3.55 Structure: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground,
or attached to something having more or less a fixed location on or in the ground.
Among other things, structures including buildings, mobile homes, walls, fences,
signs, and swimming pools.
2-3.56 Tourist Home: See Bed and Breakfast.
2-3.57 Trailer, House: See Mobile Home.
2-3.58 Trailer Park: See Mobile Home Park.
2-3.59 Variance: A relaxation of the terms of a zoning ordinance. A variance may be made
where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of
the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary and
undue hardship. Variance(s) are granted by the Board of Adjustment to rules and
regulations set forth in this Ordinance.
10
2-3.60 Yard, Front: An open space on the same lot with a building, between the front line
of the building (exclusive of steps) and the front property or street right-of-way line
and extending across the full width of the lot.
2-3.61 Yard, Rear: An open space between the rear line of the principal building (exclusive
of steps) and the rear line of the lot and extending the full width of the lot.
2-3.62 Yard, Side: An open space on the same lot with a building, lying between the side
line of the building (exclusive of steps) and the side line of the lot and extending from
the front yard line to the rear yard line.
2-3.63 Zoning Administrator: The person, officer, or official and his authorized
representative whom the Town Board has designated as its agent for administration
and enforcement of these regulations.
11
SECTION THREE (3) - GENERAL PROVISIONS
3-1 Interpretations and Applications
In interpreting and applying these regulations, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the
minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purpose of these regulations. Except as hereinafter
provided, these regulations shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul, or otherwise affect in
any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants, deed restrictions, or other agreements between
parties. Wherever the provisions of these regulations impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or
buildings or require a larger percentage of lot to be left unoccupied than the provisions of other
ordinances, rules, regulations, permits, or any easements, covenants, deed restrictions, or other
agreements between parties, the provisions of these regulations shall govern.
3-2 Zoning Affects all Land and Buildings
No land, building, or structure shall be used, no building or structure shall be erected, and no existing
building or structure shall be moved, added to, enlarged, or altered, except in conformity with these
regulations. Bona fide farms may be allowed in the extraterritorial jurisdiction; however, Intensive
Livestock Operations shall not be allowed.
3-3 Only One (1) Principal Use Upon Any Lot
Except as herein provided, there shall be no more than one (1) principal use upon any lot.
3-4 Reduction or Change in Lot Size
No lot shall be reduced or changed in size so that the total area; minimum frontage; front, side, or rear
setbacks; lot area per dwelling unit; or other dimensions, areas, or open spaces required by these
regulations are not maintained. No lot shall be reduced in size so as to produce an additional lot which
is not in conformity with these regulations, unless said is combined with other land to produce a
conforming lot or unless said lot is needed and accepted for public use.
3-5 Maintenance of Open Space
No yard shall be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with these regulations.
The yard for one (1) principal building shall not be considered as a yard for any other principal building.
Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs, ornamental objects, and planted buffer strips shall
not be construed to be encroachments on yards. Eaves are allowed to project no more than twenty-four
(24) inches into a minimum required yard.
3-6 Street Access
A building cannot be erected on a lot which does not abut a public street, a publicly maintained street, or
an alley unless said lot is held in joint ownership with another lot abutting on both said lot and said
street.
12
3-7 Lots with Multiple Frontages
In the case of a corner lot having frontage on two (2) or more streets, all buildings shall be set back from
each such street at least a distance equal to the minimum front yard requirement for the district. If a
building is constructed on a lot having frontage on two (2) streets, a setback from each street shall be
provided equal to the front yard requirement for the district in which the lot is located.
3-8 Uses Prohibited
If either a use or class of use is not specifically indicated as being permitted in a district either as a
matter of right or as a special use, then such a class of use shall be prohibited in the district.
3-9 Permitted Accessory Uses and Buildings
The Zoning Administrator may grant permission for the establishment of the following uses, subject to
any specified condition either set forth herein.
3-9.1 Accessory Uses and Buildings: Accessory uses and buildings permitted in any
Residential District shall be governed by the following requirements:
a. All accessory uses and buildings are required to meet the setback requirements
established for the district in which they are located, as specified in Section Six
(6) of this Ordinance.
b. Accessory uses and buildings allowed by right shall consist of the following
structures:
1. garage (attached)
2. playhouse
3. pumphouse
4. screened recreation area (attached)
5. tool shed
6. work shed
7. fences
3-10 Location of Accessory Uses or Buildings and Corner Lots
Accessory uses and buildings shall comply with the setback requirements of the zoning district in which
they occur. In the case of a corner lot, such accessory use or building shall be set back from the right-ofway
of the abutting side street a distance equal to the front yard setback established for principal uses in
the district.
3-11 Structures Originally Designed as Mobile Homes or Trailer Houses
No structure originally designed or intended for use as a mobile home or trailer house, no matter what its
size or dimensions, shall be used for any reason other than residential purposes, unless prior approval
has been first obtained from the Zoning Board of Adjustment which may attach reasonable conditions
for such use other than residential use. Before approval can be granted by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, such structures shall comply with all applicable building and electrical codes.
13
SECTION FOUR (4) - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
4-1 Walls and Fences
The setback requirements of these regulations shall not prohibit any necessary retaining wall or prohibit
any planted buffer strip, fence, or wall. However, no planted buffer strip, fence, or wall shall exceed a
height of four (4) feet in any front or side yard or six (6) feet in wall or fence height in any rear yard
unless specified elsewhere in this Ordinance; furthermore, within the established sight triangle of any
corner, driveway, or sidewalk, walls and fences cannot exceed three (3) feet in height or otherwise
obstruct sight angles for traffic safety.
Decorative caps or spires which extend above the highest horizontal member of the fence shall not be
included in the measurement of height. The unfinished side of a constructed wall or fence shall face the
interior of the property and shall be constructed out of decorative wood, chain link, welded wire, split
rail, vinyl, natural or cultured stone, or other decorative masonry materials approved by the Zoning
Administrator. Fences shall not be constructed out of materials which may be dangerous or hazardous to
the public; such as, barbed or razor wire in residential districts.
4-2 Structures Excluded from Height Limitations
The height limits of these regulations shall not apply to a church spire, belfry, cupola, or dome; an
ornamental tower not intended for human occupancy; a monument; a water tower; an observation tower;
a transmission tower; a chimney or smokestack; a conveyor; a flag pole, a radio or television tower,
mast, or aerial; a parapet wall not extended more than three (3) feet above the roof line or the building;
and necessary mechanical.
4-3 Reduced Front Yard Setback Requirement
If a proposed structure is within 100 feet of an existing conforming use structure within the same district
and on the same side of the street, and the setback of said existing structure is less than the setback for
the district within which it is located, then the setback of the proposed structure may be reduced to the
average setback distance between the existing structure and the required setback distance.
4-4 Substandard Lots of Record
Any lot of record existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance, which has an area or a width
which is less than required by this Ordinance may be used as a building site for permitted or special uses
in a zoning district, provided that the lot width and lot area not more than twenty-five (25) percent below
the minimum specified in this Ordinance; and provided further that such lot shall conform to the other
dimensional requirements for the district in which it is located.
4-5 Group Projects or Planned Unit Developments
In the case where two (2) or more buildings are to be constructed on a plot of land of at least two (2)
acres in size, not subdivided into customary streets and lots, and which will not be subdivided, the
application of the terms of this Ordinance may be varied by the Board of Adjustment in a manner that
will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood, provided:
14
4-5.1 that site plans and specifications in keeping with those required by the town’s
subdivision regulations be reviewed by the Williamston Planning Board for
recommendations before the Board of Adjustment considers the necessary variances;
4-5.2 that such uses are limited to those permitted within the zoning district in which the
project is located, and that in no case shall the Board of Adjustment authorize a use
prohibited in the district in which the project is to be located:
4-5.3 that the overall intensity of land use is no higher and the standard of open space is no
lower than that permitted in the district in which the project is located;
4-5.4 that if the property lies within or abuts upon a residential district and is to be used for
a nonresidential purpose, there shall be a densely planted buffer strip of at least six (6)
feet in height along the rear and/or side lot lines abutting an Residential District or
conforming residential properties. No such buffer shall extend nearer to the street
right-of-way than the established building line of adjoining conforming residential
lots.
15
SECTION FIVE (5) – NONCONFORMING LOTS, STRUCTURES, AND USES
OF LAND OR STRUCTURES
5-1 Intent
Within the districts established by this Ordinance there may exist structures and uses of land and
structures which were lawful before this Ordinance was passed or amended but which would be
prohibited, regulated differently, or restricted under the terms of this Ordinance. It is the intent of this
Ordinance to permit the conformities to continue until they are removed, and not to encourage their
survival. It is further the intent of this Ordinance that nonconformities are not to be enlarged, expended,
or extended, nor used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited in the same district.
5-2 Application
The regulations set forth in this Ordinance affect all land, every building, and every use of land and/or
building and shall apply as follows:
5-2.1 New Uses or Construction: After the effective date of this Ordinance, all new
construction shall conform with the use, area, and bulk regulations for the district in
which it is to be located.
5-2.2 Conforming Uses or Structures: After the effective date of this Ordinance, land or
structures, or the uses of land or structures, which from the regulations for the district
in which they are located may be continued; provided that any structural alteration or
change in use shall conform with the regulations herein specified for the district in
which they are located.
5-2.3 Nonconforming Uses or Structures: After the effective date of this Ordinance, land
or structures, or the uses of land or structures, which would be prohibited under the
regulations for the district in which they are located shall be considered as
nonconforming. It is the intent of this Ordinance to permit these nonconformities to
continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their continued use.
5-3 Continuing the Use or Nonconforming Land
The regulations set forth below provide the conditions under which the nonconforming use of land shall
be continued.
5-3.1 Adjoining Lots: Where two (2) or more adjoining lots with continuous frontage are
in one (1) ownership at any time after the adoption of this Ordinance, and such lots
individually are less than the minimum square footage and/or have less than the
minimum width required in the district in which they are located, then such group of
lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots of minimum permitted area and
width for the district in which located. Setbacks, side and rear yard dimensions as
described in the district in which the lot is located shall apply.
5-3.2 Extensions of Use: Nonconforming uses of land shall not hereafter be enlarged.
16
5-3.3 Change of Use: Any nonconforming uses of land may be changed to any conforming
use; or, with the approval of the Board of Zoning Adjustment, to any use more in
character with the uses permitted in the district.
5-4 Continuing the Use of Nonconforming Buildings and/or the Nonconforming Uses of
Buildings
The regulations set forth below provide the conditions under which nonconforming buildings and/or
nonconforming uses of buildings may be continued.
5-4.1 Extensions of Use: Nonconforming buildings and nonconforming use of buildings
shall not hereafter be enlarged.
5-4.2 Change of Use: If no structural enlargements are made, any nonconforming building
or use of buildings may be changed to any conforming use; or, with the approval of
the Board of Zoning Adjustment, to any use more in character with uses permitted in
the district. In permitting such change, the Board of Zoning Adjustment may require
appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the provisions of this Ordinance.
5-4.3 Cessation of Use: If the active operation of a nonconforming use is discontinued for a
continuous period of six (6) months, such nonconforming use shall thereafter be
occupied and used only for a conforming use.
5-4.4 Repair and Alteration: Normal maintenance, repair, and incidental alteration in a
building occupied by a nonconforming use is permitted, provided it does not extend
the nonconforming use.
5-4.5 Damage or Destruction: If a building occupied by a nonconforming use or
nonconforming building is destroyed by any means to an extent of more than sixty
(60) percent of its replacement cost at time of destruction, such building may not be
restored for any nonconforming use.
17
SECTION SIX (6) – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
District regulations limiting the use of buildings and/or land and the bulk and arrangement of buildings
are set forth in this Section. These regulations are hereby adopted in the following form of nineteen
(19) districts for Williamston, North Carolina and its extraterritorial zoning jurisdictional area.
(1) R-4 Residential
(2) R-8 Residential
(3) R-10 Residential
(4) R-15 Residential
(5) R-20 Residential
(6) CU Conditional Use District
(7) MHO Mobile Home Overlay District
(8) AO Agriculture Overlay
(9) SHO Special Highway Overlay
(10) PRD Planned Residential Development
(11) HO Historic Overlay – Reserved
(12) O&I Office and Institutional
(13) CN Neighborhood Commercial
(14) CBD Central Business District
(15) CD Downtown Commercial
(16) CH Highway Commercial
(17) Reserved
(18) M-1 Restricted Manufacturing
(19) M-2 Mixed Manufacturing
6-0 Buffer Requirements See Section (8) Eight of this Ordinance.
6-1 R-4 Residential District
This district is a quiet, high density neighborhood consisting of single-family dwellings in older areas of
town where pre-existing small lots overwhelmingly predominate. This district is intended to be located
ONLY in areas of pre-existing lots of record where municipal services are available. New R-4 Districts
are not to be created after original designation except as necessary to more clearly delineate and
acknowledge these long-standing high density areas.
6-1.1 Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted by right:
a. Residential Uses: Residences, single-family (not in include trailers or mobile
homes except as may be shown on the Mobil Home Overlay District on the
Official Zoning Map).
b. Accessory Uses: Customary neighborhood accessory uses.
18
6-1.2 Special Uses
The following uses are permitted subject to the additional regulations imposed below
and in Section Seven (7) of this Ordinance.
a. Utility Installations: Utility substations or pumping stations may be permitted
when authorized by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, provided they are housed in
buildings that harmonize with the character of the neighborhood and have
adequate side yards, fences, and other safety devices.
b. Railroads: Existing railroads may continue to be operated and maintained in
residential districts, but no new railroad construction shall be established except
when so authorized by the Board of Zoning Adjustment, on finding that the
character of the district and public safety are not impaired.
c. Home Occupations: Home occupations may be permitted provided the existing lot
size is at least 6,000 sq. ft. and provided the requirements of Section 7-3.1 can be
met.
d. Swimming Pool: Swimming pools shall be protected by at least a five (5) foot
fence and latching gates to keep children and animals from having unsupervised
access.
e. Accessory Building Uses: Accessory buildings may be permitted for any home
occupation permitted in this district or for personal residential purposes on finding
by the Zoning Administrator that no rental purpose is intended. Accessory
buildings can consist of the following structures: fallout shelter, garage
(detached), greenhouse, screened recreation area (detached), storage shed, dog
pens, and swimming pools.
f. Public Uses: Parks and playgrounds shall be allowable for pedestrian use.
g. Churches: Churches provided they can meet lot requirements of at least 6,000
square feet and meeting the parking requirements of Section Nine (9).
6-1.3 Area and Bulk Regulations
The following regulations limiting the bulk and arrangements of buildings are
required of all permitted and special uses in this district.
a. Minimum Lot Size: Minimum required lot area for single-family residences shall
be 4,000 square feet. Minimum lot width for single-family residences shall be
forty (40) feet measured at the building line.
b. Yard Requirements: Minimum yard depth for principal structure shall be twentyfive
(25) feet for the front yard, twenty-five (25) feet for the rear yard, and eight
(8) feet each of the two (2) side yards. A carport may not be built closer than
eight (8) feet to the side lot line.
19
c. Building Height: Except for church spires, flagpoles, antennas, chimneys, and
similar accessories to structures, all buildings more than two (2) stories in height,
or thirty (30) feet as measured from the foundation at the entrance of the building,
shall be required to have an increase in the original side yard requirements by one
(1) foot for every additional foot of building height.
d. Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than ten (10)
percent of the gross lot area, and they may be built no closer than three (3) feet to
any lot line. Except for attached garages, accessory buildings must be built to the
rear of the principal building.
e. Corner Lots: On corner lots, the side yard on the side of the lot abutting the side
street shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet.
f. Corner Visibility: On corner lots, no obstruction of any kind or nature to the
visibility of vehicles on streets at intersections shall be erected, maintained, or
allowed to exist. This area of visibility shall be considered to be between three
(3) feet and ten (10) feet above the curb level.
g. Off-Street Parking: Refer to the off-street parking requirements in Section Nine
(9) of this Ordinance.
i. Signs: Community uses may have erected one (1) shielded, non-flashing sign that
harmonizes with the character of the neighborhood and does not exceed twelve
(12) square feet in area. All other permitted or special uses may erect only one (1)
non-illuminated sign not to exceed four (4) square feet in area.
6-2 R-8 Residential District
This district is a quiet, medium density neighborhood consisting of single-family, two-family, and
multiple-family dwellings along with limited home occupations and limited private and public
community uses.
6-2.1 Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted by right:
a. Residential Uses: Residences, single-family (not to include trailers or mobile
homes except as may be shown in the Mobile Home Overlay District of the
Official Zoning Map). Dwellings, two-family.
b. Community Uses: Churches, Parks, Playgrounds.
c. Accessory Uses: Customary neighborhood accessory uses.
6-2.2 Special Uses
The following uses are permitted subject to the additional regulations imposed.
20
a. Utility Installations: Utility substations or pumping stations may be permitted
when authorized by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, provided they are housed in
buildings that harmonize with the character of the neighborhood and have
adequate side yards, fences, and other safety devices.
b. Railroads: Existing railroads may continue to be operated and maintained in
residential districts, but no new railroad construction shall be established except
when so authorized by the Board of Zoning Adjustment, on finding that the
character of the district and public safety are not impaired.
c. Home Occupations: Home occupations may be permitted provided they are
authorized by the Board of Zoning Adjustment in accordance with Section 7-3.1
of this Ordinance.
d. Accessory Building Uses: Accessory buildings may be permitted for any home
occupation permitted in this district or for personal residential purposes on
finding by the Zoning Administrator that no rental purpose is intended.
Accessory buildings can consist of the following structures: fallout shelter,
garage (detached), greenhouse, screened recreation area (detached), storage shed,
dog pens, and swimming pools.
e. Swimming Pools: Swimming pools shall be protected by at least a five (5) foot
fence and latching gates to keep children and animals from having unsupervised
access.
f. Signs: Community uses may have erected one (1) shielded, non-flashing sign
that harmonizes with the character of the neighborhood and does not exceed
twelve (12) square feet in area. All other permitted or special uses may erect only
one (1) non-illuminated sign not to exceed four (4) square feet in area.
6-2.3 Area and Bulk Regulations
The following regulations limiting the bulk and arrangements of buildings are
required of all permitted and special uses in this district.
a. Minimum Lot Size: Minimum required lot area for first dwelling unit shall be
8,000 square feet. Minimum lot area for each additional dwelling unit shall be
3,000 square feet.
Minimum lot width for the first dwelling unit shall be eighty (80) feet measured at
the building line.
Additional required lot width measured at the building line per dwelling unit in
excess of one (1) shall be ten (10) feet.
b. Yard Requirements: Minimum yard depth for principal structure shall be twentyfive
(25) feet for the front yard, twenty-five (25) feet for the rear yard, and ten
(10) feet each for the two (2) side yards. A carport may not be built closer than
ten (10) feet to the side lot line when attached to the dwelling. When the principal
structure contains three (3) or more dwelling units, the setbacks shall be: twenty21
five (25) feet for the side yard; thirty-five (35) feet for the front yard; twenty-five
(25) feet for the rear yard; and a separation of sixteen (16) feet between each unit.
c. Building Height: Except for church spires, flagpoles, antennas, chimneys, and
similar accessories to structures, all buildings more than two (2) stories in height,
or thirty (30) feet as measured from the foundation at the entrance of the building,
shall be required to have an increase in the original side yard requirements by one
(1) foot for every additional foot of building height.
d. Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than ten (10)
percent of the gross lot area, and they may be built no closer than three (3) feet to
any lot line. Except for attached garages, accessory buildings must be built to the
rear of the principal building.
Accessory buildings on that side of the lot abutting a street shall not project
beyond the full front yard requirements of the district.
e. Corner Lots: On corner lots, the side yard on the side of the lot abutting the side
street shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet.
f. Corner Visibility: No obstruction of any kind or nature to the visibility of vehicles
on streets at intersections shall be erected, maintained, or allowed to exist. This
area of visibility shall be considered to be between three (3) feet and ten (10) feet
above the curb level.
g. Off-Street Parking: See the off-street parking requirements of this Ordinance.
h. Conversion Of Residences: The conversion of any residential structure in order to
provide additional units will be permitted only if each dwelling unit has a
minimum of 450 square feet of useable floor area with adequate sanitary facilities,
and provided the requirements of 6-2.3 can be satisfied.
22
6-3 R-10 – Residential District
This district is a quiet, medium density neighborhood consisting of single-family dwellings along with
limited home occupations and limited private and public community uses.
6-3.1 Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted by right:
a. Residential Uses: Single-family residences (not in include trailers or mobile
homes except as maybe shown in the Mobile Home Overlay District on the
Official Zoning Map).
b. Community Uses: Churches, Parks, Playgrounds.
c. Accessory Uses: Customary neighborhood accessory uses.
6-3.2 Special Uses
The following uses are permitted subject to the additional regulations imposed.
a. Utility Installations: Utility substations or pumping stations may be permitted
when authorized by the Board of Zoning Adjustment, provided they are housed in
buildings that harmonize with the character of the neighborhood and have
adequate side yards, fences, and other safety devices.
b. Railroads: Existing railroads may continue to be operated and maintained in
residential districts, but no new railroad construction shall be established except
when so authorized by the Board of Zoning Adjustment, on finding that the
character of the district and public safety are not impaired.
c. Home Occupations: Home occupations may be permitted provided they are
authorized by the Board of Zoning Adjustment in accordance with Section 7-3.1
of this Ordinance.
d. Accessory Building Uses: Accessory buildings may be permitted for any home
occupation permitted in this district or for personal residential purposes on finding
by the Zoning Administrator that no rental purpose is intended. Accessory
buildings can consist of the following structures: fallout shelter, garage
(detached), greenhouse, screened recreation area (detached), storage shed, dog
pens, and swimming pools.
e. Swimming Pools: Swimming pools shall be protected by at least a five (5) foot
fence and latching gates to keep children and animals from having unsupervised
access.
23
6-3.3 Area and Bulk Regulations
The following regulations limiting the bulk and arrangements of buildings are
required of all permitted and special uses in this district.
a. Minimum Lot Size: Minimum required lot area where public water and septic
tanks are used shall be 10,000 square feet for each single-family dwelling. Any
lot within any R-10 district not served by public water, and/or sewer shall comply
with lot requirements of the Martin County Health Department.
Minimum lot width shall be eighty (80) feet measured at the building line.
b. Yard Requirements: Minimum yard depth for principal structure shall be twentyfive
(25) feet for the front yard, twenty-five (25) feet for the rear yard, and ten
(10) feet each of the two (2) side yards. A carport may not be built closer than ten
(10) feet to the side lot line when attached to the dwelling.
c. Building Height: Except for church spires, flagpoles, antennas, chimneys, and
similar accessories to structures, all buildings more than two (2) stories in height,
or thirty (30) feet as measured from the foundation at the center of the building,
shall be required to have an increase in the original side yard requirements by two
(2) foot for every additional foot of building height.
d. Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than ten (10)
percent of the gross lot area, and they may be built no closer than three (3) feet to
any lot line. Except for attached garages, accessory buildings must be built to the
rear of the principal building.
Accessory buildings on that side of the lot abutting a street shall not project
beyond the full front yard requirements of the district.
e. Corner Lots: On corner lots, the side yard on the side of the lot abutting the side
street shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet.
f. Corner Visibility: On corner lots, no obstruction of any kind or nature to the
visibility of vehicles on streets at intersections shall be erected, maintained, or
allowed to exist. This area of visibility shall be considered to be between three
(3) feet and ten (10) feet above the curb level.
g. Off-Street Parking: See the off-street parking requirements of this Ordinance
(Refer to Section Nine [9]).
h. Signs: Community uses may have erected one (1) shielded, non-flashing sign that
harmonizes with the character of the neighborhood and does not exceed twelve
(12) square feet in area. All other permitted or special uses may erect only one (1)
non-illuminated sign not to exceed four (4) square feet in area.
i. Buffer Strips and Fences: Planted buffer strips, fences, or walls must be set back
from property lines and sidewalks a sufficient distance to avoid disrupting
24
pedestrian traffic on public right-of-way. No planted buffer strip, fence, or wall
shall exceed a height of four (4) feet in any front or side yard unless specified
elsewhere in this Ordinance (Refer to Section [8] Eight).
6-4 R-15 Residential District
The regulations of this district are intended to ensure that residential development not having access to
public water supplies and dependent upon septic tanks for sewage disposal will occur at sufficiently low
densities to provide a healthful environment.
6-4.1 Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted by right:
a. Residential Uses: Single-family
Two-family residences
Class A mobile homes only
b. Community Uses: Churches
Playgrounds, public and private
Kindergartens or nurseries
Recreation facilities – publicly owned
Parks
c. Accessory Uses: Customary neighborhood accessory uses
d. Farm Uses: Bona fide farms and their customary accessory uses except that
intensive livestock operations are not allowed. Seasonal produce stands for crops
grown at the location.
6-4.2 Special Uses
The following uses are permitted subject to the additional regulations imposed.
a. Utility: Utility substations or pumping stations may be permitted when authorized
by the Board of Zoning Adjustment, provided they are housed in buildings that
harmonize with the character of the neighborhood or are completely screened
with vegetation and have adequate side yards, fences, and other safety devices.
b. Mobile Home Parks: Mobile home parks or courts may be permitted when they
conform to the regulations of the mobile home park regulations of this Ordinance,
provided they are authorized by the Board of Zoning Adjustment. (Refer to
Section 7-3.2).
c. Railroads: Existing railroads may continue to be operated and maintained in
residential districts, but no new railroad construction shall be established except
when so authorized by the Board of Zoning Adjustment, on finding that the
character of the district and public safety are not impaired.
25
d. Home Occupations: Home occupations may be permitted, provided they are
authorized by the Board of Zoning Adjustment in accordance with the provisions
of Section 7-3.1.
e. Accessory Building Uses: Accessory buildings may be permitted for any home
occupation permitted in this district or for personal residential purposes on finding
by the Zoning Administrator that no rental purpose is intended. Accessory
buildings can consist of the following structures: garage (detached), greenhouse,
screened recreation area (detached), storage shed, dog pens, and swimming pools.
Swimming pools shall be protected by at least a five (5) foot fence and latching
gates to keep children and animals from having unsupervised access.
f. Farmer’s Market, exhibition hall, conference center, meeting facilities, and related
uses.
g. Planned Residential Developments: Multi-family residential developments that
would follow requirements as set forth in Section 6-10 and Section (7) Seven of
this Ordinance.
h. Golf courses
Clubs, private
Lodges, private
6-4.3 Area and Bulk Regulations
The following regulations limiting the bulk and arrangements of buildings are
required of all permitted and special uses in this district.
a. Minimum Lot Size: Minimum size lot required shall be 20,000 square feet with a
single-minimum lot width of eighty (80) feet. Any lot which is not served by
public water and/or sewer systems shall comply with the requirements of the
Martin County Health Department.
Lots served by water or sewer would be allowed a minimum lot size of 15,000
square feet, and if served by both public utilities minimum lot size of 12,000
square feet required.
b. Yard Requirements: Minimum yard depth for principal structure shall be thirtyfive
(35) feet for the front yard, twenty-five (25) feet for the rear yard, and ten
(10) feet each for the two (2) side yards.
c. Building Heights: All structures, except for church spires, flagpoles, antennas,
chimneys, or similar accessories to structures more than one (1) story in height or
thirty (30) feet from the foundation measured at the center of the structure be
required to have an increase in the original side yard requirements by two (2) feet
for every additional foot of building height.
26
d. Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings may occupy less than five (5) percent
of the gross lot area, and they may be built to a minimum of three (3) feet from
any lot line. Except for attached garages, accessory buildings must be built to the
rear of the principal building. Whenever five (5) percent or more of the gross lot
area is occupied by an accessory building, the minimum lot line setback shall be
ten (10) feet.
e. Corner Side Lots: On corner lots, the side yard on the side of the lot abutting the
street shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. Accessory buildings on side of the
lot abutting a street shall not project beyond the full front yard requirement of the
district.
f. Corner Visibility: No obstruction of any kind or nature to the visibility of vehicles
on streets at intersections shall be erected, maintained, or allowed to exist. This
area of visibility shall be considered to be between three (3) feet and ten (10) feet
above the curb level.
g. Off-Street Parking: See the off-street parking requirements of this Ordinance
(Refer to Section Nine [9]).
h. Conversion Of Residences: The conversion of any residential structure in order to
provide one (1) additional unit will be permitted only if each dwelling unit has a
minimum 450 square feet of useable floor area and adequate sanitary facilities.
i. Signs: Community uses may have erected one (1) shielded, non-flashing sign that
harmonizes with the character of the neighborhood and does not exceed twelve
(12) square feet in area.
j. Buffer Strips and Fences: Planted buffer strips, fences, or walls must be set back
from property lines and sidewalks a sufficient distance to avoid disrupting
pedestrian traffic on public rights-of-way (Refer to Section Eight [8]).
27
6-5 R-20 Residential District
The regulations of this district are intended to ensure that residential development not having access to
public water supplies and dependent upon septic tanks for sewage disposal will occur at sufficiently low
densities to provide a healthful environment.
6-5.1 Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted by right:
a. Residential Uses: Single-family
Two-family residences
Class A mobile homes inside city limits,
if converted to real property
Class A & B mobile homes outside city limits
b. Community Uses: Churches
Playgrounds, public and private
Kindergartens or nurseries
Recreation facilities – publicly owned
Parks
c. Accessory Uses: Customary neighborhood accessory uses
d. Farm Uses: Bona fide farms and their customary accessory uses except that
intensive livestock operations are not allowed. Seasonal produce stands for crops
grown at the location.
6-5.2 Special Uses
The following uses are permitted subject to the additional regulations imposed.
a. Utility Installations: Utility substations or pumping stations may be permitted
when authorized by the Board of Zoning Adjustment, provided they are housed in
buildings that harmonize with the character of the neighborhood or are completely
screened with vegetation and have adequate side yards, fences, and other safety
devices.
b. Mobile Home Parks: Mobile home parks or courts may be permitted when they
conform to the regulations of the mobile home park regulations of this Ordinance,
provided they are authorized by the Board of Zoning Adjustment. (Refer to
Section 7-3.2).
c. Railroads: Existing railroads may continue to be operated and maintained in
residential districts, but no new railroad construction shall be established except
when so authorized by the Board of Zoning Adjustment, on finding that the
character of the district and public safety are not impaired.
28
d. Home Occupations: Home occupations may be permitted, provided they are
authorized by the Board of Zoning Adjustment in accordance with the provisions
of Section 7-3.1.
e. Accessory Building Uses: Accessory buildings may be permitted for any home
occupation permitted in this district or for personal residential purposes on finding
by the Zoning Administrator that no rental purpose is intended. Accessory
buildings can consist of the following structures: garage (detached), greenhouse,
screened recreation area (detached), storage shed, dog pens, and swimming pools.
Swimming pools shall be protected by at least a five (5) foot fence and latching
gates to keep children and animals from having unsupervised access.
f. Farmer’s Market, exhibition hall, conference center, meeting facilities, and related
uses.
g. Neighborhood Businesses pursuant to Section 6-7. These should be clustered and
planned commercial developments. See Section 6-9.2(h).
h. Planned Residential Developments: Multi-family residential developments that
would follow requirements as set forth in Section 6-10 and Section (7) Seven of
this Ordinance.
i. Golf courses
Clubs, private
Lodges, private
6-5.3 Area and Bulk Regulations
The following regulations limiting the bulk and arrangements of buildings are
required of all permitted and special uses in this district.
a. Minimum Lot Size: Minimum size lot required shall be 20,000 square feet with a
single-minimum lot width of 100 feet. Any lot which is not served by public
water and/or sewer systems shall comply with the requirements of the Martin
County Health Department.
b. Yard Requirements: Minimum yard depth for principal structure shall be thirtyfive
(35) feet for the front yard, twenty-five (25) feet for the rear yard, and ten
(10) feet each for the two (2) side yards.
c. Building Heights: All structures, except for church spires, flagpoles, antennas,
chimneys, or similar accessories to structures more than one (1) story in height or
thirty (30) feet from the foundation measured at the center of the structure be
required to have an increase in the original side yard requirements by two (2) feet
for every additional foot of building height.
d. Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings may occupy less than five (5) percent
of the gross lot area, and they may be built to a minimum of three (3) feet from
29
any lot line. Except for attached garages, accessory buildings must be built to the
rear of the principal building. Whenever five (5) percent or more of the gross lot
area is occupied by an accessory building, the minimum lot line setback shall be
ten (10) feet.
e. Corner Side Lots: On corner lots, the side yard on the side of the lot abutting the
street shall not be less than twenty (20) feet. Accessory buildings on side of the
lot abutting a street shall not project beyond the full front yard requirement of the
district.
f. Corner Visibility: No obstruction of any kind or nature to the visibility of vehicles
on streets at intersections shall be erected, maintained, or allowed to exist. This
area of visibility shall be considered to be between three (3) feet and ten (10) feet
above the curb level.
g. Off-Street Parking: See the off-street parking requirements of this Ordinance
(Refer to Section Nine [9]).
h. Conversion Of Residences: The conversion of any residential structure in order to
provide one (1) additional unit will be permitted only if each dwelling unit has a
minimum 450 square feet of useable floor area and adequate sanitary facilities.
i. Signs: Community uses may have erected one (1) shielded, non-flashing sign that
harmonizes with the character of the neighborhood and does not exceed twelve
(12) square feet in area.
j. Buffer Strips and Fences: Planted buffer strips, fences, or walls must be set back
from property lines and sidewalks a sufficient distance to avoid disrupting
pedestrian traffic on public rights-of-way (Refer to Section Eight [8]).
30
6-6 Conditional Use District
The requirements and regulations for this district are intended to ensure orderly development and use of
a specific property in order to protect the surrounding properties of adjacent districts. Properties within
the district will be subject to mutually agreed regulations that will continue with the property until such
time as the agreement is mutually amended by the property owner and the governing boards or repealed
by governing boards.
6-6.1
a. Property may be placed in a conditional use district only in response to a petition
by the owners of the property to be included. Specific conditions applicable to
these districts may be proposed by the petitioner or the city or its agencies, only
those conditions mutually approved by the city and the petitioner may be
incorporated in the zoning regulations or permit requirements. Conditions and
site-specific standards imposed in a conditional use district shall be limited to
those that address the conformance of the development and use of the site to city
ordinances and an officially adopted comprehensive or other plan and those that
address the impacts reasonably expected to be generated by the development or
use of the site.
b. Petitions for a Condition Use District and permit shall be reviewed by staff for
compliance with the district minimum requirements and compliance with other
plans and ordinances of the Town of Williamston. The staff shall submit a review
of the petition to the Williamston Planning Board for their review and
consideration. The Planning Board shall consider the petition, develop
conditional use district regulations for the subject petitioned property and use as
mutually agreed upon with the property owner/owners and make written
recommendation to the Town Board of Commissioners.
c. When deciding Conditional Use Districts and permits the Town Board and
Planning Board must follow quasi-judicial procedures. No vote greater than a
majority vote shall be required for the town board or planning board to
recommend and issue such permit. Vacant positions on the boards and members
who are disqualified from voting on the matter shall not be considered ‘members
of the board’ for calculation of the requisite majority. Every such decision of the
town board or planning board shall be subject to review of the superior court in
the nature of certiorari in accordance with G.S. 160A-388.
6-6.2 Underlying District Regulations Apply: Within a Conditional Use District, all
requirements of any corresponding general use zoning district(CH, O&I, CN, CD,
CBD, SHO, MHO, R-20, R-15, R-10, R-8, R-4), and all other requirements of this
Ordinance shall apply except to the extent that the approved conditions are more
restrictive than those requirements. A conditional use permit cannot provide for a
variance from the underlying district permitted uses.
Uses Within District: Within a companion Conditional Use District, only those uses
authorized as “permitted uses” within the underlying companion district shall be
31
allowed to be permitted. No use(s) shall be permitted except those uses authorized by
the Conditional Use Permit.
a. In a conditional use permit, conditions may specify the location on the property of
the proposed use(s): number of units, dwelling units, number of uses, location and
extent of supporting facilities such as parking lots, driveways, street access,
dumpsters, lighting, signage, location and extent of buffering and other special
purpose areas, the timing of the development, public easements, facilities, and
other matters or conditions that may be mutually agreed upon by the applicant and
town.
b. Conditional Use Permit shall be issued in strict accordance with Conditional Use
District regulations. No Occupancy or Use may be permitted until all
requirements of the Permit are in compliance.
c. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to approve minor changes in approved
plans as long as such change continues to be in compliance with approved action
of the Town Board, but shall not have authority to approve changes that constitute
a modification of the conditional use permit. The following criteria shall be used
to determine if a modification of the Conditional Use Permit is to be determined
by the Board:
1. A change in the boundaries of the site of the approved Conditional Use Permit
2. A change of use of the Conditional Use Permit
3. An increase of ten (10) percent or more in the building area of the approved
Conditional Use Permit
4. Substantial change in the location of principal and/or accessory structures of
the approved Conditional Use Permit /or,
5. Changes in vehicular access or traffic circulation of the approved Conditional
Use Permit.
If modifications are to be determined by the board, those modifications would follow
procedures as set forth in Section 6-6 for a Conditional Use District and Permit.
6-6.3 District and Permit Petition and Application
a. Petition for Conditional Use District and Permit must be submitted along with
required information at least thirty (30) days prior to a regularly scheduled
Planning Board meeting.
b. The owner or owners of property being requested for designation and permitted as
a Condition Use District and Conditional Use Permit shall submit a map of the
property with accurate meets and bounds of the property, a proposed site plan of
the property that identifies all structures and features existing on the property
along with any proposed changes or additions to the structures and property,
driveway access, parking areas, buffering, utility connections and easements.
This may be submitted as sketch plan for Planning Board hearing but must be
submitted as recordable survey drawings for Town Board of Commissioners
Hearing and Permit issuance.
32
c. The Planning Board must make a written recommendation to the Town Board that
includes a determination as to whether the request is in compliance of any long
range plans of the town. The Town Board shall hold an advertised public hearing
with the date, time and place of the public hearing published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the County once a week for two (2) successive weeks, with
first notice to be published not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty-five (25)
days prior to the date of the hearing. In addition to the published notice, a sign
must be placed on the property to notify interested parties of the rezoning hearing
and property owners within 100 foot minimum of the subject property must be
notified by First Class mail, notice must be placed in mailed at least ten (10) days
prior to the meeting (date of meeting maybe counted)
6-6.4 Violations of Permit
a. Violation of Permit Conditions: The property owner is responsible party for
maintaining compliance of any and all conditions of a Conditional Use Permit.
Upon notification of a violation said property owner shall have fifteen (15) days
to bring property into full compliance, failure to comply shall be construed as
owner initiated repeal of the Conditional Use Permit and District. Any violation
of a condition of an approved Conditional Use Permit shall be treated the same as
any other violation of this Ordinance and shall be subject to the same remedies
and penalties as any such violation.
b. Cancellation of Permit: If for any reason any condition imposed pursuant to these
regulations is found to be illegal or invalid, or if the applicant should fail to accept
any condition, the authorization of such Conditional Use Permit shall be null and
void and of no effect and proceedings shall be instituted to rezone the property to
its previous zoning classification.
33
6-7 MHO – Mobile Home Overlay District
This district is any overlay, shown on the Official Zoning Map, which identifies areas where
Double-wide or large Class A mobile homes may be allowed on individual lots as Special Uses for the
purpose of urban renewal.
All proposals for placement of Class A mobile homes in these areas will be Special Use requests, subject
to the provisions of the underlying district and any additional requirements placed on the project by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
6-8 Agricultural Overlay District (AO)
Agricultural Overlay District limits land use regulations, encourages agricultural enterprises within the
district, promoting family farming and related uses.
6-8.1 Permitted Uses
a. Row Crop farming
b. Medium to light cattle operations (no more than one and one half [1 ½ ] head per
acre)
c. Horse farms (ranches) and stables
d. Light hog operations (supply for farm use and no more than fifty [50] hogs sold
per year for commercial purposes) Commercial purposes shall mean for any use
other than the farm owners’ personal use. Operations must be at least 500 feet
from property line, which includes any public streets or roads.
e. Other similar or normal farm related use
f. Seasonal produce and vegetable stands provided they are located at least fifty (50)
feet from public road right-of-ways
6-8.2 Special Uses
a. Auto, truck and equipment repair limited to two (2) acres in total operation of
garage facility which would include buildings, parking and outside storage. All
junk, remnants, scrap, inoperable equipment and/or vehicles must be screened
from neighboring properties and roadside viewing as required in Section Eight (8)
of this Ordinance.
b. Golf courses
c. Country clubs
d. Outdoor recreation facilities
e. Public swimming pool located in a public or privately maintained facility
34
f. Bed and Breakfast inns
g. Nursing care facilities, rest homes
h. Schools
i. Junkyard facilities provided they conform with the screening requirements of
Section Eight (8).
6-8.3 Accessory Building and Uses
Barns, livestock pens and buildings, equipment sheds, workshops for use of repairing
farm equipment and other related needs. These may be constructed within the
Agricultural Overlay District provided they are at least 100 feet from property lines
and/or public streets without securing a zoning permit and as allowed within the
North Carolina Building Code.
6-8.4 Area and Bulk Regulations
a. Properties within the Agricultural Overlay must contain a minimum of thirty (30)
acres to be considered under the overlay regulations. Properties less than thirty
(30) acres are subject to the underlying district regulations regardless of the
activities thereon conducted, except those properties where is shown a significant
evidence of farm related use occurring.
b. Subdivision of property. Properties that meet the overlay requirements as to area
may subdivide up to three (3) residential parcels in one (1) year with no more than
five (5) parcels within a five (5) year period for the purpose of providing property
for residential use by immediate family members (definition of immediate family
members: sons, daughters, mother, father, brother, or sister) only. Lots must be
minimum one (1) acre each in size and be serviced by a minimum fifty (50) foot
road access. No more than five (5) parcels or residential sources may be served
by the roadway. Service to more than five (5) parcels or residential sources must
be by street or road installed to and accepted by the N. C. Department of
Transportation or the Town of Williamston. Any commercial subdivision or
residential subdivision other than above will be subject to any and all
requirements as set forth in the Williamston Subdivision Regulations of April 6,
1992, and revisions thereof.
35
6-9 Special Highway Overlay District (SHO)
6-9.1 Zoning Areas
These districts are located in areas adjacent or in proximity to the Special Highways
(existing or proposed) listed below. Each SHO overlay shall be drawn on the Zoning
Map. The regulations contained in this Ordinance shall be supplemental to those
found in the underlying zoning district, except as herein noted.
a. U.S. Highway 64
Limited access four (4) lane divided highway at the time this Ordinance is adopted.
6-9.2 Permitted Uses
Uses in the SHO district shall be limited to those permitted and conditional uses listed
in the underlying general zoning district. In no case, however, shall any of the
following uses be allowed to take place on any lot which is located in the SHO
district:
a. Manufacture of:
1. Cut stone and stone products.
2. Pottery and related products.
3. Plastic materials, synthetic resins and rubber, cellulose and other manmade
fibers, except glass.
4. Batteries.
5. Electrical industrial carbon and graphic products.
6. Structural clay products.
7. Soaps, detergents and cleaning preparations and cosmetics.
8. Tires and inner tubes.
9. Asphalt paving and roofing materials.
10. Primary metal products and secondary smelting processes.
11. Yeast.
12. Industrial organic and inorganic chemicals and agricultural chemicals.
13. Pulp, paper, and paperboard mills.
36
14. Flour, other milled grain, and feed and pet foods.
15. Meat packing and poultry dressing.
16. Lumber mills and sawmills and lumber/timber storage yards.
b. Livestock feed lot and sales facilities.
c. Contractors’ storage yards.
d. Unenclosed scrap and salvage metal storage and recycling facilities.
e. Automobile wrecking and salvage yards.
f. Quarries.
g. Coal sales and storage yards.
h. Fuel oil distribution facilities.
i. Auction sales, indoors and outdoors.
j. Automobile painting, upholstering, repair, reconditioning and body work.
k. Flea markets.
l. Mobile home sales lots.
m. Moving and storage facilities.
n. Mini-Warehouses.
o. Tire recapping shops.
p. Truck terminals.
q. Radio, television or microwave transmission towers exceeding 300 feet in height.
r. Sanitary landfills.
s. Roofing repair and installation facilities.
t. Mobile home (manufactured home) parks.
6-9.3 Minimum Lot Size
A one (1) acre minimum lot size is required for all uses except single and two-family
residential uses. Single and two-family residential uses shall observe the required
minimum lot size for the underlying zoning district. If the underlying zoning district
37
requires a greater lot size for any particular use, then the greater lot size requirement
shall prevail.
6-9.4 Maximum Building Height
None for non-residential uses. Residential uses shall observe the maximum building
height for the underlying zoning district. This shall have the effect of nullifying the
underlying zoning district maximum height regulations for all non-residential uses in
the SHO district.
6-9.5 Maximum Floor Area Ratio
Maximum floor area ratio shall be in accordance with the following table:
LOT SIZE RANGE MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIO
Less than One (1) Acre 0.15
1.0 – 1.9 Acres 0.15
2.0 – 4.9 Acres 0.20
5.0 – 9.9 Acres 0.25
10.0 – 19.9 Acres 0.30
20+ Acres 0.35
For a group development the size of the entire group development site shall be used.
6-9.6 Yard Requirements
a. Minimum Front Yard Setback: Fifty (50) feet, but in no case shall any building be
set back less than 100 feet from the right-of-way of the Special Highway.
b. Minimum Side Yard Setback: Twenty (20) feet except 100 feet shall be required
if the side yard lies adjacent to a Special Highway. If said side yard is adjacent to
a right-of-way for a ramp providing access to the Special Highway, a fifty (50)
foot side setback shall be required.
c. Minimum Rear Yard Setback: Fifty (50) feet, except 100 feet shall be required if
the rear yard lies adjacent to a Special Highway. If said rear yard is adjacent to a
right-of-way of a ramp providing access to the Special Highway, a fifty (50) foot
rear setback shall be required.
6-9.7 Usage of Yard and Setback Areas (for all uses other than single and two-family
residential uses):
a. Boundary fences, gates, security stations, flagpoles, outdoor sculptures, fountains
and similar works of art and on-premise ground mounted identification signs are
permitted in any required setback area which adjoins a Special Highway right-ofway.
38
b. Off-street parking and/or loading areas shall not be allowed within any portion of
any yard which lies within fifty (50) feet from the edge of a Special Highway
right-of-way line.
c. Outdoor storage and/or display, accessory structures and uses and the dispensing
of goods and services are permitted in any side or rear yard (other than one which
abuts a Special Highway right-of-way), but no such use shall be located closer to
a side or rear lot line than fifty (50) feet where adjacent to such public right-ofway
and twenty (20) feet in all other instances. Provided, however, the
dispensing of automotive fuels and related products is allowed in front yards
without screening. Any outdoor storage located on the lot shall be screened from
the view of any adjoining lot or roadway and the Special Highway. Such
screening may be located anywhere on the lot so long as the outdoor storage is
materially screened. Such screening shall generally be in conformance with
Section Eight (8) of this Ordinance with the following exceptions:
1. the screening shall consist of natural plantings only; and
2. the screening shall be in place and shall effectively screen said outdoor
storage prior to the certificate of occupancy being issued.
The Zoning Administrator may partially waive the requirements for such
screening in cases where he determines that due to topography such screening
would be impossible to install would be unusually and unreasonably burdensome
upon the developer, or would serve no screening or buffering purpose; provided
however, that in making such waiver the spirit and intent of this Section are met.
6-9.8 Signs
Each nonresidential use shall be permitted all identification signs as allowed in
Section Ten (10) of this Ordinance for the underlying general zoning district except
as follows:
Any nonresidential use on a separate tract of land is permitted one (1) ground
mounted identification sign between the principle building and the right-of-way of the
Special Highway. Said sign shall be no closer than twenty-five (25) feet from the
edge of right-of-way of the Special Highway and shall be limited to a height of
twenty-five (25) feet and a sign face area of 100 square feet. If a street lies between
the principle building and the Special Highway and that street provides the main
access (i.e., street that fronts the use) to the use then said sign shall be installed in lieu
of the identification sign allowed pursuant to Section Ten (10) of this Ordinance. In
all other cases such sign is permitted in addition to all other signs permitted pursuant
to Section Ten (10) of this Ordinance for the underlying general zoning district.
39
6-9.9 Landscaping
In order to provide for a visually appealing landscape as viewed by the motorist from
the adjoining Special Highway, special landscaping requirements are required for
properties which lie adjacent to such Special Highways for all uses except for singlefamily
and two-family residential uses.
The first fifty (50) feet of the yard lying between the Special Highway and the
principal structure shall be landscaped or left as natural wooded landscape. This area
shall run the entire length of the lot on the side where such lot adjoins the right-ofway
of the Special Highway and said area shall include all land lying between said
right-of-way and a line located fifty (50) feet away from and running parallel to said
right-of-way. Such landscaping shall be in the form of natural plantings (trees,
shrubs, planted or naturalized ground cover and/or berm). Part or all of the required
landscaped area may also be left as natural wooded areas. In no event shall any
portion of the landscaping area (excluding fences, gateposts, works of art, walkways,
drainage structures, etc.) consist of impervious surface. No portion of the landscaped
area shall exist as bare soil. All such landscaped areas shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with installation and maintenance requirements of Section
Eight (8) of this Ordinance.
On any lot which borders on and has access to any road other than a Special
Highway, landscaping shall be provided along the length of the yard bordering said
road as required by Subsection 8-2.1 of this Ordinance and shall be provided
regardless of whether said road is a thoroughfare or other road. Landscaping shall be
installed in accordance with all applicable provisions of this Section and Section
Seven (7) of this Ordinance.
6-9.10 Ingress and Egress Points
Direct access onto a Special Highway shall not be permitted. In addition, no access
shall be allowed onto a ramp connecting the Special Highway with an intersecting
road. No two (2) points of ingress and egress (as measured at their closest distance)
on any lot shall be closer than 300 feet apart. If a lot has less than 300 feet of
frontage on a road which may be directly accessed, no more than one (1) point of
ingress and egress (no more than one [1] driveway) shall be allowed on the same road
for each lot, or per principal use if the principal use is located on more than one (1)
lot. Provided however, any retail use engaged significantly in the sale of automotive
fuels to the public using pump islands shall be permitted one (1) additional access
point along its total frontage (total frontage includes the total for all streets on which
the use fronts) provided said access point is no closer than thirty-six (36) feet from
any other access point. Group projects such as shopping centers and office parks
shall be deemed to be a single principal use. No more than two (2) separate points of
ingress and egress per lot shall be allowed per road front except under the following
conditions:
a. The lot is five (5) acres or greater in area; and
b. The development is reviewed under the Special Use Permit process.
40
Under said conditions, more than two (2) points of ingress and egress per road
front per lot may be allowed.
Wherever possible, no portion of any point of ingress and egress shall be located
closer than 200 feet from the centerline intersection of any two (2) roads.
Whenever this distance is not possible due to the lot dimensions, the drive shall be
located as far as possible from the intersection.
Each driveway access shall be at least twenty-four (24) feet in width but not
greater than thirty-six (36) feet in width.
6-10 Planned Residential Developments
6-10.1 Planned Residential Developments
All planned residential developments (PRD’s) shall be developed in accordance with
the standards of this Section.
6-10.2 Purpose and Intent
Planned residential developments (PRD’s) may consist of either single-family
dwellings, duplexes, or multi-family dwellings, or a mixture of said housing types. A
variety of dwelling types and physical arrangements may be permitted such as singlefamily
detached houses, lot-line houses, village houses, twin houses, duplexes, patio
houses, atrium houses, townhouses, other cluster arrangements, or other multi-family
arrangements provided no dwelling unit is located over another dwelling unit. These
dwelling unit types are defined in Section Two (2) of this Ordinance.
The purpose for special regulations for planned residential developments is to
promote variety, innovation, and flexibility in development by allowing certain
variations in lot sizes, dwelling unit types and/or design requirements the intended
purpose of which is to:
a. Permit a creative approach to the development of residential land;
b. Accomplish a more desirable environment than would be possible through the
strict application of minimum requirements of the Zoning Ordinance;
c. Provide for an efficient use of land;
d. Enhance the appearance of neighborhoods through preservation of natural features;
e. Provide for recreational areas and open space; and
f. Provide an opportunity for new approaches to living environment and provide an
environment of stable character compatible with surrounding residential areas.
In keeping with the stated purpose of this Section, PRD’s are only allowed on a
conditional use basis.
41
6-10.3 Project Requirements
The following minimum requirements shall be applicable to planned residential
developments.
a. Minimum Project Site Size: Two (2) acres for all zoning districts.
b. Maximum density: Density shall be calculated on the basis of gross site area
(project streets, public or private, are included in gross site area) and fractions
shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.
Allowed densities for PRD’s for each applicable zone are as follows:
Basic Density Allowed
Zone (Units Per Acre)
R-20 7
R-15 5
R-8 4
R-10 5
O&I 6
NOTE: Subsection 6-10.1.3 provides for a schedule of density bonuses over the
above listed basic maximum densities where projects meet certain
requirements set forth in said subsection.
c. Dwelling Unit Types
Allowed dwelling unit types for PRD’s for each applicable zone are as follows:
R-15 R-20 R-10 R-8 O&I
Single-Family
Detached Houses YES YES YES YES YES
Lot Line Houses YES YES YES YES YES
Patio Houses YES YES YES YES YES
Twin Houses YES YES NO YES YES
Duplexes YES YES NO YES YES
Town Houses YES YES NO YES YES
Multi-Family YES YES NO YE S YES
And Other
Developments
(No Units
Over Units)
42
d. Public water and sewer must be provided to the site.
e. Minimum front yard setback or setback from any dedicated street: forty (40) feet
at project boundary.
f. Minimum side yard setback at project boundary: twenty-five (25) feet (except on
corner lots where thirty-five [35] feet shall be provided).
g. Minimum rear yard setback at project boundary: thirty (30) feet.
h. Minimum lot width (as measured at required front yard setback): 100 feet. In no
case shall the front lot width at the street right-of-way line be less than fifty (50)
feet.
i. Maximum building height: thirty-five (35) feet.
j. Minimum unobstructed open space. Fifty (50) percent. [As used in section the
term “unobstructed open space” shall mean all land of the gross site area
(including street rights-of-way to be dedicated), which is not covered by buildings
or other structures. Off-street parking areas and drives are counted as
“unobstructed open space” but are not counted as “improved common open
space.”]
k. Where parking is provided by private drives for individual dwelling units, space
shall be provided for parking at least two (2) cars at each dwelling unit.
Where common parking areas are used at least two (2) parking spaces shall be
provided for each one (1) or two (2) bedroom dwelling units and at least three (3)
parking spaces shall be provided for each three (3) or more bedroom dwelling
units. However, where dwellings are designed specifically for elderly and/or
handicapped persons the minimum parking requirements shall be one and onefourth
(1 ¼ ) parking spaces per such dwelling unit.
l. At least one (1) ground entrance to every dwelling shall be located within 100 feet
of the parking area within the development designated to serve that dwelling.
m. Private streets within the development shall be so designed and constructed to
carry vehicular traffic from public streets to parking or service areas within the
development. All private streets shall meet the following requirements:
1. Private streets must have a minimum right-of-way width of thirty (30) feet,
exclusive of parking bay areas, and have a minimum pavement width of
twenty (20) feet, measured from edge of pavement to edge of pavement.
Additional widths will be required where parallel parking is to be provided.
2. Angled parking areas directly adjoining private streets will be permitted;
however, the combined length of parking areas along private streets may not
exceed fifty (50) percent of the length of the adjoining roadway. Such parking
areas may be alternated from one (1) side of the street to the other. All other
43
angled parking areas must be clearly separated from the private street by at
least a barrier island.
3. The edge of pavement of any private street shall be no closer than twenty (20)
feet to any multi-family principal building. However, private streets may be
within ten (10) feet of accessory buildings.
n. In projects where multi-family units (dwelling units where more than two [2]
units are attached) are proposed there shall be an area or areas of Improved
Common Open Space. Said area or areas in combination shall be at least 10,000
square feet in area or 500 square feet in area per multi-family dwelling unit,
whichever is greater. (As used in this Section the term “Improved Common Open
Space” shall mean land and/or water areas within the site designated for
development, exclusive of lands occupied by streets, street rights-of-way, or offstreet
parking, not individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is
designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the
development, and which has been improved with recreational areas and amenities
such as, but not limited to playgrounds, ballfields, tennis courts, nature trails,
gardens, swimming pools, clubhouses, etc.)
o. Screening shall be required at the following locations:
1. along major thoroughfares, but the screen shall not hinder sight distance
where development streets or entrances intersect with thoroughfares.
2. along a property line or a street bounding the project where said property line
or street separates multi-family housing areas within the project and existing
single-family residential areas outside the project.
3. along a property line or a street bounding the project where said property line
or street separates the project from any areas zoned or used for non-residential
purposes.
Such screening shall materially screen the project from the view of the adjoining
property, and in the case of items one (1) and three (3) immediately above, the
adjoining property from the view of the project. Such screening shall otherwise
be in compliance with Section Eight (8) of this Ordinance.
In cases where screening is required by this Ordinance and devices such as
existing vegetation or topographical features or extreme size of the tract involved
would render the installation of screening unnecessary, the City Council is hereby
empowered to accept the existing features as meeting the general screening
requirements. Such decision shall be based on the spirit and intent of this Section.
The vacancy or non-use of adjacent property shall not negate the necessity for
installation of screening. If at any time after such existing features are accepted,
such features are altered so as to render them inadequate as screening as described
in this Section to achieve the required screen, the developer shall be required to
make the necessary improvements to achieve the required screen.
44
p. The following additional requirements apply to multi-family projects:
1. Multi-Family development will be allowed based on a ratio which allocates
seventy-five (75) percent of new housing to single-family housing and twentyfive
(25) percent to other types of housing. The following additional
requirements apply to multi-family projects:
2. No principal residential building side (front, rear, left, or right) shall be
located closer than thirty-five (35) feet to the edge of pavement of any private
street or off-street parking area within the development.
3. Front yard set back from a public street shall be a minimum of eighty feet (80)
and shall not include parking or any other structure except entrance drive and
one (1) identification sign.
4. Side and rear yards set back adjacent to property lines are at minimum 100
feet.
5. Development proposed to contain more than twenty (20) dwelling units shall
have frontage along and direct primary access on a major thoroughfare as
shown on the Thoroughfare Plan for Williamston 1995, revised 2002.
6. Development to contain more than fifty (50) units shall have frontage along
and two (2) direct primary accesses on a major thoroughfare, or on one (1)
major thoroughfare and one (1) minor thoroughfare.
7. Off-street parking areas and all internal streets shall provide safe and
convenient access for firefighting and refuse collection vehicles and other
service and delivery vehicles. Parking shall be provided on the following
standards:
a. 1 bedroom units 1.8 spaces per unit
b. 2 bedroom units 2.2 spaces per unit
c. 3 bedroom units 2.5 spaces per unit
8. The arrangement of buildings shall not create long alleyways between the
rears of residential buildings on the site.
9. The front entrance to any residential building shall not directly face the rear of
any other residential building.
10. No dwelling unit shall be located over another dwelling unit.
11. No exterior wall of a building shall run unarticulated for a horizontal distance
of more than forty (40) feet.
12. No multi-family principal building shall be located closer than forty (40) feet
to any other building within the development.
45
13. All walls of greater than 200 square feet shall have at least six (6) square feet
of window area per 200 square feet of total wall area; however, this
requirement shall not apply to walls facing alleyways or end elevations.
14. Outdoor storage facilities, either attached or freestanding shall be provided for
the exclusive use of occupants at the rate of fifteen (15) square feet per
bedroom per dwelling unit. Storage facilities must be within reasonable
distance of units being accommodated and not grouped separately as “miniwarehouse”
structure.
15. Density Bonus not available on multi-family developments
16. Driveway and street access may require adjoining street widening, curbs and
gutter and/or acceleration/deceleration lanes where in the opinion of planning
board, town board and/or NCDOT such improvements are warranted by the
impact of the development. Installation of traffic signals as necessary and
determined by NCDOT. All costs related to these improvements are
responsibility of the developer.
17. Developer shall provide a storm water management plan prepared and
certified by a Registered Professional Engineer. The plan shall provide for the
control of the first half (½) inch of rainfall. The plan must assess off-site
drainage ways, ditches, culverts and pipes for their ability to handle increased
storm water runoff created by new development. Required off-site
improvements will be responsibility of the developer.
q. Each phase of a multi-phased project shall be able to stand as an independent
project. As used in this Section, the term “phase” shall refer to that portion of the
project for which the applicant requests a conditional use permit. At no point in
the development of a multi-phase project shall the density of residential
development in a completed phase of the project area exceed the maximum
density established approved for the project.
6-10.4 Density Bonus
A density bonus of up to forty (40) percent over the basic density normally allowed
may be approved by the Board of Adjustment when granting the special use permit.
Such density bonus must be based upon the amount of unobstructed open space
greater than the minimum fifty (50) percent and the amount of land area to be used
for Improved Common Open Space.
Both the unobstructed open space test and the Improved Common Open Space test
must be met in accordance with the schedule below in order for a project to be
considered for the respective density bonus. All Improved Common Open Space not
covered by buildings or structures shall also be deemed unobstructed open space.
The bonuses listed on the schedule shall be maximum bonuses and the Board of
Adjustment, at its discretion may grant a smaller bonus.
46
Application for the density bonus must accompany the preliminary site plan when the
plan is submitted for approval. Bodies of water shall constitute no more than twentyfive
(25) percent of the unobstructed open space nor more than fifty (50) percent of
the Improved Common Open Space used for calculating the maximum allowable
density bonus.
The density bonus schedule shall be as follows:
Maximum
% of Site Minimum Allowable
(Gross % of Site Density
Land Area) (Gross Land Bonus (%
to be Area) to be Increase
Unobstructed Improved in Units
Open Space Open Space Per Acre)
51% to 55% 12% 8%
56% to 60% 14% 16%
61% to 65% 16% 24%
66% to 70% 18% 32%
Over 70% 20% 40%
47
6-11 Reserved for Historic Overlay District
48
49
6-12 OI – Office and Institutional District
This district provides for the development of offices, community institutions, limited related services,
and residences which have similar development characteristics. It is also a district especially well suited
as a transition zone in established residential neighborhoods near the downtown commercial district.
6-12.1 Permitted Uses:
The following uses shall be permitted by right:
a. Residences: Dwellings, two-family
Residences, single-family (not including mobile homes)
b. Offices: Business
Civic, charitable, political, union, fraternal, social and religious
Government
Professional offices and agencies (medical, dental, engineering,
legal, etc.)
c. Institutions: Cemeteries
Institutions, public or semi-public (but not to include jails,
reformatories, or other correctional institutions)
Churches
Colleges
Dancing Schools
Schools, public or private
d. Services: Boarding homes and nursing homes
Funeral homes
Motels
Radio and television broadcasting stations
e. Accessory Uses and Buildings:
Customary and incidental accessory uses and buildings
Parking lots (Refer to Section Nine [9]).
6-12.2 Special Uses
The following uses are permitted subject to the additional regulations imposed.
a. Utility Installations: Utility substations or pumping stations may be permitted
when authorized by the Board of Zoning Adjustment, provided they are housed in
buildings or otherwise screened to harmonize with the character of the
neighborhood completely and have adequate side yards, fences, and other safety
devices.
b. Railroads: Existing railroads may continue to be operated and maintained in
residential districts, but no new railroad construction shall be established except
50
when so authorized by the Board of Zoning Adjustment, on finding that the
character of the district and public safety are not impaired.
c. Home Occupations: Home occupations may be permitted, provided they are
authorized by the Board of Zoning Adjustment in accordance with the provisions
of Section 7-3.1 of this Ordinance.
d. Kindergartens or Nurseries: Kindergartens and nurseries may be permitted when
at least 100 square feet of outdoor play area are supplied for each child
accommodated; the entire play area is enclosed by a fence having a minimum
height of at least four (4) feet and constructed in such a manner that maximum
safety to the children is insured; and off-street parking requirements be met in
accordance with Section 9-5.10.
e. Boarding Home: Conversion of residences into boarding homes may be allowed
by the Board of Zoning Adjustment, provided that 1) improved off-street parking
space is sufficient to meet the requirements of Section 9-5.20; 2) the character of
the structure is maintained to housing code standards; and 3) the neighborhood
character is maintained. The Board of adjustment may impose further conditions
to insure that the boarding house is not a disruptive neighborhood use.
f. Conversion Of Residence to Other Uses: Conversion of residences to other
permitted uses may be allowed by Board of Adjustment, provided that: 1)
adequate off-street parking is provided on the lot (refer to Section Nine [9]) or
within 120 feet of the lot in any direction with easy access; 2) the character of the
structure is improved and maintained; and 3) if the conversion use ceases to
function for a period of one (1) year, the structure would revert back to its original
purpose.
g. Multi-Family: Allowed as a special use provided development meets
requirements as set forth in Section 6-10 and Section (7) Seven of this Ordinance.
6-12.3 Area and Bulk Regulations
The following regulations limiting the bulk and arrangements of buildings are
required of all permitted and special uses in this district.
a. Minimum Lot Size, Residences: Minimum required lot area for single-family
residences shall be 6,000 square feet. Minimum lot width for single-family
residences shall be sixty (60) feet measured at the building line.
Minimum required lot area for two-family dwelling shall be 8,000 square feet.
Minimum lot width for two-family dwelling shall be seventy (70) feet measured
at the building line.
Minimum additional lot area for each dwelling unit in excess of two (2) dwelling
units shall be 2,000 square feet.
51
b. Minimum Lot Sizes, Other Uses: Minimum required lot area for offices,
institutions, and services shall be 6,000 square feet measured at the building line.
c. Yard Requirements: Minimum yard depth for principal structure shall be twentyfive
(25) feet for the front yard, twenty-five (25) feet for the rear yard, and eight
(8) feet each for the two (2) side yards. A carport may not be built closer than
eight (8) feet to the side lot line. When the principal structure contains three (3) or
more dwelling units, the yard setbacks shall be: side yard, fifteen (15) feet; front
yard, fifteen (15) feet; rear yard, fifteen (15) feet; and a separation of sixfteen (16)
feet between each principal structure.
d. Building Heights: Except for church spires, flagpoles, antennas, chimneys, or
similar accessories to structures, all buildings more than two (2) stories in height
or forty (40) feet from the foundation measured at the center of the building shall
be required to have an increase in the original side yard requirements by one (1)
foot for every additional foot of building height.
e. Building Uses: Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than ten (10) percent
of the gross lot area, and they may be built no closer than three (3) feet from any
lot line. Except for attached garages, accessory buildings must be built to the rear
of the principal building.
f. Corner Lots: On corner lots, the side yard on the side of the lot abutting the side
street shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. Accessory buildings on side of the lot
abutting a street shall not project beyond the full front yard requirement of the
district.
g. Corner Visibility: On corner lots, no obstruction of any kind or nature to the
visibility of vehicles on streets at intersections shall be erected, maintained, or
allowed to exist. This area of visibility shall be considered to be between three
(3) feet and ten (10) feet above the curb level.
h. Off-Street Parking: See the off-street parking requirements of this Ordinance
(Refer to Section Nine [9]).
i. Conversion Of Residences: The conversion of any residential structure in order
to provide one (1) additional unit will be permitted only if each dwelling unit has
a minimum 450 square feet of useable floor area and adequate sanitary facilities.
j. Signs: Refer to Section Ten (10) of this Ordinance.
k. Curb Cuts: No portion of any entrance driveway leading from a public street
shall be closer than fifteen (15) feet to the property line at the intersection of
streets.
The width of any entrance driveway leading from the public street shall not
exceed thirty (30) feet at its intersecting with the curb or street line.
52
Driveways leading from a public street must be at least twenty (20) feet apart as
measured at the curb.
l. Buffer Strips and Fences: Planted buffer strips, fences, or walls must be set back
from property lines and sidewalks a sufficient distance to avoid disrupting
pedestrian traffic on public rights-of-way (Refer to Section Eight [8]).
6-13 CN – Neighborhood Commercial District
This district is established as a district in which the principal use of land is to provide for goods and
services for a residential neighborhood. It is the intent of this district to provide convenient services to
relatively few people within a short distance from such district. The arrangement of the land uses within
the CN Neighborhood Commercial District shall be of a design so as not to conflict with abutting
residential areas. Further, this district should be limited to one (1) quadrant of a street intersection and
should not be promoted in mid-block areas.
6-13.1 Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted by right:
a. Trade: Florists shop
Grocery stores
Novelty stores
Launderettes
b. Services: Barber and beauty shops
Cafes/Restaurants
Dry Cleaning stores
Neighborhood library
c. Accessory Uses and Buildings:
Customary and incidental accessory uses and buildings
Parking lots
Principal use signs
6-13.2 Special Uses
The following uses are permitted subject to the additional regulations imposed.
a. Kindergartens or Nurseries: Kindergartens and nurseries may be permitted when
at least 100 square feet of outdoor play area are supplied for each child
accommodated; the entire play area is enclosed by a fence having a minimum
height of at least four (4) feet and constructed in such a manner that maximum
safety to the children is insured; and off-street parking requirements be met in
accordance with Section 9-5.10.
b. Conversion of Residence To Other Uses: Conversion of residences to other
permitted uses may be allowed by Board of Adjustment, provided that: 1)
adequate off-street parking is provided on the lot or within 120 feet of the lot in
53
any direction with easy access; 2) the character of the structure is improved and
maintained; 3) the neighborhood character is improved and maintained; and 4) if
the conversion use ceases to function for a period of one (1) year, the structure
would revert back to its original purpose.
c. Auto Repair Shop: Automobile repair, not to include the sale of tires, body shop
or painting or automobiles. All repair work to be done inside of structure. No
outside storage of supplies or remnants of repairs.
d. Services: Funeral Homes
6-13.3 Area and Bulk Regulations
The following regulations limiting the bulk and arrangements of buildings are
required of all permitted and special uses in this district.
a. Building Size Limit: No one use may contain more than 4,000 square feet of gross
floor area within one (1) enclosed building under one (1) roof.
b. Minimum Lot Sizes: Minimum required lot area for uses in this district shall be
6,000 square feet.
c. Yard Requirements: Minimum yard depth for principal structure shall be twentyfive
(25) feet for the front yard fifteen (15) feet for the rear yard, and three (3) feet
for the side yards except where a CN Neighborhood District abuts a District
where a fifteen (15) foot side yard is required.
d. Building Heights: Except for church spires, flagpoles, antennas, chimneys, or
similar accessories to structures, all buildings more than three (3) story in height
or forty (40) feet from the foundation measured at the center of the building shall
be required to have an increase in the original side yard requirements by one (1)
foot for every additional foot of building height.
e. Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than ten (10)
percent of the gross lot area, and they may be built no closer than three (3) feet
from any lot line. Except or attached garages, accessory buildings must be built
to the rear of the principal building.
f. Corner Lots: On corner lots, the side yard on the side of the lot abutting the side
street shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. Accessory buildings on side of the lot
abutting a street shall not project beyond the full front yard requirement of the
district.
g. Corner Visibility: On corner lots, no obstruction of any kind or nature to the
visibility of vehicles on streets at intersections shall be erected, maintained, or
allowed to exist. This area of visibility shall be considered to be between three
(3) feet and ten (10) feet above the curb level.
54
h. Off-Street Parking: See the off-street parking requirements of this Ordinance
(Refer to Section Nine [9]).
i. Signs: Refer to Section Ten (10) of this Ordinance.
j. Curb Cuts: No portion of any entrance driveway leading from a public street shall
be closer than fifteen (15) feet to the property line at the intersection of streets.
Driveways leading from a public street must be at least twenty (20) feet apart as
measured at the curb.
k. Buffer Strips and Fences: Planted buffer strips, fences, or walls must be set back
from property lines and sidewalks a sufficient distance to avoid disrupting
pedestrian traffic on public rights-of-way (Refer to Section Eight [8]).
6-14 CBD – Central Business District
Within this district it would be the spirit and intent of the Ordinance to foster and promote a
professional, retailing and personal services atmosphere to ensure a stable economy for effective
revitalization of the area.
6-14.1 Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted by right:
a. Retail, Office, Service Uses:
Antique Shops
Art and school supply stores and Art galleries and studios
Auditoriums
Bakeries
Banks
Barber shops
Beauty shops
Bicycle stores, including rental and repair
Blueprinting and photostatting establishments
Book or stationery stores
Business colleges or business schools, operated as a business enterprise
Camera and photographic supply stores
Carpet, rugs and linoleum stores
Caskets and casket supplies, when conducted wholly within a completely
enclosed building
Catering establishments when operated in conjunction with restaurant/café
or diner
China and glassware stores
Clothing and costume retail shops
Coin and stamp stores
Custom dressmaking and millinery shops
Department stores
Drug stores
55
Dry cleaning stores
Electrical and household appliance stores, including radio and television
sales
Employment agencies
Florist shops
Food stores, grocery stores, meat markets, fish markets, bakery goods,
candy and ice cream shops, and delicatessens
Furrier shops
Furniture stores
Gift stores
Hardware stores
Hobby shops
Interior decorating shops
Jewelry stores, including watch repair
Laundries, except self-service, employing not more than four (4) persons
in addition to one (1) owner or manager
Leather goods and luggage stores
Loan offices
Locksmith shops
Medical or dental clinics and laboratories
Mortuaries
Musical instrument shops
News stands
Office supply stores
Optometrists
Paint and wallpaper stores
Pawn shops
Photograph developing and processing shops in conjunction with camera
and supply sales
Photographer’s or artist’s studios
Picture framing establishments
Printing, lithographing, or publishing establishments for letter press,
business cards, mimeographing, and other similar services;
newspaper publishing, including engraving and photoengraving
Radio and television broadcasting studios
Restaurants (excluding drive-in and carry-out restaurants), tea rooms or
cafes
Second hand stores, when conducted wholly within a completely enclosed
building
Sewing machine stores – sales or sales with repair
Shoe repair stores
Shoe stores
Sporting goods stores
Tailor shops
Taxidermist shops
Taxi stands
Telephone and telegraph offices
Theaters, excluding drive-in theaters
Tobacco shops
56
Toy shops
Travel bureau and ticket offices
Variety stores
Wearing apparel shops
Any other similar type retail store or service establishment not specifically
permitted herein but which has economic compatibility with the
established uses on adjoining conforming premises
b. Offices:
Business
Financial
Government
Professional (medical, dental, engineers, etc.)
c. Services:
Fire stations
Police stations
Civic Clubs & Organizations except on Main Street
Parking lots (Refer to Section Nine [9])
Public Meeting Facilities
d. Accessory Uses and Buildings:
Customary and incidental accessory uses and building provided that all
accessory uses are enclosed on at least three (3) sides and materials stored
are not visible from the right-of-way.
e. Signs:
Principal use signs (Refer to Section Ten [10])
6-14.2 Special Uses
The following uses are permitted subject to the additional regulations imposed.
a. Automobile Service Stations: Service stations shall have a minimum lot area of
7,000 square feet with a frontage of not less than 100 feet. No portion of a service
station building or equipment shall be nearer than twenty-five (25) feet to the
front property line. All automobile repair or storage shall be performed inside a
structure.
b. Multi-Family Dwellings: Multi-family dwellings above the first story level of any
structure having the first story devoted to a permitted use.
c. Drive-In Banks: Drive-in banks will require special attention to traffic circulation
57
6-14.3 Area and Bulk Regulations
The following regulations limiting the development and arrangement of building
and/or land area required of all permitted and special uses in this district.
a. Loading Space: One (1) loading space shall be required for each individual
business establishment when abutting an alley
b. Sidewalks: Adequate sidewalks paralleling streets are required
c. Signs: Refer to Section Ten (10) of this Ordinance
d. Security Doors & Windows: Security measures such as window and door bars are
to be placed on the inside of the building. Outside bars or steel doors are
prohibited.
6-14.4 Adopting a Downtown Commercial District Development Plan
In the central business district, the existing street layout and density of building
construction make it impractical to apply the area and bulk requirements and certain
other portions of this Ordinance for building arrangement, off-street parking, and
truck loading space to individual property units. The Planning Board shall review all
town plans for downtown development. The Planning Board shall review the
proposed land use and development plans taking into consideration the following
conditions:
a. Adequate off-street parking and truck loading space to relieve traffic
congestion in the streets.
b. Controlled vehicle movement within, through, and around the Central
Business District.
c. Adequate, safe, and convenient sidewalks for pedestrian circulation.
d. Landscaping and planting strips to promote the character of the Central
Business District.
e. The possibilities for future expansion and development of the Central
Downtown District.
f. The relationship of the proposed land use and development of the Central
Downtown Business District.
g. The accessibility of all buildings to emergency vehicles.
h. Compatibility with the spirit and intent of the Central Business District.
58
6-15 CD – Downtown Commercial District
This is the central business district which provides retailing, personal services, and office space for local
and regional commercial activities. The regulations are designed to permit a concentrated development
of permitted facilities and to protect the district itself from over-intensive development and congestion.
6-15.1 Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted by right:
a. Retail, Office, Service Uses:
Antique Shops
Art and school supply stores and Art galleries and studios
Auditoriums
Bakeries
Banks
Barber shops
Beauty shops
Bicycle stores, including rental and repair
Blueprinting and photostating establishments
Book or stationery stores
Business colleges or business schools, operated as a business enterprise
Camera and photographic supply stores
Carpet, rugs and linoleum stores
Caskets and casket supplies, when conducted wholly within a completely
enclosed building
Catering establishments when operated in conjunction with restaurant/café
or diner
China and glassware stores
Clothing and costume retail shops
Coin and stamp stores
Custom dressmaking and millinery shops
Department stores
Drug stores
Dry cleaning stores
Electrical and household appliance stores, including radio and television
sales
Employment agencies
Florist shops
Food stores, grocery stores, meat markets, fish markets, bakery goods,
candy and ice cream shops, and delicatessens
Furrier shops
Furniture stores
Gift stores
Hardware stores
Hobby shops
Interior decorating shops
Jewelry stores, including watch repair
59
Laundries, except self-service, employing not more than four (4) persons
in addition to one (1) owner or manager
Leather goods and luggage stores
Loan offices
Locksmith shops
Mortuaries
Musical instrument shops
News stands
Office supply stores
Optometrists
Paint and wallpaper stores
Pawn shops
Photograph developing and processing shops in conjunction with camera
and supply sales
Photographer’s or artist’s studios
Physical culture and health services – gymnasiums, indoor swimming
pools, reducing salons
Picture framing establishments
Plumbing showrooms
Printing, lithographing, or publishing establishments for letter press,
business cards, mimeographing, and other similar services;
newspaper publishing, including engraving and photoengraving
Radio and television broadcasting studios
Restaurants (excluding drive-in and carry-out restaurants), tea rooms or
cafes
Schools for music or dance
Second hand stores, when conducted wholly within a completely enclosed
building
Sewing machine stores – sales or sales with repair
Shoe repair stores
Shoe stores
Sporting goods stores
Tailor shops
Taxidermist shops
Taxi stands
Telephone and telegraph offices
Theaters, excluding drive-in theaters
Tobacco shops
Toy shops
Travel bureau and ticket offices
Upholstery shops, when conducted wholly within a completely enclosed
building
Variety stores
Wearing apparel shops
Any other similar type retail store or service establishment not specifically
permitted herein but which has economic compatibility with the
established uses on adjoining conforming premises
60
b. Offices:
Business
Financial
Government
Professional (medical, dental, engineers, etc.)
c. Services:
Fire stations
Police stations
Private clubs and lodges
Parking lots (Refer to Section Nine [9])
Public Meeting Facilities
d. Accessory Uses and Buildings:
Customary and incidental accessory uses and building provided that all
accessory uses are enclosed on at least three (3) sides and materials stored
are not visible from the right-of-way.
e. Signs: Principal use signs (Refer to Section Ten [10]).
6-15.2 Special Uses
The following uses are permitted subject to the additional regulations imposed.
a. Automobile Service Stations: Service stations shall have a minimum lot area of
7,000 square feet with a frontage of not less than 100 feet. No portion of a service
station building or equipment shall be nearer than twenty-five (25) feet to the
front property line. All automobile repair or storage shall be performed inside a
structure.
b. Multi-Family Dwellings: Multi-family dwellings above the first story level of any
structure having the first story devoted to a permitted use.
c. Drive-In Banks: Drive-in banks will require special attention to traffic circulation
d. Churches: Churches meeting the parking regulations of Section Nine (9).
e. Beach Bingo.
6-15.3 Area and Bulk Regulations
The following regulations limiting the development and arrangement of building
and/or land area required of all permitted and special uses in this district.
a. Loading Space: One (1) loading space shall be required for each individual
business establishment when abutting an alley
b. Sidewalks: Adequate sidewalks paralleling streets are required
61
c. Signs: Refer to Section Ten (10) of this Ordinance
d. Security Doors & Windows: Security measures such as window and door bars are
to be placed on the inside of the building. Outside bards or steel doors are
prohibited.
6-15.4 Adopting a Downtown Commercial District Development Plan
In the central business district, the existing street layout and density of building
construction make it impractical to apply the area and bulk requirements and certain
other portions of this Ordinance for building arrangement, off-street parking, and
truck loading space to individual property units. The Planning Board shall review all
town plans for downtown development. The Planning Board shall review the
proposed land use and development plans taking into consideration the following
conditions:
a. Adequate off-street parking and truck loading space to relieve traffic congestion
in the streets.
b. Controlled vehicle movement within, through, and around the Central Business
District.
c. Adequate, safe, and convenient sidewalks for pedestrian circulation.
d. Landscaping and planting strips to promote the character of the Central Business
District.
e. The possibilities for future expansion and development of the Central Downtown
District.
f. The relationship of the proposed land use and development of the Central
Downtown Business District.
g. The accessibility of all buildings to emergency vehicles.
62
6-16 CH – Highway Commercial District
These are commercial districts located on the major entrance streets into the town and provide offices,
personal services, and the retailing and wholesaling of durable and convenience goods for the
surrounding community and to through traffic. Because these commercial uses are subject to the public
view, which is a matter of important concern to the whole community, they should provide an
appropriate appearance, ample parking, controlled traffic movement, and suitable landscaping. The
proper development of commercial uses in this district is a responsibility of the entire community.
6-16.1 Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted by right:
a. Retail, Office, Service Uses:
ABC (Alcoholic Beverage Control) stores
Appliance stores
Antique Shops
Art and school supply stores
Art galleries and studios
Automobile brokers
Automobile sales
Automobile service stations including self-service pumps, provided
gasoline pumps, canopies, and equipment at least twenty-five (25)
feet from the front property line
Automobile parts and supplies
Automobile, truck, and tractor tire service centers (not recapping)
Bakeries
Banks
Barber shops
Beach Bingo
Beauty shops
Bicycle stores, including rental and repair
Blueprinting and photostating establishments
Book or stationery stores
Building supply dealers
Business colleges or business schools, operated as a business enterprise
Cabinet and carpentry stores
Camera and photographic supply stores
Carpet, rugs and linoleum stores
Caskets and casket supplies, when conducted wholly within a completely
enclosed building
Catering establishments
China and glassware stores
Clothing and costume retail shops
Commercial recreation (indoor, such as ice and roller skating and bowling
contractors, general and plumbing, heating, and electrical
contracting, with screened or inside equipment storage only
Department stores
63
Drug stores
Dry cleaning stores
Eating establishments
Electrical and household appliance stores, including radio and television
sales
Farm supplies and equipment
Fertilizer dealers
Florist shops
Food stores, grocery stores, meat markets, fish markets, bakery goods,
candy and ice cream shops, and delicatessens
Furniture stores
Greenhouses, plant nurseries, and landscaping (storage, service, and sales)
Grocery stores
Hardware stores
Hobby shops
Interior decorating shops
Jewelry stores, including watch repair
Laundries
Medical or dental clinics and laboratories
Mobile home sales
Mortuaries
Motels and tourist homes
News stands
Office supply stores
Optometrists
Paint and wallpaper stores
Pet shops
Photograph developing and processing shops including drive-in service
Photographer’s or artist’s studios
Physical culture and health services – gymnasiums, indoor swimming
pools, reducing salons
Plumbing showrooms
Pool halls, night clubs, game rooms and similar establishments selling or
intending to sell adult beverages for consumption on premises.
Printing, lithographing, or publishing establishments for letter press,
business cards, mimeographing, and other similar services;
newspaper publishing, including engraving and photoengraving
Radio and television broadcasting studios
Restaurants (excluding drive-in and carry-out), tea rooms or cafes
Schools for music or dance
Second hand stores, when conducted wholly within a completely enclosed
building
Sewing machine stores
Shoe repair stores
Shoe stores
Specialty shops (such as: pawn, dressmaking, musical instruments,
records, and coin shops)
Sporting goods stores
Tattoo Parlors, body art or body piercing establishments
64
Telephone and telegraph offices
Theaters, excluding drive-in theaters
Toy shops
Travel bureau and ticket offices
Upholstery shops
Variety stores
Wearing apparel shops
Wholesale merchandise brokers, excluding wholesale storage
Any other similar type retail store or service establishment not specifically
permitted herein but which has economic compatibility with the
established uses on adjoining conforming premises
b. Offices:
Business
Financial
Government
Professional (medical, dental, engineers, etc.)
c. Services:
Fire stations
Police stations
Private clubs and lodges
Parking lots (Refer to Section Nine [9])
d. Accessory Uses and Buildings:
Customary and incidental accessory uses and building
Principal use signs (Refer to Section Ten [10])
6-16.2 Special Uses
The following uses are permitted subject to the additional regulations imposed.
a. Animal Clinics or Hospitals: No animal storage or kennel shall be allowed within
200 feet of any residential property line or fifty (50) feet from an property line as
from any point on any property line.
b. Automotive or Truck Body Repair: All automobile or truck body repairs shall be
performed inside a structure; and the vehicle storage area shall be inside a
structure or behind a screening buffer of vegetation and/or fencing. Structures
used for body repair shall be located no closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any
property line.
c. Bottled Gas Dealers: Maximum storage of LP bottle gas is limited to 1,000 gallon
bulk gas tank. Bottled gas storage shall be located no closer than twenty-five (25)
feet from any property line, nor closer than 200 feet from a residential property
line.
65
d. Outdoor Advertising Signs: Outdoor advertising signs (off-premise signs)
placement requires a permit from the Zoning Administrator in accordance with
Section Ten (10).
e. Bus Station and Taxi Stands: Bus stations and/or taxi stands shall be permitted
conditionally, upon the approval of a site plan by the Board of Adjustment
(showing location of buildings, entrance and exit drives, bus bays, and off-street
parking).
f. Commercial Recreation: The following uses may be permitted by the Board of
Zoning Adjustment provided they meet at least the following requirements:
1. Adequate turning lanes, driveway entrances, and off-street parking are
provided to relieve traffic congestion in the street or highway.
2. All facilities except parking are located at least 200 feet from any exterior
property line bordering a residential district.
Baseball batting Go-cart tracks
Bus Stations Golf driving ranges
Carnival rides Miniature golf
Children’s merry-go-rounds
Drive-In Theaters
g. Utility: Provided any storage of equipment (poles, transformers, etc.) are kept
indoors or behind a screening fence and/or vegetative buffer.
h. Shopping Centers subject to site plan review with the following requirements:
1. The minimum land area for any shopping center district shall be three (3)
acres.
2. A minimum of one (1) off-street parking space for every 200 square feet of
floor area in the proposed buildings shall be required.
3. No wall, canopy, awning, or marquee sign shall exceed twenty (20) percent of
the total wall frontage facing a public street. The total allowable sign area
will be calculated according to the characteristics of each building as follows:
i. For a two (2) or more story building, the building wall frontage is
that wall facing above the window line at the ground floor of the
building.
ii. For those buildings of less than two (2) stories, the total wall area
will include the total building wall facing, including windows,
from ground level to the top of the building.
66
4. One (1) freestanding sign structure is permitted per road frontage to be
used for identifying the shopping center and any establishment within;
however, such signs shall not exceed 100 square feet in sign face area.
Other freestanding signs may be used for principal use buildings in the
shopping center such as banks and service stations. These signs shall not
exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in sign face area.
i. Adult Use: Adult Use/Sexually Oriented Business as defined in Section Two (2)
of this Ordinance shall be allowed by special use under the following conditions
or with any additional conditions deemed appropriate by the Williamston Board
of Adjustment:
1. No adult use or sexually oriented business shall be constructed or allowed
to operate closer than 1,000’ to the nearest:
-Residential Zone
-House of Worship
-Day Care Center
-School
-Public Park
-Public Library
-Cemetery
-Motion picture theater regularly showing G or PG rated movies to the
public
-Any other area where large numbers of minors regularly travel or
congregate
2. All windows, doors, openings, entries, etc. for all adult uses shall be so
located, covered, screened, or otherwise treated so that views into the
interior of the establishment are not possible from any public or semipublic
area, street, or way
3. The lot containing the adult use shall not be located within a 1,000’radius
of another lot containing an adult use.
4. All buildings used for permitted adult uses must be designed in such a way
as to prevent the escape of noise from the premises.
6-16.3 Area and Bulk Regulations
The following regulations limiting the bulk and arrangement of building are required
of all permitted and special uses in this district.
If the property lies within or abuts upon a residential district, there shall be a densely
planted buffer strip of at least eight (8) feet in height along the yard and/or side lot
lines abutting a R-District. No such buffer shall extend nearer to the street right-ofway
than the established building lies to the adjoining residential lots.
a. Lot Requirements: Minimum lot width shall be seventy-five (75) feet with a
minimum lot dept of 120 feet.
67
b. Yard Requirements: Minimum front yard depth shall be forty (40) feet from the
right-of-way line of the street. Minimum side yard depth shall be ten (10) feet
from the right-of-way line of the street. Minimum rear yard depth shall be ten
(10) feet from the right-of-way line of the street. The first ten (10) feet from the
property line shall not be used for any purpose except for the necessary drives,
walks, and landscaping and shall not include off street parking or signs.
c. Building Heights: There shall be no building height over forty (40) feet in this
district, unless there is an increase in the minimum required side yard of one (1)
foot for every additional foot in building height above forty (40) feet.
d. Loading Space: One (1) off-street truck loading space shall be provided for each
commercial establishment.
e. Parking: Refer to Section Nine (9) of this Ordinance.
Two (2) or more commercial uses may cooperate in the provision of automobile
parking space required by this Section.
All parking areas shall be so located and designed as to avoid undue interference
with the use of public street and alleys and shall be graded and paved to city
Specifications for parking lots.
f. Curb Cuts: No portion of any entrance driveway leading from a public street shall
be closer than twenty (20) feet to the corner of any intersection measured from the
right-of-way.
g. Signs: Refer to Section Ten (10) of this Ordinance.
h. Corner Lots: On corner lots, the side yard on the side of the lot abutting the side
street shall not be less than twenty (20) feet.
68
6-17 Reserved
69
70
6-18 M-1 – Restricted Manufacturing District
This district is designed to provide areas primarily for industrial assembly fabrication, and warehousing
on planned sites with access to major highway and railways and with adequate utility services. These
regulations prohibit the use of land for heavy industry, residential, and most retail trade activities.
6-18.1 Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted by right:
a. Manufacturing:
Apparel and other finished products made from fabrics, leather, and
similar materials
Bakery products
Beverages
Bottling and canning soft drinks and carbonated water
Electrical machinery, equipment, and supplies
Furniture
Ice
Instruments (electrical and mechanical)
Paperboard containers and boxes and other converted paper and
Paperboard products
Professional, scientific, and controlling instruments; photographic and
optical goods; watches and clocks
b. Warehousing Trade & Services: Warehousing and storage services
c. Wholesale Trade & Services:
Beer, wine and distilled alcoholic beverages
Drugs, chemicals, and allied products
Dry goods and apparel
Electrical goods
Farm products (cotton, grain and tobacco)
Furniture and home furnishings
Groceries and related products (groceries, dairy, products, poultry,
confectionary, fish and seafoods, fruits & vegetables)
Hardware, plumbing, heating and air condition equipment & supplies
Lumber and other building materials – retail or wholesale
Machinery, equipment, and supplies (commercial and industrial, farm
machinery and equipment, transportation equipment)
Paper and paper products
Truck rental
d. Transportation & Utilities:
Airports and flying fields
Bus transportation (terminals, garaging, and equipment maintenance)
Motor freight transportation (terminals, garages, and equipment)
Railroads
71
Transportation services (freight forwarding services and packing and
crating)
Utilities (electric regulating substations and water storage tanks)
e. Other Services: Contract construction services (building, general, plumbing,
heating, air condition, painting, electrical, carpentry, roofing, sheet metal, and
other specifically construction trade)
f. Accessory Uses & Buildings:
Customary and incidental accessory uses and buildings
Parking Lots (Refer to Section Nine [9])
Principal use signs (Refer to Section Ten [10])
6-18.2 Special Uses
a. It is the intent of this Section to permit existing residences and retail trade uses to
continue until removed or abandoned.
6-18.3 Area and Bulk Regulations
a. Lot Requirements: Minimum required lot size shall be 12,000 square feet.
Minimum lot depth shall be 150 feet.
b. Yard Requirements: Minimum front yard depth shall be forty (40) feet from the
property line, and except for the necessary driveway and walks, this area shall be
planted in grass and ornamental shrubs and trees. Minimum side yard dept shall
be twenty (20) feet on each side. Minimum rear yard depth shall be twenty (20)
feet.
c. Building Heights: Except for customary accessory appurtenances, building height
shall be forty (40) feet as measured from the foundation at the center of the
building unless there is an increase in the minimum required side yard of two (2)
feet for every additional foot of building height above forty (40) feet.
d. Loading Space: All permitted and special uses in this district shall provide offstreet
truck loading space for each commercial establishment (Refer to Section
Nine [9]).
e. Off-Street Parking: See the off-street parking requirements of this Ordinance
(Refer to Section Nine [9]).
f. Curb Cuts: No portion of any entrance driveway leading from a public street shall
be closer than fifteen (15) feet to the property line corner of any intersection
measured from the right of-way line.
g. Corner Visibility: No obstruction of any kind or nature to the visibility of vehicles
on streets at intersections shall be erected, maintained, or allowed to exist. This
area of visibility shall be considered to be no more than three (3) feet higher than
the curb level and not less than ten (10) feet from the property line.
72
h. Signs: Refer to Section Ten (10) of this Ordinance.
6-19 M-2 Mixed Manufacturing District
This district is established to provide areas where the principal use of land is for light and heavy
manufacturing, warehousing, and offensive trade uses. In addition, this district is intended:
a. To provide appropriate areas for existing heavy industrial type uses predominately
developed at the time of this Ordinance’s adoption;
b. To provide additional areas near adequate rail, water, and/or major thoroughfares
for additional development of the uses permitted in this district;
c. To prohibit residential and retail trade uses of land in conjunction with the uses
permitted in this district; and
d. To establish regulations for the mutual protection of all users permitted in the
district.
6-19.1 Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted by right:
a. All uses permitted in the M-1 Restricted Manufacturing District
b. Manufacturing: Chemicals and allied products (plastics, drugs, detergents, acids,
paints and varnishes, wood chemicals, and agricultural chemicals)
Fabricated metal products-machinery (engines, office machines, transportation
equipment, metal working machinery and equipment, etc.)
Food and kindred products (meat products, dairy, seafood products, grain mill
products).
Lumber and wood products (sawmills, planing mills, millworks, veneer
and plywood manufacture, wooden containers)
Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products (flat glass, glass and glass wares,
cement, structural clay products, concrete products, gypsum products, pottery, and
cut stone products)
Tobacco products manufacturing
River related business of retail, service or wholesale nature within those locations
where a relationship exists.
73
6-19.2 Special Uses
These uses shall be permitted subject to the additional regulations imposed.
a. Foundries: Foundries (primary and secondary metal and nonferrous)
b. Petroleum Refining & Storage: Oil and gas products manufacturing and storage,
provided such uses are located no closer than 300 feet to a residential district.
c. Salvage or Junk Yard: Salvage or junk yards are allowed, provided such
operations are no closer than 200 feet to a residential district.
d. Sewage Disposal: Sewage treatment plants, provided such operations are no
closer than 300 feet to a residential district.
e. Solid Waste Disposal: Refuse incineration and sanitary landfills, provided
appropriate state and federal approval is acquired and such uses are no closer than
300 feet to a residential district.
f. Accessory Uses and Buildings:
Customary and incidental accessory uses and buildings
Parking lots (Refer to Section Nine [9])
Principal use signs (Refer to Section Ten [10])
6-19.3 Area and Bulk Regulations
a. Minimum Lot Requirements: Minimum required lot size shall be 12,000 square
feet. Minimum lot depth shall be 150 feet.
b. Yard Requirements: Minimum front yard depth shall be forty (40) feet from the
property line, and except for the necessary driveway and walks, this area shall be
planted in grass and ornamental shrubs and trees. Minimum side yard dept shall
be twenty (20) feet on each side. Minimum rear yard depth shall be twenty (20)
feet.
c. Building Heights: Except for customary accessory appurtenances, the maximum
building shall be forty (40) feet as measured from the foundation at the center of
the building unless there is an increase in the minimum required side yard of two
(2) feet for every additional foot of building height above forty (40) feet.
d. Loading Space: All permitted and special uses in this district shall provide offstreet
loading and unloading space as required by Section Nine (9) of this
Ordinance.
e. Off-Street Parking: See the off-street parking requirements of this Ordinance
(Refer to Section Nine [9]).
74
f. Curb Cuts: No portion of any entrance driveway leading from a public street shall
be closer than fifteen (15) feet to the property line corner of any intersection
measured from the right-of-way line.
No two (2) driveways leading from a public street shall be within twenty (20) feet
of each other measured along the full height of the curb.
g. Corner Visibility: No obstruction of any kind or nature to the visibility of vehicles
on streets at intersections shall be erected, maintained, or allowed to exist. This
area of visibility shall be considered to be no more than three (3) feet higher than
the curb level and not less than ten (10) feet from the property corner.
h. Signs: Refer to Section Ten (10) of this Ordinance.
75
6-20 TRD – Tourism Related District
Tourism Related Districts are primarily provided along or nearby major highways and adjacent to scenic
and natural areas or tourist attractions. The purpose is to provide areas and space for a variety of
commercial uses, limited residential uses in the form of cluster development, and overnight and short
term lodging establishments associated with and supporting the tourism industry.
6-20.1 Permitted Uses:
The following uses shall be permitted by right:
a. Retail, Service:
Convenience Stores, Bait and Tackle shops, Bicycle store (including rental
and repair), gift stores, Camera and photographic supply stores, sporting good
variety stores, apparel shops (excluding second-hand and consignment),
Specialty shops (such as taxidermy, art), ATM facilities;
Restaurants, eating establishments, bakeries, ice cream parlors, food trucks,
Concession trailer or stands (separate ordinance regulating food trucks,
concession trailers and stands), candy stores, motels, hotels, lodges, RV parks
and campgrounds (short term stay that provides for no more than 14
consecutive nights stay separated by a 14 day absence);
Boat sales, Boat repair provided all work is done inside enclosed building,
Boat storage in completely enclosed building, (Commercial boats, ships,
barges are excluded from repair and storage except as allowed for Tourism
purposes), boat and canoe rental services, fishing, hunting, and river guide
services, tour boats (including dining and theater), travel bureau, visitor
center, museums, ticket offices, parks, rest areas, information centers;
Gasoline and fueling locations provided pumps, canopies, and equipment are
at least twenty-five (25) feet from property line or street right of way. Truck
Stops are not allowed;
Recreational facilities such as miniature golf, Splash Park, swimming pool,
and Fun Park (Go-Kart, carnival rides, etc.).
b. Business:
Offices: Tourism, Ticket, Charter Service (boat, hunting, tour)
Government
c. Fire Stations, Police Stations
Parking lots (See Section Nine)
Public Meeting Facilities
76
d. Customary and incidental accessory uses and building(s) provided that all
accessory uses are enclosed on at least three sides and materials stored are not
visible from the right-of-way.
e. Principal use signs (See Section Ten)
6-20.2 Special Uses:
The following uses are permitted subject to the additional regulations imposed.
Automobile
Service
Stations
a. Convenience Stores shall have a minimum lot area of 7,000 square
feet with a frontage of not less than 100 feet. No portion of a service
station or building or equipment shall be nearer than 25 feet to the
front property line. All automobile repair or storage shall be
performed inside a structure.
Multi-
Family
Dwellings
b. Single or Multi-family dwellings above the first story level of any
structure having the first story devoted to a permitted use.
Condo, Townhouse submitted under Section 6-10 of this ordinance.
c. Drive-in banks will require special attention to traffic circulation.
6-20.3 Area and Bulk Regulations
The following regulations limiting the development and arrangement of
building and/or land required of all permitted and special uses in this
district.
a. One loading space shall be required for each individual business
establishment when abutting an alley.
b. Adequate sidewalks paralleling streets are required to provide for
pedestrian safety within the district and for connection to other
neighborhoods and districts. Where topography exists that
prevents reasonable construction, sidewalk construction may be
waived;
Signs c. Signs – Refer to Section Ten of this ordinance, CH district signage
Security
Doors &
Windows
d. Security measures such as window and door bards are to be
placed on the inside of the building. Outside bars or steel doors
with bars or mesh are prohibited.
e. Lot Requirements: Minimum lot width shall be fifty (50) feet with
77
a minimum lot depth of seventy-five (75) feet.
f. Yard Requirements: Minimum front yard shall be twenty-five (25)
feet from right-of-way of street. Minimum side yard shall be ten
(10) feet from property line, corner lot shall maintain fifteen (15)
foot side yard where abutting a street. First ten (10) feet adjacent
to street must be used for street landscaping, walks, drives and
shall not include signs. Rear yard setback is ten (10) feet
minimum. Reduced yard setbacks may be allowed through
planned development approved by Board of Adjustments.
6-20.4 Additional Conditions of Plan Review
Planning Board shall review all town plans for the Tourism Related
District development. The Planning Board shall review the proposed land
use and development plans, taking into consideration the following
conditions:
Planning Board further directs staff to review all plans for private and
public development within this district taking into consideration the
following conditions:
a. Adequate off-street parking and truck loading space to relieve traffic
congestion in the streets.
b. Controlled vehicle movement within, through, and around the Tourism
Related District (TRD).
c. Adequate, safe, and convenient sidewalks for pedestrian circulation.
d. Landscaping and planting strips to promote the character of the TRD.
e. The possibilities for future expansion and development of the TRD.
f. The relationship of the proposed land use and development of the District.
g. The accessibility of all buildings to emergency vehicles.
h. Compatibility with the spirit and intent of the Tourism Related District.
Definition: Section 2-3.58.1 Truck Stop: is a facility intended to provide services for the trucking
industry, included but not limited to the following activities: dispensing of fuel, repair, servicing,
washing, overnight or extended parking, weight scales, showers, sleeping quarters, and restaurants as
part of the facility.
78
SECTION SEVEN (7) - SPECIAL USE PROVISIONS
7-1 General Restrictions
Permission may be granted for the establishment of uses listed as special uses if the Board of
Adjustment finds from the evidence produced after a study of the complete records that:
7-1.1 the proposed use does not affect adversely the general plans for the physical
development of the town as embodied in these regulations or in any plan or portion
thereof adopted by the Planning Board;
7-1.2 the proposed use will not be contrary to the purposes stated in these regulations;
7-1.3 the proposed use will not affect adversely the health and safety of residents and
workers in the town;
7-1.4 the proposed use will not be detrimental to the use or development of adjacent
properties or other neighborhood uses;
7-1.5 the proposed use will not be affected adversely by the existing uses;
7-1.6 the proposed use will be placed on a lot of sufficient size to satisfy the space
requirements of said use;
7-1.7 the proposed use will not contribute a nuisance or hazard because of the number of
persons who will attend or use such facility, vehicular movement, noise or fume or
type of physical activity;
7-1.8 the proposed use shall be subject to the minimum area, setback, and other locational
requirements of the zoning district in which it will be located, and to the other
appropriate regulations in this Ordinance.
7-2 Additional Restrictions and Revocation of Permits
7-2.1 The Board of Adjustment may impose or require such additional conditions and
standards as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of workers and
residents of the community, and to protect the value and use of property in the general
neighborhood.
7-2.2 Wherever the Board of Adjustment shall find, in the case of any permit granted
pursuant to the provisions of these regulations, that any of the terms, conditions, or
restrictions upon which such permit was granted are not being complied with, said
board shall rescind and revoke such permit after sending the notice to all parties
concerned and granting full opportunities for a hearing. Notice may be given by
personal service or registered or certified mail.
79
7-3 Uses Which May Be Authorized by the Board of Adjustment
All “Special Uses” listed under each zoning district in Section Six (6) of this Ordinance are the specific
responsibility of the Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment may authorize such uses subject to
the special conditions set forth with the listed special uses and subject to any other conditions deemed
necessary to satisfy the general restrictions listed in Section 7-1 above.
The following uses may be permitted by the Board of Adjustment subject to these and/or any other
appropriate conditions imposed.
7-3.1 Home Occupation: A home occupation as defined in this Ordinance is considered an
accessory use in a Residential district and shall be generally governed by the
following requirements:
a. only one (1) person other than those residing in the home shall be engaged in the
occupation;
b. the home shall continue to be used principally as a dwelling;
c. home occupations shall be permitted only in single-family dwellings or customary
residential accessory buildings;
d. the occupation shall not be visible from the street;
e. retail sales of products shall not make up more than ten (10) percent of the
earnings of any home occupation, provided that in a R-15 district, farm fruits and
vegetables raised and prepared on the premises may be sold;
f. there shall be a maximum of one (1) sign used on the premises to identify the
home occupation. The sign shall be a maximum of four (4) square feet and nonilluminated,
and either mounted flat against the principal building or hunt from a
permanent freestanding sign (mobile signs and signs with rotating parts are not
permitted);
g. the occupation shall not constitute a nuisance, as defined in the Ordinances of the
Town of Williamston, or any undue disturbance in the neighborhood.
7-3.2 Mobile Home Parks: A mobile home may be permitted in R-15 residential district
subject to the requirements of this subsection.
a. Special Use Permit to Construct: Prior to the construction of a new mobile home
park, or the expansion of the area of an existing mobile home park, the builder
shall make application for a special use permit to construct a mobile home park.
The application shall include a plan of the proposed mobile home park which
shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Board and checked against the
requirements of this Ordinance. The Planning and Zoning Board may require the
builder to revise the proposed plan before final approval.
80
b. Site Plans: Plans to be included with the application for a mobile home park
special use permit shall include the following:
1. A complete site plan of the mobile home park, showing: streets,
driveways, walkways, recreation areas, trailer spaces, parking spaces,
buildings, garbage receptacle, street lighting, etc.
2. Plans of proposed layouts and connections for sewer, water, storm
drainage, and other utilities.
3. Where public water or public sewer is not available, a written statement
from the County Health department or appropriate state agency indicating
the mobile home park has sufficient land area and soil conditions to
accommodate the proposed water supply and sewage disposal systems.
4. The name of the mobile home park, names and addresses of the owner or
owners, and the designer of the park.
5. A vicinity map showing the location of the mobile home park in relation
to the other existing land uses within the general area.
c. Development Standards: Mobile home parks shall be developed to at least the
following standards:
1. All mobile home parks shall be located on a site or tract of land not less
than one (1) acre in size.
2. The minimum mobile home space in a mobile home park shall be 5,000
square feet. Mobile home shall be harbored on these mobile home spaces
so that there shall be at least twenty (20) feet side clearance and ten (10)
feet end clearance. No mobile home shall be located closer than ten (10)
feet from any property line bounding on the park. No mobile home shall
be placed closer than thirty-five (35) feet to any property line adjoining a
street.
3. All mobile home spaces shall abut upon an interior driveway (and not on a
public street) of not less than thirty (30) feet in width. Such driveways
shall be eighteen (18) feet wide, hard surfaced, or of properly compacted
gravel, well-marked and lighted.
4. At least one (1) hard surfaced or properly compacted gravel off-street
parking space shall be constructed and maintained for each mobile home
space and shall be located so as not to interfere with the movement of
vehicles on streets or access drives.
d. Utility Connections: In mobile home parks the following utility connections shall
be required:
81
1. A supply of water for domestic purposes from a source approved in
writing by the County Health Office, Town of Williamston, and/or
appropriate state agency shall be provided in each mobile home park.
2. Every mobile home park shall be provided with an adequate sewage
disposal system, either by connection to a public sewerage system or by
connection to a septic tank system constructed in compliance with state
regulations and approved in writing by the County Health Office, Town of
Williamston, and/or appropriate state agency.
e. Waste Cans: Where centrally located waste cans are used, they shall be no further
than 150 feet from any mobile home lot.
f. Property Markers: Each home lot shall be clearly defined by means of concrete or
steel or iron pipe markers placed at all corners.
g. Recreation Area: At least 200 square feet per mobile home lot or stall in the park
shall be provided in one (1) or more locations for community playground and
recreation purposes.
h. Buffer Required: There shall be provided and maintained along the property line
of the mobile home park a continuous visual buffer with a minimum height of six
(6) feet. The buffer shall be a compact evergreen hedge or other type of
evergreen foliage screening, or shall be a combined fence and evergreen
shrubbery screen, the former facing the mobile home park. (Refer to Section
Eight [8]).
i. Expansion Requires New Special Use Permit: No mobile home park shall be
occupied by a greater number of mobile homes than that authorized in the
approved special use permit. No mobile home park shall be enlarged or extended
beyond the approved special use permit site plan unless a separate application for
a special use permit is approved by the Board of Adjustment.
7-3.3 Junkyard/Salvage Yard
The following requirements shall apply to all uses, existing and proposed, meeting the
definition of a junkyard within the zoning jurisdiction of the Town of Williamston.
Such uses must comply with these minimum requirements, and any individual
additional conditions as required by the Board of Adjustment, by January 1, 2001.
Notwithstanding these requirements, all properties are subject to Chapter 16, Sections
16-67 through 16-70 of the Municipal Code of Ordinances, regarding keeping and
removal of junk and abandoned cars.
a. Where Allowed: Junkyards, as defined in Section Two (2), shall be special uses
allowable in M1 and M2 zoning districts. A junkyard may not be placed within
1,000 feet of any existing junkyard.
82
b. Minimum Lot Size: Minimum lot size for junkyards shall be one (1) acre,
regardless of the district lot size requirements for other uses.
c. Buffers: A solid vegetative buffer shall be required on side and rear lot lines.
In addition, solid fencing not less than six (6) feet in height nor more than eight
(8) feet shall be installed along the front building line setback from the building to
the side lot line to screen roadside view.
d. Appearance Restrictions: No junk, salvage, or other materials shall be stored or
displayed in an open-air manner in such a way as to be visible along the front of
the property. The front yard shall be used only for customer parking or
landscaping. All materials shall be confined within the required fence and no
materials shall be stacked in such a way as to be visible above the fence.
e. State Highway Commission regulations also apply along state-owned and
maintained roads.
7-3.4 Public Utility Facilities
a. Public utility installations and substations shall conform to district setback
requirements and shall be planted with a buffer strip of evergreen shrubs to shield
cabinets or unsightly equipment from general view.
7-3.5 Shopping Centers
a. Shopping Centers shall be allowed as special uses in the CH District and shall be
subject to site plan review.
7-3.6 Class A Mobile Homes in the MH Overlay District
a. Double-wide or larger Class A mobile homes, as defined in Section Two (2) of
this Ordinance may be allowed as special uses for the purpose of urban renewal in
areas subject to dilapidated and substandard housing.
7-4 Approval Process for Special Use Permits
Every application for a special use permit shall contain plans that locate the development site and
demonstrate existing and proposed features on and near the site in question. The plan shall be drawn to
scale sufficient to demonstrate these features. The applicant will provide ten (10) copies of the site plan
along with a completed application to the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator will review
the proposal for general compliance with zoning requirements and prepare staff comments to the Board
of Adjustment. Copies of the site plan will be distributed to the Board of Adjustment for consideration
at the next regular meeting falling not less than fourteen (14) days from the date of submission of the
application. Property owners within 100 feet of the property in question will be notified by mail of the
proposal. If a public hearing is desired, it shall be scheduled in accordance with the provisions of
N.C.G.S. 160A-364, requiring notice to be published in a newspaper having general circulation at least
two (2) times in successive calendar weeks, the first time not less than ten (10) nor more than twentyfive
(25) days prior to the hearing. (Public hearings are required by law only for adoption of ordinances
and amendments to ordinances. Others are optional.)
83
The applicant or his representative shall attend the meeting at which the evidentiary hearing of the
proposal will be heard. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to present the evidence relating to
his case, citing the ways in which his proposal complies with the requirements of Section 7-1 above.
84
SECTION EIGHT (8) – SCREENING AND LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
Screening and landscaping shall be a requirement to beautify the community and to minimize the
impacts of adjacent incompatible uses where districts coincide. Proper screening and landscaping can
mitigate the effects of summer heat or poor drainage, especially in parking lots.
8-1 Screening and Landscaping
The Intent of these screening requirements shall be to create a screen between zoning districts and other
Zoning districts or to screen certain uses in order to minimize potential nuisances such as the
transmission of noise, dust, odor, litter, and glare of lights; to reduce the visual input of unsightly aspects
of adjacent development; to provide for the separation of any spaces; and to establish a sense of privacy.
Any screening required under this Section shall materially screen the subject use between the ground
level and the height of the required screening from the view of the adjoining property.
8-1.1 Screening shall be required under the following situations:
a. Between Residential and Non Residential Districts: Under all circumstances, the
more offensive use shall bear responsibility for screening requirements.
b. Multi-Family Developments: All multi-family developments shall be screened
from all other lots which lie in a Residential (R) District except that screening
shall not be required around a multi- family development whose side and rear
boundaries abut another multi-family development.
c. Open Storage and Open Structures: Within any business or manufacturing
district, screening shall be required for the open storage of any goods other than
vending machines, new retail goods displayed outside, vehicles, trailers, other
equipment capable of being driven on a roadway, and any fixtures fastened to a
building, ground or impervious surface; or for any unenclosed structure consisting
of a roof, but no walls used for storage of materials, products, wastes or
equipment, whenever such storage or structure is located within 100 feet of the
street right-of-way line. Screening shall be placed on the property so as to
effectively screen such open storage or structure from the public view from any
street right-of-way.
d. Manufactured Home Parks: All manufactured (mobile) home parks shall be
screened from other uses.
e. Planned Unit Developments: Screening for planned unit developments or
individual elements of the PUD shall be determined during the site plan review
and approval process.
f. Industrial Uses: All industrial uses shall be screened where the district coincides
with other districts.
g. Other: Other situations as specifically listed in the Zoning District Regulations
(Refer to Section Six [6] of this Ordinance) or in the Special Use Provisions.
85
8-1.2 Location of Screening
a. Any screening required by above shall be located along side and/or rear property
lines of the lot(s) in question required along any street right-of-way unless
otherwise stipulated in this Ordinance. If screening is required along a street
right-of-way it shall be located behind such right-of-way and outside the area of
the sight triangle.
b. Streets shall not constitute a required screen.
8-1.3 Specifications for Screening
Screening may be in the form of natural plantings, planted berms, walls or fences.
Screening shall be encouraged, however, in the form of natural plantings. Where
sufficient room exists to place a screen consisting of natural plantings or maintain an
existing screen of natural plantings, such natural plantings shall be used as the
required form of screening. Otherwise, screening in the form of a planted berm, wall
or fence may be used. The Zoning Administrator may approve a combination of
natural planting, planted berm, wall or fence, if he determines that the spirit and intent
of this Section are met by such combination.
a. Natural Plantings: Where natural plantings are used, a buffer strip of at least
fifteen (15) feet in width, or ten (10) feet for a non-residential use in an R, shall be
planted. This strip shall be free of all encroachments by structures, parking areas
or other imperious surfaces. The alternatives for amount and type of buffer
materials to be planted per 100 linear feet shall be as follows:
1. Eight (8) large trees + twenty (20) shrubs; or
2. Ten (10) small trees + twenty (20) shrubs
All materials planted shall be live plant, free from disease, installed in a fashion
that ensures the availability of sufficient soil and water to sustain healthy growth,
properly guyed or staked and planted in a manner which is not intrusive to utilities
and/or pavement. Other options shall be considered by the Zoning Administrator
on a case by case basis.
Minimum buffer strip widths for natural plantings shall conform to the following:
M2 Restricted Manufacturing District 25 feet to 30 feet
M1 Mixed Manufacturing District 15 feet to 20 feet
CH Highway Commercial District 10 feet to 15 feet
Multi-Family Residential or Mobil Home Park 10 feet to 15 feet
b. Walls or Fences: Any wall shall be constructed in a durable fashion with a finish
surface of brick, stones or other decorative masonry material approved by the
Zoning Administrator. Fences shall be constructed of wood in a durable fashion
and of durable, weather resistant wood fencing materials and of consistent pattern.
No wall or fence shall be greater than four (4) feet above grade unless otherwise
specified in this Ordinance. All walls or fences used for screen purposes shall be
86
opaque. Walls and fences shall be constructed in accordance with Section Four
(4) of this Ordinance.
c. Berms: All berms shall be planted with both shrubs and ground covers to leave
no bare earth. The berm shall be at least three (3) feet in height and contain at
least thirty (30) shrubs per 100 linear feet. Said shrubs shall be a species that can
be expected to materially screen the development site within five (5) years of
planting. No slope of a berm shall be steeper than one (1) foot of rise for every
three (3) feet in plane.
8-1.4 Relief to Screening Requirements
In the event that the unusual topography or elevation of a development site or the
location or size of the parcel to be developed would make strict adherence to the
requirements of this Section serve no meaningful purpose or would make it physically
impossible to install and/or maintain the required screen, the Zoning Administrator
may alter the requirements of this Ordinance provided the spirit and intent of the
screening requirement as outlined in Section 8.1 of this Ordinance are maintained.
Such an alteration may occur only at the request of the developer, who shall submit a
plan to the Zoning Administrator showing existing site features that would screen the
proposed use and any additional screen materials the developer will plant or construct
to screen the proposed use. The Zoning Administrator shall have no authority to
provide said relief unless the developer demonstrates that existing site features and
any additional screening materials will screen the proposed use as effectively as the
required screen.
8-1.5 Areas Deficient in Screening
After the effective date of this Ordinance, where screening does not meet the
requirements of this Ordinance, any change or addition undertaken on the property
will require that screening be brought into compliance before any other change is
made. An exception to this requirement may be made where the Zoning
Administrator determines either: 1) the use has insufficient land to install required
screening; 2) the use would be required to utilize land developed for off-street
parking for screening; or 3) the use is already screening by existing topography or
plant life. In any of such cases, the Zoning Administrator may partially or entirely
waive the requirements of this subsection by allowing existing features or any
combination thereof provided the spirit and intent of this Ordinance are preserved.
8-1.6 Existing Screened Areas
In cases where an existing screened area exists, further plantings and/or
improvements shall not be required provided said screened area is of sufficient width
and depth and contains adequate and sufficient materials to meet the requirements of
this Ordinance. If the screened area is deficient, the developer shall make needed
improvements and/or additions to satisfy the screening requirements and intent of this
Ordinance.
87
8-1.7 Screen Construction and Installation Maintenance
The plantings, fences, walls or berms that constitute a required screen shall be
properly installed and maintained in order for the screen to fulfill the purpose for
which it is established. Walls, fences, and berms shall be constructed in a durable and
attractive fashion in accordance with any applicable codes and generally accepted
construction and workmanship practices and meet all specifications herein. Plant
species shall be appropriate for healthy growth under local climate conditions, not
highly prone to disease and be expected to grow in a manner to meet the spirit and
intent of this Section. Plant materials shall be planted with generally accepted and
recommended planting and growing practices.
The owner of the property and any tenant on the property where a screen is required
shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all screen materials.
Such maintenance shall include all actions necessary to keep the screened area free of
litter and debris, to keep plantings healthy and growth from interfering with safe
vehicular or pedestrian travel, or use of parking areas, or from creating any nuisances
to adjoining property owners and to keep wall, fences, and berms in good repair and
neat appearance. Any vegetation that constitutes part of a screen shall be replaced in
the event that it dies. All screen materials shall be protected from damage by erosion,
motor vehicles or pedestrians.
8-2 Landscaping
The intent of these landscaping requirements shall be to enhance the visual quality of development, to
soften the appearance of expansive paved areas and building mass, create and maintain a pleasing
appearance in the community, reduce the effects of glare and heat caused by parking areas and to reduce
visual clutter along commercialized streets.
Landscaping required by this Section shall be installed in the following situations:
a. All new construction, development or any expansions in developed site area for
multi-family residential, mobile home parks, highway commercial development,
industrial development, and all required parking areas; or
b. For all existing development, other than single or two (2) family residential land
uses, when more than fifty (50) percent of the land area developed at the time of
application for zoning permit is disturbed, redesigned, altered or reconstructed.
Where screening or buffering requirements of this Ordinance overlap in area, duplicate or otherwise
conflict with any requirement of this Section, only the more stringent requirements need be met except
that, no fence, wall, or berm may be substituted for any requirement in this Section.
The following subsections described the minimum types and amounts of landscaping which shall be
required:
NOTE: Where growing conditions permit, large trees may be substituted for small trees and large or
small trees may be substituted for shrubs, however, required larger plant material may not be substituted
88
with small plant material. Where existing plant life satisfies the requirements of this Section, the owner
is encouraged to use such plant life in lieu of destroying it and planting new materials.
8-2.1 Street Landscaping
Street landscaping off the street right-of-way and behind the sight triangle shall be
required in The Highway Commercial and Manufacturing Zoning Districts along all
thoroughfares.
Said landscaping shall be provided in a designated landscaping area which shall
include, as width, at least the first ten (10) feet of the front yard as measured from the
edge of the street right-of-way line. Per 100 linear feet of landscaping, there shall be,
at a minimum: four (4) small trees or two (2) large trees. The remaining portion of the
landscaped area shall be improved with ground covers or natural mulching materials.
No part of the landscaped area shall be left as bare soil. It shall be the responsibility
of the owner of the property and any tenant of such property to maintain the
landscaped area in a healthy condition to keep plant growth off roadways or
otherwise from interfering with traffic visibility or safety, and to keep the landscaped
area, landscaped decorative fences and masonry wall may be constructed no closer
than six (6) feet to the street right-of-way line and behind the sight triangle, however,
the construction of said fences or masonry walls shall not relieve the developer from
planting requirements except as provided in the succeeding paragraphs in this
subsection.
All required plantings shall be located on the street side of any fence or wall, and
where berms are constructed, between the street right-of-way line and the crest of the
berm. Any side devices constructed within the designated landscaped area shall be
limited to the following:
a. Berms: All earth shall be planted with ground covers except where mulching is
provided for trees or shrubs. Shrubs and trees on the berms and within the
designated landscaping area may be counted in planting requirements. Berms
shall meet all requirements of the specifications section of this Ordinance.
b. Fences: Fences shall be constructed of decorative wood or metal materials,
designed three (3) specifically for fencing, be of a consistent pattern, and shall not
exceed four (4) feet in height nor obstruct vision within the established sight
triangle at corners or driveway areas. Utility metal fencing such as chain link
fencing is not permitted within the designated landscape area. Wood fences shall
be limited to pressure treated wood or naturally preserved species approved by the
Zoning Administrator (e.g. locust or redwood). Wood fencing may be rail, picket,
or opaque in construction and must be of a consistent pattern.
c. Walls: Walls shall be constructed of decorative materials and shall not exceed a
height of four (4) feet. Material visible on the street side shall be limited to brick,
natural or cultured stone, or other decorative masonry materials approved by the
Zoning Administrator. Except for stone, masonry materials must be constructed
of a consistent pattern. In the event that the size of the parcel to be developed or
its location would make it physically impossible to install and/or maintain the
89
required landscaping, the Zoning Administrator may alter the street landscaping
requirements of this Ordinance provided, however, the spirit and intent of this
Ordinance are maintained. Such an alteration may occur only if the developer
submits a plan to the Zoning Administrator which shows any existing and
proposed landscaping. The Zoning Administrator shall otherwise have no
authority to alter any landscaping requirements.
No street landscaping materials, wall or fence device shall be constructed or maintained in a manner
which blocks sight distance at vehicular ingress and egress points on the property or obstructs sight
distance at street intersections as set forth in this Ordinance. All plantings exceeding two and one-half
(2 ½ ) feet in height shall be located behind the sight distance.
8-2.2 Parking Lot Landscaping
Parking lots shall be landscaped in accordance with this subsection. The provisions
of this Section do not apply to rear parking lots (As used herein, the rear parking lots
include only parking areas located between the rear building line and a rear interior
lot line not adjoining the street). The amount of plant materials required for parking
lot landscaping are in addition to any plant materials required by any other provision
of this Ordinance (e.g., buffer strips, street landscaping, and building landscaping).
The following minimum number of plants shall be required for each parking space.
(If calculations result in a fraction, the fraction shall be increased to the next whole
number):
Large Trees – 0.10
Small Trees - 0.07
Shrubs - 0.50
The following rules shall apply to the arrangement and installation of required
parking lot landscaping:
Note: These requirements apply only to the minimum number of trees required by
this Section. Non-required trees (additional trees beyond what is required by this
Section) may be planted in any fashion.
a. Large trees shall be planted so that no point of the tree’s main trunk is closer than
Four (4) feet from parking lot or driveway surfaces. If large trees required by the
specifications subsection are planted in an island (area surrounded by paved
surfaces), peninsula, or median there shall be sufficient previous planting area
[pervious area shall also mean impervious materials (e.g., walks), that drain into
the trees root area] for viable growth of such tree(s)].
(Note: Trees may be clustered where appropriate for the species and this area may
also be used for required parking lot landscaping, a large tree must be planted
within twenty-five [25] feet of the parking lot. Where existing plant stock is to be
used in lieu of new materials the Zoning Administrator may allow such existing
stock to be counted at distances greater than twenty-five [25] feet from the paved
surfaces if the developer can show that such existing stock casts shadows upon
90
the paved surfaces. No trees located off the project site may be substituted for
new plantings.)
b. Small trees shall be planted so that no point of the tree’s main trunk is closer than
four (4) feet from parking lot or driveway surfaces. To be counted for required
parking lot landscaping a small tree must be planted within fifteen (15) feet of the
parking lot.
c. No shrubs shall be located within any vehicle overhang area (area three [3] feet
beyond curb or wheel stop at the head of a parking space).
d. Required parking lot landscaping shall generally be distributed throughout the
parking area. Planting may be located along the perimeter of the parking lot,
along entrances, and on interior features such as islands, peninsulas and medians)
is as follows:
Minimum Percent of
Plant Materials to be
Planted on
Number of Spaces Interior Features
40 or Less Spaces No Minimum
40 to 100 Spaces 30%
More than 100 Spaces 50%
e. Each parking space shall be no further than 100 feet from a tree (large tree or
small tree).
f. It is encouraged that trees be located so as to maximize shading of parking spaces
during summer months.
g. All parking lot landscaped areas shall be covered with ground covers or natural
mulching materials, however, areas subject to vehicle overhand may be covered
with brick, stone, mulch, or other nonliving materials.
8-2.1 Landscaping Installation and Maintenance
The plantings that constitute required landscaping shall be properly installed and
maintained in order to fulfill the purpose of which it is established. Plant species
shall be appropriate for healthy growth under local climate conditions, not of a type
highly prone to disease, and be a type expected to grow in a manner which will
satisfy the spirit and intent of this Ordinance. Plant materials shall be planted in
accordance with generally recommended and accepted planting and growing
practices. The owner of the property and any tenant on the property where
landscaping is required shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance
of all required landscape materials. Such maintenance shall include all actions
necessary to keep the landscaped areas free of litter and debris, to keep plantings
healthy; to keep growth from interfering with safe vehicular or pedestrian travel, or
91
use of parking areas, or from creating any nuisances to adjoining properties; and to
keep walls, fences, and berms in good repair and neat appearance.
Any vegetation that constitutes required landscaping shall be replaced in the event
that it dies. All landscaping materials shall be protected from damage by erosion,
motor vehicles, or pedestrians.
8-3 Screening & Landscaping Required Prior to Issuance of Certificate of Compliance
After the effective date of this Ordinance, a Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued for any use
located on a lot(s) upon which screening and/or landscaping is required, unless such screening and
landscaping is provided on said lot(s) as herein specified. This provision may be temporarily waived by
the Zoning Administrator in cases where it was not possible for the developer to install certain species of
plant material prior to occupancy due to the recommended planting season not occurring at an
appropriate phase in construction, and in such case, the time deadline for planting such materials shall be
extended only to the ideally recommended planting season for such materials, and a refundable cash
bond may be required to guarantee the planting. Such bond shall be calculated on the number of
plantings to be delayed and the typical local cost of such plants.
92
93
94
SECTION NINE (9) - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
REQUIREMENTS
9-1 Required Plans
Each application for a zoning permit or certificate of occupancy submitted to the Zoning
Administrator shall include information as to the location and dimensions of off-street parking and
loading space and the means of ingress and egress to such space. This information shall be in sufficient
detail to enable the Zoning Administrator to determine whether or not the requirements of this Section
are met.
9-2 Off-Street Parking Required
Off-street automobile parking or storage shall be provided for every establishment and every dwelling
on every lot or, in a case where no parking space can be reasonably provided on the same lot, such space
shall be provided on a lot, any part of which is within 400 feet of such establishment or dwelling. Such
parking space may be provided in a parking garage or on properly graded and improved open space.
9-3 Combined Lots Permissible
The required parking spaces for any number of separate establishments may be combined in one (1) lot,
and shared provided the total number of parking spaces in the lot total the required number for all of the
uses utilizing the parking lot; except that uses having alternate hours of operation may share the same
spaces for the purposes of meeting parking requirements as long as there is a clear separation of
operating hours (i.e. churches could use business spaces or vice versa provided the businesses are not
open on Sundays and provided that the church is not functioning during regular business hours).
9-4 Exceptions and Modifications
Any structure or use in existence on the effective date of this Ordinance is not affected by the provisions
of this Section until such time as the existing gross floor area is increased ten (10) percent or more. In
the event of building destruction, these provisions shall be waived.
Any multi-family residential unit which is used only for elderly or public housing may request reduction
of parking requirements to one (1) space per unit upon evidence that vehicle ownership is substantially
less than two (2) per unit.
9-5 Minimum Parking Requirements
For any use, or class of uses, not specifically mentioned in this Section, the requirements for off-street
parking and loading facilities for a similar use or class of uses specifically mentioned shall apply. For
the purposes of this Section, the number of employees shall be computed on the basis of the largest
number of persons to be employed on the largest shift. Each off-street parking space shall be no less
than 200 square feet in area and be provided with adequate ingress and egress.
Unless otherwise specified by the Board of Adjustment as condition for special uses, parking
requirements shall be as follows:
95
Use Required Parking
9-5.1 Apartment and Multi-Family Two (2) spaces for each unit
Dwellings
9-5.2 Auditorium or Theater One (1) space for each four (4) seats in the largest
assembly area.
9-5.3 Auto Wash One (1) space for each two (2) employees on a shift
of greatest employment, plus one (1) space for the
manager and reserve spaces equal to five (5) times
the capacity of the car wash at the location of
ingress and egress.
9-5.4 Bowling Alley Three (3) spaces per alley plus requirements for any
other use associated with the establishment such as
restaurant, etc.
9-5.5 Church of Other Place One (1) space for each four (4) seats in the nave or
Worship main auditorium.
9-5.6 Club or Lodge One (1) space for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area.
9-5.7 Commercial or Personal One (1) space for each 200 square feet of gross
Service Establishment floor area.
9-5.8 Hospital or Care Home One (1) space for each one (1) bed plus one (1)
space or each two (2) employees (nurses,
attendants, etc.) plus one (1) space for each staff or
visiting doctor.
9-5.9 Industrial or Manufacturing One (1) space for each employee on shift of greatest
Establishment or Warehouse employment, one (1) visitor parking space for each
five (5) managerial personnel, and one (1) space for
each vehicle used directly in the conduct of the
business.
9-5.10 Kindergarten or Nursery One (1) space for each employee and one (1) space
per ten (10) children shown on certification
capacity.
9-5.11 Library One (1) space for each three (3) seats provided for
patron use.
9-5.12 Medical and Dental Offices Four (4) spaces for each practicing doctor or dentist
Clinics at the office or clinic, plus one (1) space for each
employee.
96
Use Required Parking
9-5.13 Mobile Home Park Two (2) spaces for each mobile home requiring plus
one (1) space per employee for any building
requiring staff, plus one (1) space for visitors to any
building staff.
9-5.14 Mortuary or Funeral Home One (1) space for each 100 square feet of gross
floor area.
9-5.15 Motel One (1) space for each unit plus one (1) space for
each two (2) employees plus requirements for any
other use associated with the establishment.
9-5.16 Office, Professional One (1) space for each 200 square feet of gross
Building, or Similar Use floor area.
9-5.17 Outdoor Recreation Areas One (1) space for each three (3) persons able to use
(Commercial), Driving Range, such facility at its maximum capacity plus ten (10)
Miniature Golf, etc. spaces for waiting plus one (1) space for each two
(2) employees.
9-5.18 Restaurant or Place Dispensing One (1) space for each three (3) seats plus one (1)
Food, Drink, or Refreshments space for each two (2) employees.
9-5.19 Restaurant, Drive-In One (1) space for each three (3) seats plus a
minimum of fifteen (15) spaces for drive-in service
plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees.
9-5.20 Rooming House and Boarding One (1) space for each two (2) guest rooms, plus
House two (2) additional spaces for the owners.
9-5.21 School
a. Elementary and Junior High School: One (1) space for each two (2) teachers,
employees, and administrative personnel plus safe and convenient loading and
unloading of students.
b. High School: Five (5) spaces for administrative offices plus one (1) space for each
two (2) administrative employees plus five (5) spaces for each classroom and one
(1) space for each ten (10) seats in largest auditorium.
9-5.22 Shopping Center One (1) parking space for every 200 square feet
gross floor area.
9-5.23 Single or Two-Family Dwelling Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit.
9-5.24 Stadium One (1) space for each four (4) seats including
adjacent off-street accommodations.
97
9-6 Off-Street Loading
The number of off-street loading berths required by this Section shall be considered as the absolute
minimum. For purposes of this Section, an off-street loading berth shall have minimum dimensions of
twelve (12) feet by twenty-five (25) feet and fifteen (15) feet overhead clearance with adequate means
for ingress and egress.
The number of required off-street loading berths for nonresidential buildings and uses shall be as
follows:
Square Feet of Gross
Floor Area Required Number of Berths
0 – 40,000 1
40,000 – 100,000 2
100,000 – 160,000 3
160,000 – 240,000 4
240,000 – 320,000 5
320,000 – 400,000 6
Each 90,000 above 4000,000 1
9-7 Paving Requirements
All parking lots for multifamily, office & institutional, commercial or industrial uses shall be paved and
landscaped. Porous paving blocks may be utilized to facilitate drainage, provided an adequate
maintenance plan is presented for approval at the time of application. No Certificate of Occupancy shall
be issued by the Zoning Administrator until paving and landscaping requirements are met.
98
SECTION TEN (10) – SIGNS
10-1 Purpose
It is the purpose of this Section to permit signs of a commercial, industrial, and residential nature in
districts which have appropriate uses and to regulate the size and placement of signs intended to be seen
from a public right-of-way, the jurisdiction of this Ordinance without proper compliance with the terms
set forth in this Section.
Any sign or billboard not covered by the terms of this Section must be approved by the Planning Board
and Town Council prior to its erection.
10-2 General Provisions
All signs within the jurisdictional area are governed by these regulations and shall be erected,
constructed, and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Section; and only those signs that
are listed in this Section may be erected within the jurisdictional area of this Ordinance.
10-2.1 Traffic Safety: No sign shall be erected or continued that:
a. obstructs the sight distance at intersections or along a public right-of-way;
b. would tend by its location, color, or nature to be confused with or obstruct the
view of traffic signs or signals, or would tend to be confused with a flashing light
or an emergency vehicle; or
c. uses admonitions such as “stop”, “go”, “slow”, “danger”, etc. which might be
confused with traffic directional signals and signs.
10-2.2 Maintenance: Whenever a sign becomes structurally unsafe or endangers the safety
of a building or the public, the Zoning Administrator shall order that such sign be
made safe or be removed. A period of ten (10) days following receipt of said order by
the person, firm, or corporation owning or using the sign is allowed for compliance.
10-2.3 Prohibited Signs: The following signs are prohibited, as indicated:
a. Signs shall not be attached to or painted on telephone poles, power poles, light
poles, or other manmade objects not intended to support a sign. Except as herein
provided, signs shall not be located on any rock, tree, or other natural object.
b. Any flashing sign or device displaying flashing or intermittent lights, or lights of
changing intensity, except signs indicating time and/or temperature(see N.C.
General Statues 136.32, 136.32.1,136.32.2);
c. Signs advertising an activity, business, product, or service no longer conducted on
the premises;
99
d. Any sign and/or display lighting not shielded in order to prevent cast of light on to
or direct view of light from a residential district or residence and/or vehicles on a
public right-of-way;
e. Any sign located in a manner or place that constitutes a hazard;
f. No sign shall be so located, placed, erected, or mounted above the for line of the
structure to which it is attached, except in the case of Mansard roofs, which are
thirty (30) degrees or less from the perpendicular of the building line, where the
sign area calculated will include that portion which is thirty (30) degrees or less.
However, no sign attached to an acceptable portion of a Mansard roof will be
more than twelve (12) inches from the structure at the sign base or bottom.
g. Support wires or guy wires and other exterior supportive elements are not
permitted.
10-2.4 Construction Standards: Signs shall be constructed according to the requirements of
this Section and Chapter 23 of the 1967 edition of the North Carolina Building Code
and amendments thereto, whichever is more restrictive.
10-2.5 Illumination: Illumination devices such as, but not limited to, flood or spot lights
shall be so placed and so shielded as to prevent the rays of illumination therefrom
being cast upon neighboring buildings and/or vehicles approaching from any
direction.
10-2.6 Nonconforming Signs: All signs or advertising structures located in districts where
they would not be permitted as a new use under the terms of these regulations are
hereby declared to be nonconforming uses.
10-2.7 Height of Attached Signs: No signs shall be allowed to be placed above the roof line
of the principal building.
10-3 Signs Which do not Require a Permit
The following signs may be erected, hung, or placed without a permit from the Zoning Administrator
but shall not be illuminated. NOTE: The Term “temporary” when applied to signs is defined elsewhere
as “not to exceed twelve (12) months.”
10-3.1 Temporary Real Estate Sign: One (1) temporary real estate sign not exceeding four
(4) square feet in area. Where the property faces more than one (1) street, one (1)
sign is allowed on each street footage.
10-3.2 Temporary Construction Sign: One (1) temporary construction site sign not
exceeding twenty-four (24) square feet erected on the site during the period of
construction to announce the name of the owner or developer, contractor, architect,
land planner, landscape architect, or engineer.
100
10-3.3 Temporary Farm Sign: One (1) sign per road frontage advertising the sale of farm
products, provided the products are grown and produced on the premises where the
sale is offered; and the sign area cannot exceed sixteen (16) square feet.
10-3.4 Direction or Information Sign: Direction or information signs of a public or quasipublic
nature shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area. Such signs shall only
be used for the purpose of stating or calling attention to:
a. the name or location of the town, hospital, community center, public or private
school, church, synagogue, or other place of worship; this type sign may be
illuminated;
b. the name of a place of meeting of an official or civic body such as the Chamber of
Commerce, service club, or fraternal organization; this type sign may be
illuminated;
c. an event of public interest such as a public hearing, rezoning announcement,
general election, church or public meeting, local or county fair; and other similar
community activities and campaigns;
d. soil conservation, 4-H, and similar projects; and
e. zoning and subdivision jurisdiction boundaries.
10-3.5 Home Occupation Signs: Home occupation signs shall not exceed four (4) square
feet.
10-3.6 Setback Requirements: Signs which do not require a permit shall be setback at least
ten (10) feet from any public right-of-way line or property line and shall be setback at
least fifty (50) feet from any road intersection.
10-4 Signs Requiring a Permit
No sign, except those listed in Section 10-3, can be erected, hung, placed, or structurally altered without
a permit from the Zoning Administrator. Signs requiring permits must meet the general provisions of
10-2 and any specific size, setback, and other requirements listed below and under a particular zoning
district.
10-4.1 Identification and Principal Use Signs: These signs shall be setback at least ten (10)
feet from any right-of-way line or property line and fifty (50) feet from any road
intersection. This does not apply in the CD District, adequate setback and clearance
shall be provided in order that trucks and other larger vehicles may move close to the
curb. No part of an attached or freestanding sign shall extend beyond a line projected
vertically from two (2) feet inside the curb as defined and no portion of such sign
shall be less than ten (10) feet above the finished grade of the curb. Signs shall be
limited to thirty-five (35) feet in height inside city limits and outside city limits to 100
feet in height, except where noted (See Outdoor Advertising Sign).
a. District Requirements:
101
1. O&I-Office & Institutional and CN-Neighborhood Commercial:
There shall be no neon signs or other advertising devices, except
identification signs whose size shall be limited to one (1) square foot of
area per lineal foot of each building wall facing a public street.
Only one (1) sign is allowed per street frontage.
No sign shall project more than one (1) foot from any building wall or
canopy edge.
Illuminated signs shall be limited to those lighted from behind to
silhouette letter and figures.
Flood lighting and display lighting shall be shielded so as to prevent
beaming into residential districts, and so as to prevent a direct view of the
light source from a residential district.
2. CD-Downtown Commercial and CBD-Central Business District:
No wall, canopy, awning, or marquee sign shall exceed twenty (20)
percent to the total wall area of wall frontage facing a public street. The
total allowable sign area will be calculated according to the characteristics
of each building as follows:
i. For a two (2) or more story building, the building wall frontage is
that wall facing above the window line at the ground floor of the
building.
ii. For those buildings of less than two (2) stories, the total wall area
will include the total building wall facing, including windows,
from ground level to the top of the building.
iii. No part of an attached or freestanding sign shall extend beyond the
line projected vertically from two (2) feet to ten (10) feet above the
curb. No portion of a sign shall extend below eight (8) feet above
the finished grade of a sidewalk. Adequate setback and clearance
shall be provided in order that trucks can move close to the curb.
3. CH-Highway Commercial; Restricted Manufacturing; M2-Mixed
Manufacturing: No wall, canopy, awning, or marquee sign shall exceed
twenty (20) percent to the total area of wall frontage facing a public street.
The total allowable sign area will be calculated to the characteristics of
each building as follows:
i. For a two (2) or more story building, the building wall frontage is
that wall facing above the window line at the ground floor of the
building.
ii. For those buildings of less than two (2) stories, the total wall area
102
will include the total building wall facing, including windows,
from ground level to the top of the building.
iii. No freestanding sign shall exceed 200 square feet in sign face
(measured as one [1] side). Only one (1) freestanding sign
structure is permitted per road frontage of the lot. The total
allowable sign area shall not exceed one (1) square foot of sign
face per two (2) lineal feet of lot frontage. Any part of a
freestanding sign shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from
the right-of- way line. Sign height is to be measured at the
pavement elevation at lot street frontage. Signs that are above fifty
(50) feet in height shall be allowed a sign face not to exceed 250
square feet per side.
10-4.2 Outdoor Advertising Signs: These signs shall be setback a distance equal to the
Minimum setback requirements for the district in which they are located unless
otherwise specified in this Section. No permit shall be issued for any outdoor
advertising sign closer than 300 feet to any residential use or within 100 feet of any
primary use building on the property. The minimum distance between signs shall be
1,000 feet and said distance measured along the center line of the roadway or street
adjacent to the sign. In addition to the above, the following standards are set for
outdoor advertising signs:
a. they may be illuminated;
b. they shall not exceed 288 square feet in copy area on Major and Minor
thoroughfares, nor thirty-two (32) square feet in copy area on collector streets and
other thoroughfares, when allowed. A double facing or “V” sign structure will
not exceed the specifications above; for properties with less than 1000 feet road
frontage a maximum allowable sign face for all freestanding signs located o a
property shall not exceed a total of 500 square feet;
c. Support columns for sign structure must be of steel monopole design and must
have engineering certification to meet NC Building codes;
d. the minimum clear distance between the ground level and the bottom of the
trim shall be ten (10) feet;
e. the maximum height of sign shall be thirty-five (35) feet outside the town limits
and twenty-five (25) feet maximum height inside the town limits. Height shall be
calculated from elevation of the pavement of the roadway upon which the sign is
placed. Pavement elevation point shall be a right angle with the sign;
f. Signs must be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from other permitted signs on the
property;
g. Signs must be minimum distance of 500 feet from intersection of major highways
or corridors. These corridors are as identified in the Town of Williamston
103
Thoroughfare Plan. Signs must be at least 150 feet from all other intersections of
highways;
h. the backs of signs must be a neutral color to blend in with the surrounding area;
i. shrubbery planting around sign bases is encouraged. The area surrounding
the base of signs is to be maintained and free of unsightly debris.
Outdoor advertising signs are allowed only in the Highway Commercial District,
M-1or M-2 Manufacturing Districts.
Outdoor advertising signs are prohibited in the CD Downtown Commercial
District.
10-4.3 Commercial Banners:
a. Commercial banner shall be allowed for not more than a total of twelve (12)
weeks during any year.
b. The banner shall be professionally lettered and shall not exceed thirty-two (32)
square feet in size.
c. Banners shall be allowed only on the front façade of a building.
d. A fifty (50) dollar bond shall be required for all banners. The bond will be
reimbursed upon appropriate placement and removal of the banner being
permitted
.
10-5 Procedure for Obtaining a Permit
Applications for permits to erect, hand, place, paint, or alter the structure of a sign shall be submitted on
forms obtainable from the Zoning Administrator. Each application shall be accompanied by a plan
showing the following:
a. area of the sign;
b. size, character, general layout, and designs proposed for painted displays;
c. the method and type of illumination, if any;
d. the location proposed for such signs in relation to property lines, zoning district
boundaries, right-of-way lines, and existing signs; and
e. if conditions warrant it, the Zoning Administrator may require such additional
information as will enable him to determine if such sign is to be erected in
conformance with these regulations.
104
SECTION ELEVEN (11) - OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
11-1 Official Zoning Map Adopted
Williamston, North Carolina, is divided into districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map. This map is
adopted and declared to be a part of this Ordinance. The Official Zoning Map, as amended from time to
time, shall be the final authority for current zoning and status of land and buildings in the Town and
extraterritorial area. All territory included within the zoning jurisdiction not previously zoned otherwise
shall be zoned R-15.
The Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the Town Clerk, and bearing the
Official Seal of the Town of Williamston under the following words: “This is to certify that this is the
Official Zoning for the Town of Williamston, North Carolina.” The date of adoption shall also be
shown.
11-2 Zoning Map Changes
If, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, changes are made in the zoning district
boundaries or if other matter is shown on the Map, such changes shall be made together with an entry on
the Map. The entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the Town Clerk. No amendment to
this Ordinance which involves matter portrayed on the Map shall become effective until after such
change and entry have been made on said Map. The Town Board shall give official notice of the zoning
changes to the Zoning Administrator within four (4) calendar days after adoption of said change.
Regardless of all copies of the map which may exist, the Official Zoning Map, which shall be located in
the Williamston Town Hall, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land, water
areas, and buildings in the town and its extraterritorial area.
11-3 Replacement of Official Zoning Map
In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret, the
Town Board may by ordinance adopt a new Official Zoning Map which shall be the same in every detail
as the map it supersedes. The new map shall bear the signatures of the same officials as the original and
shall bear the Seal of the Town under the following words: “This is to certify that this Official Zoning
Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted (date of adoption of Map replaced) and
referred to in Section Five (5) of the Zoning Ordinance for the Town of Williamston, North Carolina.”
The date of adoption of the new Official Zoning Map shall be shown, also.
11-4 Maintenance of the Official Zoning Map
The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the maintenance and revision of the Official Zoning
Map.
11-5 Interpretation of District Boundaries
Where district boundaries prove to be uncertain as to their location on the Official Zoning Map, the
following rules shall apply.
105
11-5.1 Streets, Rights-of-way, and Easements. Unless otherwise specifically indicated,
where district boundaries are indicated on the Zoning Map as approximately parallel
to or following the center line of a street, highway, railroad right-of-way, utility
easement, stream or river bed, or of such lines extended, then such lines shall be
construed to be such district boundaries.
11-5.2 Lot Lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be
construed as following such lot lines.
11-5.3 Corporate Lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the corporate
limits shall be construed as following the corporate limits.
11-5.4 Property Divisions. If a district boundary divides a lot, the requirements for the
district in which the greater portion of the lot lies shall be extended to the balance of
the lot, provided that such extension shall not include any part of such lot which lies
more than 100 feet beyond the district boundary, and further provided that the
remaining parcel shall not be less than the minimum required for the district in which
it is located.
11-5.5 Vacation and Abandonment. Where any public street or alley is hereafter officially
vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to parcels of abutting property shall
apply to the portion added thereto by virtue of such vacation or abandonment.
11-5.6 Further Interpretation. In case any further uncertainly exits, the Board of
Adjustment shall interpret the intent of the maps to location of such boundaries.
106
SECTION TWELVE (12) - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND
PENALTIES
12-1 Zoning Administrator
The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized, and it shall be his duty to enforce and administer the
provisions of this Ordinance. If a ruling of the Zoning Administrator is questioned, the aggrieved party
or parties may appeal such ruling to the Board of Adjustment.
12-2 Zoning Permit Required
No building, sign, or other structure shall be erected, moved, extend or enlarged, or structurally altered,
nor shall any excavation or filling of any lot for the construction of any building be commenced until the
Zoning Administrator issues a zoning permit and certificate of occupancy for such work in accordance
with the requirements of this Ordinance.
12-3 Application for Zoning Permit or Certificate of Occupancy
Each application to the Zoning Administrator for a zoning permit or certificate of occupancy shall be
made on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator and shall be accompanied by plot plans. The
Zoning Administrator may waive the required submission of plot plans if he determines such
information is not necessary in order to make a determination on the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy. When required, plot plans are to be drawn to scale and show the following:
12-3.1 The actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon;
12-3.2 The size of the building to be erected;
12-3.3 The location of the building on the lot;
12-3.4 The location of existing structures on the lot, if any;
12-3.5 The number of dwelling, commercial, or industrial units the building is designed to
accommodate;
12-3.6 The approximate setback lines of buildings on adjoining lots; and
12-3.7 Such other information as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of
this Ordinance are being observed.
12-4 Termination or Expiration of Zoning Permit or Certificate of Occupancy
Any zoning permit or certificate of occupancy issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized
by it shall have been commenced within six (6) months of its date of issuance or if the work authorized
by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of one (1) year.
107
12-5 Certificate of Occupancy Required
A certificate of occupancy, issued by the Zoning Administrator, is required in advance of:
12-5.1 Electrical service transfer or connection to any commercial properties, excluding
apartments, except those under enforcement action, in accordance with the authority
of N.C.G.S. 160A-422 through 160A-425; and
12-5.2 A change of use of any building, land, or renovation thereof; and
12-5.3 Occupancy or use of a building hereafter erected, altered, or moved;
12-5.4 In addition, a certificate of occupancy shall be required for each nonconforming use
created by the passage of and subsequent amendments to this Ordinance. The owner
of such nonconforming use shall obtain a certificate of occupancy within sixty (60)
days of the date of said passage or amendments.
12-5.5 A certificate of occupancy, either for the whole or a part of a building, shall be
applied for within ten (10) days after the erection or the structural alteration of such
building or part shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of the
Ordinance. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of
a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this Ordinance. If the
certificate of occupancy is denied, the Zoning Administrator shall state in writing the
reasons for refusal; and the applicant shall be notified of the refusal. A record of all
certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator, and copies
shall be furnished on request to any person.
12-6 Enforcement Powers of the Zoning Administrator
The Zoning Administrator may provide for the enforcement of this Ordinance by means of withholding
zoning permits and occupancy permits. He may provide for enforcement by instituting injunction,
mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, conversion, moving, maintenance, or use; to correct or abate such violation; or
to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure, or land.
12-7 Penalties for Violations
Any person violating any provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be punished for each offense by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment not to
exceed thirty (30) days. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
12-8 Remedies
In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or
maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of this Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator, or
any other appropriate town authority, or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in
addition to other remedies, may institute an action for injunction, or mandamus, or other appropriate
action or proceeding to prevent such violation.
108
12-9 Complaints Regarding Violations
When a violation of this Ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written
complaint. Such complaint shall state fully the cause and basis thereof and shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall properly record the complaint, investigate
within ten (10) days, and take action as provided in these regulations.
12-10 Cancellation of Permits
A zoning or occupancy permit shall be canceled by the Zoning Administrator when the method of
moving, construction, or use violates any provisions contained in these regulations. Upon cancellation,
any further work upon the moving, construction, alteration, or repair on the building or structure, or
further use of said building, structure, or land will be deemed a violation of this Ordinance. Each and
every day such unlawful moving, construction, alteration, or repair on said building or structure, or
further use of said building, structure, or land continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
109
SECTION THIRTEEN (13) – BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND PLANNING
BOARD
13-0 Proportional Representation of Planning Agencies
For both the Zoning Board of Adjustment and the Planning Board, there shall be proportional ETJ
representation based on the population for residents of the extraterritorial area to be regulated. This
proportionality shall be determined by methods defined by the state to determine full fraction population
proportions and in accordance with N.C.G.S. 160-A-362. In any event, there shall be at least one (1)
representative residing in the ETJ.
13-1 Creation of the Board of Adjustment
The Board of Adjustment is hereby created, which shall consist of not less than five (5) members, each
to be appointed for three (3) years. In addition, the Board of Commissioners of the Town of
Williamston may appoint five (5) alternate members to serve on the Board of Adjustment in the absence
of any regular member. Alternate members, when appointed, shall be appointed for the same term, at
the same time, and in the same manner as regular members. Each alternate member, while attending any
regular or special meeting of the board and serving in the absence of any regular member, shall have and
may exercise all the powers and duties of a regular member.
A member of the Board of Adjustments shall not participate in or vote in any quasi-judicial matter in a
manner that violates affected persons’ constitutional rights to an impartial decision maker. Conflicts
include, but are not limited to, a member having a fixed opinion prior to hearing the matter that is not
susceptible to change, undisclosed ex parte communications, a close familial, business, or other
associational relationship with an affected person, or a financial interest in the outcome of the matter. If
an objection is raised to a member’s participation and that member does not recuse himself or herself,
the remaining members shall by majority vote rule on the objection.
13-2 Proceedings of the Board of Adjustment
The Board of Adjustment shall adopt the necessary rules to conduct its affairs and establish regular
meeting dates. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public and a public record of all findings
and decisions shall be maintained. The concurring vote of four-fifths (4/5) of the members of the board
shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning
Administrator, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under
any ordinance, or to grant a variance from the provisions of this Ordinance. For the purpose of this
subsection, vacant position on the board and members who are disqualified from voting on a quasijudicial
matter shall not be considered ‘members of the board’ for calculation of the requisite
supermajority if there are no qualified alternates available to take the place of such members.
13-3 Filing and Notice for an Appeal
13-3.1 Hearing of the Appeal: Appeals from the enforcement and interpretation of this
Ordinance and requests for exceptions or variances shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall
110
transmit to the Board of Adjustment all applications and records pertaining to such
appeals, variances, or exceptions.
13-3.2 Notice: The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal and shall give public notice thereof.
13-3.3 Appeal Stays Proceedings: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the
Board of Adjustment, after notice of appeal shall have been filed within him, that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise
than by restraining order, which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a
court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken
and on due cause shown.
13-4 Fees for Variances or Appeals
A fee shall be paid to the Town of Williamston, North Carolina, for each application for a variance,
exception, or appeal to cover the necessary administrative costs and advertising. Where interpretation of
the terms of this Ordinance is required specifically by this Ordinance to be determined by the Board of
Adjustment, the required fee may be waived.
13-5 Powers and Duties
The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers and duties:
13-5.1 Administrative: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the administrative official in
the enforcement of this Ordinance.
13-5.2 Interpretation: To hear and decide where required in this Ordinance appropriate
interpretation of the terms of this Ordinance.
13-5.3 Special Uses: To hear and decide only such special uses as the Board of Adjustment
is specifically authorized to pass on by the terms of this Ordinance. The location and
types of special uses are listed under each zoning district with procedures for
applications and additional requirements for certain special uses (such as mobile
home parks) prescribed in Section Eight (8) of this Ordinance.
13-5.4 Variances: To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances from the terms
of this Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance would result in
unnecessary hardship. In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Ordinance. A
variance from the terms of this Ordinance shall not be granted by the Board of
Adjustment unless and until it shall make a finding:
a. that special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land,
111
structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands,
structures, or buildings in the same district;
b. that literal interpretation of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the
applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district
under the terms of this Ordinance;
c. that the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the
applicant; and
d. that granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special
privilege that is denied by this Ordinance to other land, structures, or buildings in
the same district.
13-6 Appeal From the Board of Adjustment
Appeal from the decisions of the Board of Adjustment shall be to the Martin County Superior Court In
accordance with the procedure and within the time set out (within thirty [30] days) in N.C. General
Statutes 160-A-388(e).
13-7 Planning Board Responsibility
The Planning Board shall be the Advisory Board to the Town Council on the following matters related
to the content of this Ordinance:
13-7.1 Types of Review: The Planning Board shall act on the following and make
appropriate recommendations to the Town Council concerning matters outlined
below.
a. Every proposed amendment, supplement change, modification, or appeal to this
Ordinance shall be referred to the Planning Board for its recommendation and
report.
b. All requests for a change in the Official Zoning Map shall include a description of
the property involved and the names and addresses of current abutting property
owners.
c. Periodically review the district designations to ensure that land development is
taking place within the intent of this Ordinance and its parts.
112
SECTION FOURTEEN (14) - AMENDMENTS TO THE ORDINANCE
14-1 Who May Petition
A petition for a zoning amendment may be initiated by the Town Board of Commissioners, the Planning
Board, any department or agency of the town, or any citizen within the zoning jurisdiction of the Town
of Williamston.
14-2 Reapplication
Reapplication for Amendment of the Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted only once within any six (6)
month period. The Town Commissioners, by three-fourths (3/4) vote of its total membership, may
waive this restriction if it finds an emergency exists.
14-3 Fee
A fee shall be paid to the Town of Williamston in accordance with the duly adopted schedule of fees for
each application for an amendment to this Ordinance to cover the costs of advertising and other
administrative expenses involved.
14-4 Application Procedure
Applications for amending the Zoning Ordinance shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator at least
fifteen (15) days prior to the date on which it is to be considered by the Williamston Planning Board.
Each application shall be signed in duplicate copies and contain at least the following information:
14-4.1 The applicant’s name in full, applicant’s address, and description of the property to be
rezoned;
14-4.2 Applicant’s interest in the property and the type of rezoning requested;
14-4.3 If the proposed change would require a change in the Zoning Map, an accurate
diagram of the property proposed for rezoning showing;
a. all property lines with dimensions; north arrow;
b. adjoining streets with rights-of-way and paving widths;
c. the location of all structures;
d. the use of all land at the site;
e. zoning classification of all abutting zoning districts;
f. comprehensive site plan if the application is for commercial, industrial, or multifamily
development; and
113
g. a statement regarding the changing conditions, if any, in the area or in the town
generally, that make the proposed amendment reasonably necessary to the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
14-5 Action by the Planning Board
The Planning Board will consider and made recommendations to the Town Board of Commissioners
concerning each proposed zoning amendment. The Planning Board may hold separate public hearings
or may sit concurrently with the public hearing held by the Town Board of Commissioners. The
Planning Board will have thirty-five (35) days within which to submit its report to the Town Board of
Commissioners. If the Planning Board fails to submit a report within the above time period, it shall be
deemed to have recommended approval of the proposed amendment.
14-6 Required Public Hearing of the Town Board of Commissioners
A public hearing shall be held by the Town Board of Commissioners before the adoption of any
proposed amendment to the Zoning Ordinance. A notice of such public hearing shall be given once a
week for two (2) successive calendar weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of
Williamston. The notice is to be published the first time not less than ten (10) days, but not more than
twenty-five (25) days before the date fixed for the hearing. The date of publication is not to be counted,
but the date of the hearing can be.
A map amendment requires that a first class mail notice must be mailed to the owner of the parcel and
all adjacent parcels of land abutting that parcel of land as shown on the county tax listing at the last
addresses listed for such owner on the county tax abstracts. This notice must be deposited in the mail at
least ten (10) but not more than twenty-five (25) days prior to the date of the public hearing. The person
mailing must certify to the City Council that fact.
When a zoning map amendment is proposed the town shall prominently post a notice of the public
hearing on the site proposed for rezoning or on an adjacent public street or highway right-of-way. When
multiple parcels are included within a proposed zoning map amendment, a posting on each individual
parcel is not required, but the city shall post sufficient notices to provide reasonable notice to interested
persons.
14-7 Petition Withdrawal
Any petition for an amendment to this Ordinance may be withdrawn at any time at the discretion of the
persons initiating such a request, upon written notice to the Zoning Administrator.
14-8 Reconsideration
When the Town Board shall have denied any application for the change of any zoning district, it shall
not thereafter accept any other application for the same change of zoning districting affecting the same
property, or any portion thereof, until the expiration of six (6) months from the date of such previous
denial in accordance with 14-2.
114
14-9 Protest Against an Amendment
In the case of a protest against an amendment, supplement, change, modification, or repeal signed by the
owners of twenty (20) percent of the lots included in such proposed change, or five (5) percent of a 100
foot wide buffer extending along the entire boundary of each discrete or separate area proposed to be
rezoned. A street right-of-way shall not be considered in computing the 100 foot buffer as long as that
street right of way is 100 feet wide or less. When less than an entire parcel of land is subject to the
proposed zoning map amendment, the 100 foot buffer shall be measure from the property line of the
entire parcel, such amendments shall not become effective except by favorable vote of three-fourths
(3/4) of all the members of the Town Board of Williamston. For the purpose of this subsection, vacant
positions on the board and members who are excused from voting shall not be considered ‘members of
the council’ for calculation of the requisite supermajority.
14-10 Acceptable Form of Protest Petition
No protest against any change in or amendment to the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map shall be valid
of effective unless it is in the form of a written petition actually bearing the signatures of the requisite
number of property owners and stating that the signers do protest the proposed change or amendment,
and unless it shall have been received by the Town Clerk in sufficient time to allow the Town at least
two (2) normal workdays, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, before the date established
for a public hearing on the proposed change or amendment to determine the sufficiency and accuracy of
the petition.
14-11 Moratoriums
For the purpose of promoting health, safety, morals, or the general welfare of the community, the town
may adopt temporary moratoria on any city development approval required by law. The duration of the
moratorium shall be reasonable in light of the specific condition the warrant imposition of the
moratorium and may not exceed the period time necessary to correct, modify, or resolve such
conditions. (GS 160A-381 Section Five [5])
14-11.1 Except in case of imminent and substantial threat to public health or safety, before
adopting an ordinance imposing a development moratorium with a duration of sixty
(60) days or shorter period, the governing board shall hold a public hearing and shall
publish a notice of the hearing in a newspaper having general circulation in the area
not less than seven (7) days before the hearing date.
14-11.2
a. Absent an imminent threat to public health or safety, building or development
permits issued prior to the adoption of a moratorium shall be unaffected by the
moratorium.
b. Any ordinance establishing a development moratorium must expressly include at
the time of adoption each of the following:
1. A clear statement of the problems or conditions necessitating the moratorium
and what courses of action, alternative to a moratorium, were considered by
the city and why those alternative courses of action were not deemed adequate
115
2. A clear statement of the development approvals subject to the moratorium and
how a moratorium on those approvals will address the problems or conditions
leading to imposition of the moratorium.
3. An express date for termination of the moratorium and a statement setting
forth what that duration is reasonably necessary to address the problems or
condition leading to imposition of the moratorium.
4. A clear statement of the actions, and the schedule for those actins, proposed to
be taken by the city during the duration of the moratorium to address the
problems or conditions leading to imposition of the moratorium.
c. No moratorium may be subsequently renewed or extended for any additional
period unless the town shall have taken all reasonable and feasible steps proposed
to be taken by the town in its ordinance establishing the moratorium to address the
problems or conditions leading to the moratorium and unless new facts and
conditions warrant an extension.
116
SECTION FIFTEEN (15) – LEGAL PROVISIONS
15-1 Questions on Enforcement and Administration
It is the intent of this Ordinance that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first
presented to the Zoning Administrator. If his decisions are questioned, the aggrieved party may then
appeal to the Board of Adjustment; and that recourse form the decisions of the Board of Adjustment
shall be to the courts as provided by law.
It is further the intent of this Ordinance that the duties of the Town Board of Commissioners in
connections with this Ordinance shall be to:
a. consider and adopt or reject proposed amendments or the repeal of this
Ordinance; and
b. to establish a schedule of fees and charges required by this Ordinance.
The duties of the Town Board of Commissioners shall not include hearing and deciding questions of
interpretation and enforcement that arise.
15-2 Validity
Should any section of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such
declaration shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the
part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
15-3 Schedule of Fees
There shall be levied and collected such fees as are established herein and as set from time to time by the
Town Board of Commissioners. Such schedule of fees shall be kept on file in the office of the Zoning
Administrator where they shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours of the
Zoning Administrator.
The schedules so adopted by the Town Board of Commissioners not set out herein are adopted as if fully
set out herein.
Front Side Rear Corner St Other Front Yard Setbacks**
Max. Lot
Coverage
R-4
Residential 4,000 40' 25' 8' 25' 15' NA Not Allowed 3' 10% 30'
8,000 Single Unit 80' 25' 10' 25' 15'
16' between
buildings Not Allowed 3' 10% 30'
3,000 Per unit in excess
of one unit +10' per unit 35' 25' 25' 15' NA Not Allowed 3' 10% 30'
R-10
Residential
10,000 Single Unit
(same as R-15 if not served by
public water and sewer) 80' 25' 10' 25' 15' NA Not Allowed 3' 10% 30'
R-15
Residential
12,000 Lot served by
public water and sewer 80' 35' 10' 30' 15' NA Not Allowed 3' 5% 30'
R-20
Residential 20,000 100' 35' 10' 25' 20' NA Allowed 3' 5% 30'
CN
Neighborhood
Commercial 6,000 NA 25'
10'
**** 15' 15' NA Not Allowed 3' 10% 40'
6,000 60' 25' 8' 25' 15' NA Not Allowed 3' 10% 40'
8,000 Two-Family 70' 25' 8' 25' 15' NA Not Allowed 3' 10% 40'
+2,000 Per unit in excess
of two units 70' 15' 15' 15' 15'
16' between
buildings Not Allowed 3' 10% 40'
SECTION SIXTEEN (16) - SUMMARY TABLE OF DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Zoning District
Min. Lot Area in
Square Feet
Min. Lot
Width*
Principal Building Yard Setbacks Accessory Building
** On a corner lot, setback on the side of the lot facing the street shall be at least fifteen (15) feet.
*** Building height may be extended above the minimum provided the side yard requirements are also increased. See "building height" under each district.
**** Unless the side yard abuts a district where a fifteen (15) foot side yard is required.
Max. Building
Height***
O & I
Office and
Institutional
* Miminum lot width is measured at the minimum front yard setback line.
R-8
Residential
***** No side yard is required where buildings share a common four (4) hour rated firewall.
Front Side Rear Corner St
M-1
Restricted
Manufacturing 12,000 75' 150' 40' 20' 20' 10' 40'
M-2
Mixed
Manufacturing 12,000 75' 150' 40' 20' 20' 10' 40'
75' 120' 40' 10' ***** 10' 20' 40'
PRD Planned
Residential
2 acres for all zoning
districts.
CD Downtown
Commercial
CBD Central
Business
SHO Special
Highway
AO
Agricultural
Overlay
MHO Mobile
Home Overlay
CUD
Conditional
Use District
*** Building height may be extended above the minimum provided the side yard requirements are also increased. See "building height" under each district.
***** No side yard is required where buildings share a common four (4) hour rated firewall.
Min. Principal Building Yard Setbacks
Lot
CH
Highway
Commercial
3 acres for shopping
center
* Miminum lot width is measured at the minimum front yard setback line.
SECTION SIXTEEN (16) CONTINUED- SUMMARY TABLE OF DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Zoning District
Min. Lot Area in
Square Feet
Min. Lot
Width*
Max. Building
Height***
Development subject to approved site plan. Refer to Section 6-16 of the Zoning
Ordinance.
**** Unless the side yard abuts a district where a fifteen (15) foot side yard is required.
Refer to Section 6-7 of the Zoning Ordinance and underlying zoning district.
Refer to Section 6-10 and 6-6 of the Zoning Ordiance.
Refer to Section 6-6 of the Zoning Ordiance and underlying zoning district. District subject to approval from the
Town Board of Commissioners.
Refer to Section 6-15 in the Zoning Ordinance.
Refer to Section 6-14 in the Zoning Ordinance.
Refer to Section 6-9 in the Zoning Ordinance and underlying zoning district.
Refer to Section 6-8 in the Zoning Ordinance and underlying zoning district.
** On a corner lot, setback on the side of the lot facing the street shall be at least fifteen (15) feet.

TOWN OF
WILLIAMSTON, NORTH CAROLINA
John T. Boykin, Jr.
Town Administrator
Daniel a. manning
town attorney
Donald w. Christopher
zoning administrator
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
ADOPTED
April 6, 1992
i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
SECTION 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
PREAMBLE………………………………………………………………………….. 1
A. SHORT TITLE……………………………………………………………………. 1
B. AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE………………………………………………….. 1
C. JURISDICTION AND AMENDMENT………………………………………….. 2
D. FEES………………………………………………………………………………. 2
E. ENFORCEMENT…………………………………………………………………. 2
F. INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT, SEPERABILITY…………………………… 2
SECTION II DEFINITIONS
A. PURPOSE…………………………………………………………………………. 3
B. DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS……………………………………… 3
C. TENSE AND NUMBER…………………………………………………………... 11
D. WORD INTERPRETATION……………………………………………………… 11
SECTION III ADMINISTRATION
A. VARIANCES………………………………………………………………………. 12
B. EXCEPTIONS……………………………………………………………………… 12
C. NO SERVICE OR PERMIT UNTIL FINAL PLAT APPROVAL………………… 12
D. COMPLIANCE WITH OFFICIAL PLANS……………………………………….. 12
E. OVERSIZE FACILITIES………………………………………………………….. 13
F. DUTY OF REGISTER OF DEEDS……………………………………………….. 13
G. PENALTY………………………………………………………………………… 13
SECTION IV PLAT PREPARATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE
A. PURPOSE………………………………………………………………………….. 14
B. APPLICATION……………………………………………………………………. 14
C. MINOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL…………………………………………….. 14
D. MAJOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL……………………………………………. 15
1. Sketch Plan……………………………………………………………………… 15
2. The Preliminary Plat……………………………………………………………. 16
3. The Final Plat………………………………………………………………....... 18
E. RE-SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES……………………………………………… 22
ii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CONTINUED
PAGE
SECTION V DESIGN STANDARDS
A. GENERAL PROVISIONS……………………………………………………….. 23
B. SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS……………………………………………………. 23
1. Streets……………………………………………………………………. 23
2. Right-of-Way and Pavement Widths…………………………………….. 24
3. Grades……………………………………………………………………. 24
4. Horizontal Curves……………………………………………………….. 24
5. Intersections……………………………………………………………… 25
6. Cul-de-sacs………………………………………………………………. 25
7. Alleys…………………………………………………………………….. 25
8. Easements………………………………………………………………… 26
9. Pedestrian Pathways……………………………………………………… 26
10. Blocks……………………………………………………………………. 26
11. Building Setback Lines…………………………………………………... 26
12. Lots………………………………………………………………………. 27
13. Public Utilities…………………………………………………………… 27
14. Drainage………………………………………………………………… 27
SECTION VI IMPROVEMENTS
A. GUARANTEES IN LIEU OF COMPLETED IMPROVEMENTS……………….. 28
B. IMRPOVEMENTS REQUIRED………………………………………………….. 28
APPENDIX A
CERTIFICATES………………………………………………………………………... 33
APPENDIX B
SAMPLE PLATS………………………………………………………………………. 37
1
SECTION ONE
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ENACTMENT PREAMBLE
An ordinance establishing subdivision regulations for the Town of Williamston, North Carolina,
and its surrounding extraterritorial jurisdiction in Martin County and providing for the administration,
enforcement, and amendment thereof, in accordance with the provisions of NC General Statutes 160A-371
through 376, and N. C. G. S. 160A-360, and for the repeal of all ordinances in conflict herewith.
Be it ordained and enacted by the Board of Commissioners of the Town of Williamston, State of
North Carolina, as follows:
A. SHORT TITLE
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as: The Subdivision Ordinance of the Town of
Williamston, North Carolina.
B. AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE
1. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority delegated to local governments under
North Carolina General Statutes, Chapter 160A, Article 19, Part 2, and is adopted to promote good
planning practice.
2. The purpose of this ordinance is to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
while allowing for cost-saving efficiencies, in accordance with the Town’s service policies, and
furthermore, this ordinance is designed to accomplish the following specific objectives:
a. Lessen congestion in the streets and highways;
b. Further the orderly layout and use of land;
c. Insure proper legal descriptions and proper monumenting of subdivided
land;
d. Prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid undue concentration of
population;
e. Facilitate adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, parks, playgrounds, and other public requirements.
3. The provisions in this ordinance shall be administered to ensure orderly growth and
development and shall supplement and facilitate the provisions in any master plan, zoning ordinance,
official map, and Town budget.
2
SECTION ONE
GENERAL PROVISIONS
C. JURISDICTION AND AMENDMENT
1. The provisions in this ordinance shall be applicable in each and every subdivision of land
within the corporate limits of the Town of Williamston, North Carolina as now or hereafter established, and
within the surrounding extraterritorial jurisdiction up to a distance of one (1) mile from the corporate limits
in all directions, consistent with the provisions of N. C. G. S. 160A-360.
2. This ordinance shall become effective as of April 6, 1992.
3. When necessary to further its purposes, this ordinance shall be amended by action of the
Board of Commissioners of the Town of Williamston, but no amendment shall become effective unless it
shall have been proposed by or submitted to the Planning Board for review and recommendations. The
Planning Board shall have forty-five (45) days within which to submit its report. If the Planning Board
fails to submit a report within the specified time, it shall be deemed to have recommended approval of the
amendment.
D. FEES
Reasonable fees sufficient to recover incurred costs shall be charged at the time of plat
submissions. These fees shall be levied as follows:
1. Sketch Plats………………………………………………………………..$ 25.00
2. Preliminary Plats
From 1 to 10 lots………………………………………………………….. 50.00
From 11 to 50 lots…………………………………………................. 6.00 per lot
Over 50 lots………………………………………………………….. 7.00 per lot
E. ENFORCEMENT
1. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to enforce the provisions of this ordinance
and to bring to the attention of the Town Administrator and the Planning Board any violations or lack of
compliance.
2. Violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed a misdemeanor, punishable
as provided by law and with each day such violation continues constituting a separate offense. The Zoning
Administrator shall have the recourse to initiate through the Town Attorney such remedies in law and
equity as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of these regulations.
F. INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT, AND SEPERABILITY
1. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be
the minimum requirements. More stringent provisions may be required if it is demonstrated that different
standards are necessary to promote the public health, safety and welfare.
2. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this ordinance are either more
restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this ordinance
or of any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which
are more restrictive and impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
3. The provisions of this ordinance are separate, if a section, sentence, clause, or phrase of
this ordinance is adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the decision shall not affect
the remaining portions of this ordinance.
3
SECTION TWO
DEFINITIONS
A. PURPOSE
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this ordinance, have
the meaning herein indicated.
B. DEFINITIONS
Administrative Officer. The governmental officer charged with administering development regulations.
Aisle. The traveled way by which cars enter and depart parking spaces.
Alley. A public or private street primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those
properties whose principal frontage is on some other street.
Applicant. A developer submitting an application for development.
Application. The application form and all accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat or site plan.
Approving Authority. The Planning Board for some minor subdivisions or Board of Commissioners for all others,
unless a different agency is designated by ordinance.
Bicycle Lane. A lane at the edge of a roadway reserved and marked for the exclusive use of bicycles.
Bicycle Path. A pathway usually separated from the roadway, designed specifically to satisfy the physical
requirements of biking.
Block. A parcel of land intended for urban purposes, which is entirely surrounded by public streets, highways,
railroad right-of-ways, public walks, parks or green strips, rural land or drainage channels or a combination thereof.
Buffer. An area within a property or site, generally adjacent to and parallel with the property line, either consisting of
natural existing vegetation or created by the use of trees, shrubs, fences, or berms, designed to limit continuously the
view of adjacent sites or properties.
Building Setback Line. (See Setback).
Channel. The bed and banks of a natural stream which convey the constant or intermittent flow of the stream.
Cluster Development. A development approach in which building lots may be reduced in size and building sited
closer together, usually in groups or clusters, provided that the total development density does not exceed that which
could be constructed on the site under conventional zoning and subdivision regulations. The additional land that
remains undeveloped is then preserved and maintained as open space or recreational land.
4
SECTION TWO
DEFINITIONS
Common Open Space. Land within or related to a development, not individually owned nor dedicated for public
use, which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development. It may
include complementary structures and improvements.
Construction Cul-de-Sac. A temporary, graveled circle with a minimum 35 foot width at the end of an unfinished
street in an approved phased development and intended to provide interim vehicular circulation for a period not to
exceed 5 years.
Corner Lot. A lot abutting two (2) or more streets at the street intersections.
Cul-de-Sac. A local street with only one outlet and having the other end for the reversal of traffic movement. See
Street.
Culvert. A structure designed to convey a watercourse not incorporated in a closed drainage system under a road or
pedestrian walk.
Curb. A vertical or sloping edge of a roadway.
Dedication. An act transmitting property or interest thereto for a public purpose such as recreation areas or public
rights-of-way in a subdivision.
Density. The permitted number of dwelling units per gross acre of land to be developed.
Design Standards. Standards that set forth specific improvement requirements.
Detention Basin. A manmade or natural water collector facility designed to collect surface and subsurface water in
order to impede its flow and to release the same gradually at a rate not greater that that prior to the development of the
property, into natural or manmade outlets.
Developer. The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land included in a proposed development.
Also, the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or any other person having enforceable proprietary interest in
such land.
Development. A planning or construction project involving substantial property improvement and, usually, a change
of land-use character within the site; the act of using land for building or extractive purposes.
Development Regulation. Zoning, subdivision, site plan, official map, flood plan regulation, or other governmental
regulation of the use and development of land.
Double Frontage Lot. A continuous lot having the same depth as the width of the block and which is accessible from
both streets upon which it fronts.
Divided Street. A street having an island or other barrier separating moving lanes.
Drainage. The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading, or other means.
Drainage Facility. Any component of the drainage system.
Drainage System. The system through which water flows from the land, including all watercourses, waterbodies, and
wetlands.
5
SECTION TWO
DEFINITIONS
Driveway. A paved or unpaved area used for ingress or egress of vehicles, and allowing access from a street to a
building or other structure or facility.
Drop Manhole. A manhole provided for inspection and maintenance of sewers where an incoming sewer is
considerably higher than the outgoing. See current Town policy for Standard Specifications.
Easement. A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of private land for a public or quasi-public
purpose and within which the owner of the property shall not erect any permanent structures.
Environmental Constraints. Features, natural resources, or land characteristics that are sensitive to improvements
and may require conservation measures or the application of creative development techniques to prevent degradation
or the environment, or may require limited development, or in certain instances may preclude development.
Erosion. The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments, or the wearing away of the land surface by water,
wind, ice or gravity.
Escrow. A deed, a bond, money, or a piece of property delivered to a third person to be delivered by him to the
grantee only upon fulfillment of a condition.
Exempt Subdivision. See Subdivision.
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). Territory surrounding a locality’s corporate limits which by ordinance has been
established in accordance with NC G.S. 160A-360 as the area in which land use regulations will be enforceable by the
locality.
Fence. An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire, metal, or any other manufactured material or
combinations of materials.
Final Approval. The official action of the planning board taken on a preliminary approved major subdivision or site
plan, after all conditions, engineering plans, and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled and the required
improvements have been installed or guarantees properly posted for their completion, or approval conditioned upon
the posting of such guarantee.
Final Plat. The final map of all or a portion of a subdivision which is presented for final approval.
Frontage. See Lot Frontage.
General Development Plan. A plan outlining general, rather than detailed, development intentions. It describes the
basic parameters of a major development proposal, rather than giving full engineering details. As such, it allows
general intentions to be proposed and discussed without the extensive costs involved in submitting a detailed proposal.
(See Sketch Plan).
Governing Body. The chief legislative body of the municipality.
Grade. The slope of a street or other public way, specified in percentage (%) terms.
6
SECTION TWO
DEFINITIONS
Group Development. A development comprising two or more buildings such as a group of apartments, where the
land is not subdivided into customary streets and lots.
Ground Cover. A planting of low-growing plants or sod that in time forms a dense mat covering the area, preventing
soil from being blown or washed away and the growth of unwanted plants.
Gutter. A shallow channel usually set along a curb or the pavement edge of a road for purposes of catching and
carrying off runoff water.
Impervious Surface. A surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly
resistant to infiltration by water.
Impoundment. A body of water, such as a pond, confined by a dam, dike, floodgate, or other barrier.
Improvement. Any manmade, immovable item which becomes part of, placed upon, or is affixed to, real estate.
Individual Sewage Disposal System. A septic tank, seepage tile sewage disposal system, or any other approved
sewage treatment device serving a single unit.
Island. In street design, a raised area, usually curbed, placed to guide traffic and separate lanes, or used for
landscaping, signing, or lighting.
Lateral Sewers. Pipes conducting sewage from individual buildings to larger pipes called collector, trunk, or
interceptor sewers that usually are located in street or other right-of-ways.
Lot. A designed parcel, tract, or area of land established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used,
transferred, developed, or built upon as a unit.
Lot Area. The size of a lot measured within the lot lines and expressed in terms of acres or square feet.
Lot Frontage. That portion of a lot extending along a street line.
Main. In any system of continuous piping, the principal artery of the system in which branches may be connected.
Maintenance Guarantee. Any security which may be required and accepted by a governmental agency to ensure
that necessary improvements will function as required for a specific period of time.
Major Subdivision. Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision.
Manhole. An inspection chamber whose dimensions allow easy entry and exit and underground working room for a
person inside. See current Town policy for Standard Specifications.
Master Plan. A comprehensive long-range plan intended to guide the growth and development of a community or
region. Includes analysis, recommendations, and proposals for the community’s population, economy, housing,
transportation, community facilities, and land use.
Median. That portion of a divided highway separating lanes of traffic proceeding in opposite directions.
7
SECTION TWO
DEFINITIONS
Minor Subdivision. A subdivision of land of not more than 4 lots, provided that such subdivision does not
involve a planned development, any new street, or the extension of a utility or other municipal facility.
Official Map or Plans. Any maps or plans officially adopted by the Planning Board or Town Board of
Commissioners as a guide for the development of Williamston and its surrounding area, consisting of maps, charts and
text.
Off-Site. Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within the property (of which the lot is a part) that is
the subject of a development application, or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
Off-Street Parking Space. A parking space provided in a parking lot, parking structure, or private driveway.
Off-Tract. Not located on the property that is the subject of a development application nor on a contiguous portion of
a street or right-of-way.
On-Site. Located on the lot in question.
On-Street Parking Space. A parking space that is located on a dedicated street right-of-way.
On-Tract. Located on the property that is the subject of a development application or on the contiguous portion of a
street or right-of-way.
Open Space. Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated, or
reserved for the public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land
adjoining or neighboring such open space.
Parking Lane. A lane usually located on the sides of streets, designed to provide on-street parking for vehicular
traffic.
Perc Test. (Percolation Test). A test designed to determine the ability of ground to absorb water, and sometimes
used to determine the suitability of a soil for drainage or for the use of a septic system.
Performance Guarantee. Any security that may be accepted by a municipality as a guarantee that the improvements
required as part of an application for development are satisfactorily completed.
Permanent Marker. An iron pipe not less than tree-fourths (3/4) of an inch in diameter and thirty (30) inches long.
Permanent Monuments. Concrete monuments not less than four (4) inches in diameter or square and three (3) feet
long.
Pervious Surface. A surface that permits full or partial absorption of storm water.
8
SECTION TWO
DEFINITIONS
Planned Unit Development. An area of a minimum contiguous size as specified by ordinance, to be planned,
developed, operated, and maintained as a single entity containing one or more structures to accommodate commercial
or office uses, or both, and appurtenant common areas and other uses incidental to the predominant uses.
Planning Board. The duly designated planning board of the municipality, county, or region.
Plat. A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
Potable Water Supply. Water suitable for drinking or cooking purposes.
Pre-Application Conference. An initial meeting between developers and municipal representatives which affords
developers the opportunity to present their proposals informally.
Preliminary Approval. The conferral of certain rights prior to final approval after specific elements of a
development plan have been agreed upon by the planning board and the applicant.
Preliminary Subdivision Plat. A map indicating the proposed layout of a development and related information that
is submitted for preliminary approval.
Public Open Space. An open space area conveyed or otherwise dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, board
of education, state or county agency, or other public body for recreational or conservational buses.
PUD. See Planned Unit Development.
Reservation. An act which sets aside property in a subdivision as required by a local government for a public
purpose such as a school site or a recreation area, with the understanding that this property will be condemned by the
Town and taken with just compensation. The local government has 18 months from the date of final approval of a
subdivision to begin condemnation proceedings or the subdivider may treat the land as freed of the reservation.
Residential Access Street. The lowest order of residential street. Provides frontage for access to private lots, and
carries traffic having destination or origin on the street itself. Designed to carry traffic at slowest speed. Traffic
volume should not exceed 250 ADT at any point of traffic concentration. The maximum number of housing units
should front on this class of street.
Residential Collector. The highest order of residential street (See Street Hierarchy). . Conducts and distributes
traffic between minor streets and major streets. Since its function is to promote free traffic flow, access to homes and
parking should be prohibited. Collectors should be designed to prevent use as shortcuts by non-neighborhood traffic.
Total traffic volume should not exceed 3,000 ADT.
Residential Density. The number of dwelling units per gross acre of residential land area including streets,
easements, and open space portions of a development.
Retaining Wall. A structure erected between lands of different elevation to protect structures or to prevent the
washing down or erosion of earth from the upper slope level.
Retention Basin. A pond, pool, or basin used for the permanent storage of water runoff.
9
SECTION TWO
DEFINITIONS
Right-of-Way. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by overhead or underground public service
facilities such as streets, crosswalks, railroads, roads, telecommunication lines, electric transmission lines, gas
pipelines, water mains, sanitary or storm sewer mains, shade trees, or for another special use.
Screen. A structure or planting consisting of fencing, berms, or evergreen trees or shrubs providing a continuous
view obstruction within a site or property.
Sedimentation. A deposit of soil that has been transported from its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity, or other
natural means as a product of erosion.
Septic System. An underground wastewater disposal system with a septic tank used for the decomposition of
domestic wastes.
Septic Tank. An underground watertight receptacle that receives the discharge of sewage.
Setback. The distance between the street right-of-way line and the front line of a building or any projection thereof,
excluding uncovered steps.
Sewer. Any pipe conduit used to collect and carry away sewage or stormwater runoff from the generating source to
treatment plants or receiving streams.
Shoulder. The graded part of the right-of-way that lies between the edge of the main pavement (main traveled way)
and the curbline.
Sidewalk (area). A paved path provided for pedestrian use and usually located at the side of a road within the rightof-
way.
Sight Triangle. A triangular-shaped portion of land established at street intersection in which nothing is erected,
placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists entering or
leaving the intersection.
Sketch Plan. A rough plan of a proposed subdivision or other development.
Stormwater Detention. A provision for storage of stormwater runoff and the controlled release of such runoff during
and after a flood or storm.
Stormwater Retention. A provision for storage of stormwater runoff.
Street. Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, drive, cul-de-sac, or other roadway.
1. MAJOR STREET: A street or highway which is used for moving heavy traffic volumes or
high-speed traffic, or both, or which has been designated as a major thoroughfare on the Major
Street Plan.
2. MINOR STREET: A street whose primary purpose is to provide access to adjacent properties
and which is designed in a manner that will discourage use by through traffic.
3. COLLECTOR STREET: A minor street which collects traffic from other minor streets and
serves as the most direct route to a major street or a community facility.
10
SECTION TWO
DEFINITIONS
4. MARGINAL ACCESS STREET: A minor street, located beside a limited access
street or highway or a railroad, which provides access to abutting properties, provides
protection from through traffic, and controls access.
5. CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street having one (1) end open to vehicular traffic and
having one (1) end permanently terminated by a vehicular turn-around.
Street Hardware. The mechanical and utility systems within a street right-of-way, such as hydrants, manhole covers,
traffic lights and signs, utility poles and lines, and parking meters.
Street Hierarchy. The conceptual arrangement of streets based upon function. A hierarchical approach to street
design classifies streets according to function, from high-traffic arterial roads down to streets whose function is
residential access. Systematizing street design into a road hierarchy promotes safety, efficient land use, and
residential quality.
Street Loop. A street that has its only ingress and egress at two points on the same subcollector or subcollector street.
Subdivider. Any person, firm, or corporation who subdivides or develops any land deemed to be a subdivision
herein.
Subdivision. The division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions of land
for the purpose of sale or building development (whether immediate or future) and shall include all division of land
involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets, but the following shall not be included within
this definition nor be subject to the regulations authorized by NC G.S. 160A-376: (1) the combination or
recombination of portions of previously subdivided and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased
and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the municipality as show in its subdivision regulations;
(2) divisions of land where all resulting parcels are greater than 10 acres in size and where not street right-of-way
dedication is involved, (3) public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets; (4)
division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is no greater than two acres into not more than three lots,
where no street right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of
the municipality, as shown in its subdivision regulations.
Subgrade. The prepared earthen surface beneath a road.
Topsoil. The original upper layer of soil material which is usually darker and richer than the subsoil.
Variance. A waiver from compliance with a specific provision of the zoning ordinance granted to a particular
property owner because of the practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship that would be imposed by the strict
application of that provision of the ordinance. The granting of variances from zoning regulations is the responsibility
of the Zoning Board of Adjustments. Variances from subdivision regulations shall be the responsibility of the Board
of Commissioners.
11
SECTION TWO
DEFINITIONS
C. TENSE AND NUMBER
The present tense, includes the future tense, and the future tense includes the present tense.
The singular number includes the plural number and the plural number includes the singular number.
D. WORD INTERPRETATION
For the purpose of this ordinance certain words shall be interpreted as follows:
The word “may” is permissive.
The words “shall” and “will” are mandatory.
The word “building” includes the word “structure”.
The word “Town” shall mean the ““Town of Williamston”, a municipal corporation
of the State of North Carolina.”
The word “Ordinance” and “Regulations” shall mean the “Official Subdivision
Regulations for the Town of Williamston, North Carolina.”
The words “Planning Board” shall mean the “Town of Williamston Planning and Zoning
Board.”
The words “Town Board” shall mean the “Board of Commissioners of the Town of
Williamston, North Carolina.”
The words “Register of Deeds” shall mean the “Recorder of Deeds for Martin County,
North Carolina.”
12
SECTION THREE
ADMINISTRATION
A. VARIANCES
The Board of Commissioners may approve subdivision plats which vary from the requirements of
design, but not of procedure or improvements, contained in these regulations upon the recommendations of
the Planning Board.
Where topography or other existing physical conditions are such that compliance with the
requirements of this ordinance would cause an unusual and unnecessary hardship on the subdivider above
and beyond what other subdividers would meet, the minimum requirements as set forth in this ordinance
may be varied, provided that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the interest and purpose of
these regulations.
B. EXCEPTIONS
The standards and requirements of this ordinance may be modified by recommendations of the
Planning Board to the Board of Commissioner s in the case of a plan and program for a group, cluster, or
planned unit development, which is the judgment of the Board, provides adequate public spaces and
improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air, and service needs of the tract when fully developed
and populated, and which also provides such covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity
to and achievement of the proposed Development Plan.
The subdivider must submit a written request stating the reason(s) for each modification. The
Planning Board and Town Board may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, preserve the spirit
and intent of these regulations. These conditions may include, but shall not be limited to: surety,
performance, or maintenance bonds; affidavits, covenants, or other legal instruments as will secure
conformity to and achievement of the plan. Any modification thus recommended and authorized is
required to be entered in writing in the Minutes of the Planning Board and of the Board of Commissioners
and the reasoning on which the departure was justified set forth. The time limitations otherwise applying to
the approval process shall be suspended pending approval or disapproval of the proposed modification.
C. NO SERVICE OR PERMIT UNTIL FINAL PLAT APPROVAL
No street shall be constructed, nor shall any street lighting, water, or sewer be extended to or
connected with any subdivision of land nor shall any permit be issued by any administrative agency or
department of the Town of Williamston, for the construction of any building or other improvement
requiring a permit unless and until the requirements set forth in this ordinance have been compiled with and
the same approved by the Town of Williamston.
D. COMPLIANCE WITH OFFICIAL PLANS
When a tract to be subdivided embraces any part of a proposed major or minor thoroughfare,
parkway, or boulevard designated in Official Maps and Plans, the proposed way should be platted and
dedicated by the subdivider in the location and at the width specified.
13
SECTION THREE
ADMINISTRATION
To insure orderly development of the community in accordance with the general principles set
forth in the land development plan, the Planning Board may require that the subdivider dedicate open
spaces for such public purposes as parks and playgrounds for residents of the proposed subdivision. The
Town may also require that the subdivider reserve open spaces for such public purposes as schools or fire
stations. The Town will have an option to buy reserved land at the fair market value for a period of six (6)
months from the date of submission of the preliminary plan.
E. TOWN COSTS WHEN OVERSIZE FACILITIES ARE REQUIRED
Whenever the Planning Board requires that the developer install improvements or facilities that are
either larger, more costly, or not normally required by this ordinance, the municipality shall participate in
the extra cost one hundred percent (100%). The subdivider shall be required to pay only the portion of the
cost of construction that would equal the cost of an improvement required to serve only the subdivision, as
determined by the Board of Commissioners.
The purpose of this action is to guarantee compliance with official Town plans and also to preserve
equal protection to all the developers in the Town.
F. DUTY OF THE REGISTER OF DEEDS
The Town of Williamston shall file a copy of this ordinance with the Register of Deeds of Martin
County. The Register of Deeds shall not thereafter file or record a plat of subdivision located within the
territorial jurisdiction of the Town of Williamston without the approval of the legislative body as required
in this ordinance. The landowner shown on a subdivision plat submitted for recording, or his authorized
agent, shall sign a statement on the plat stating whether or not any land shown thereon is within the
territorial jurisdiction of the Town of Williamston as defined herein. The filing or recording of a plat of a
subdivision without the approval of the Town Board of Commissioners as required by this ordinance shall
be null and void. The Clerk of Superior Court of Martin County shall not order or direct the recording of a
plat where such recording would be in conflict with this section.
G. PENALTY
The following penalties proposed in the General Statues of North Carolina (160A-375) shall
prevail. Any person who, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located within the platting
jurisdiction granted to the municipality (G. S. 160A-360) thereafter transfers or sells such land before such
plat has been approved by said legislative body and recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a penalty fine of up to $500 per offense or 30 days in
jail, and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the
process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. Said municipality,
through its Town attorney or other official designed by its local legislative body, may enjoin such transfer
or sale by action for injunction.
14
SECTION FOUR
PLAT PREPARATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE
A. PURPOSE
The purpose of this section is to establish the procedure for local government review and action on
applications for subdivisions. The procedure is intended to provide orderly and expeditious processing of
applications.
B. APPLICATION
An application for development shall include the items specified in the provisions below along
with a fee calculated according to the fee schedule listed in Section One.
A subdivision application shall be complete for purposes of commencing the applicable time period
for action when so certified by the Zoning Administrator. In the event that such certification of the
application is not made within thirty (30) days of the date of its submission, the application is deemed
complete after the thirty (30) days unless it lacks information listed on the checklist and the Zoning
Administrator has notified the applicant in writing of the deficiencies of the application within the thirty
(30) day period. Before forwarding the preliminary plat to the Planning Board for action, the Zoning
Administrator, on behalf of the Planning Board, shall refer copies of the plat and any accompanying
information to those public officials and agencies which are concerned with new development, including
where applicable, the Director of Public Works, the Building Inspector, Fire Chief, and the District
Engineer of the North Carolina Department of Transportation for review and recommendations. These
agencies shall have a period of ten (10) working days to complete their review and return comments to the
Zoning Administrator. The Planning Board may subsequently require additional information not specified
in the ordinance as is reasonably necessary in order to make an informed decision; however, the application
shall not be deemed incomplete for consideration purposes for lack of such additional information.
The subdivider may request a preapplication conference to discuss his proposal with the Zoning
Administrator prior to submitting an application. This conference will be an informal meeting for the
purpose of clarifying intentions and requirements.
C. MINOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL
Minor subdivisions of land shall be those set forth in the Definitions in Section Two. The approval
process for minor subdivisions shall be as follows:
1. Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed minor subdivision as defined in this
ordinance shall submit to the Zoning Administrator (5) copies of the items required on the final plat
(Section Four, D. 3), together with an application form, the application fee, and evidence that no
taxes or assessments are outstanding against the property.
2. The application shall be declared complete or incomplete by the Zoning Administrator
within thirty (30) days from the date of its submission according to the provisions of this ordinance.
3. The application shall be forwarded to the Planning Board for review. If the minor
subdivision is approved by the Planning Board, no further approval shall be required. If the
Planning Board shall not vote in favor, or if a variance is requested, the full approval process for
major subdivisions must be followed. If the Planning Board takes no action within forty-five (45)
days of the time an application is declared complete by the Zoning Administrator, then the minor
15
SECTION FOUR
PLAT PREPARATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE
subdivision shall be considered recommended for approval and the subdivider may submit his plat
to the Board of Commissioners for consideration.
4. All approved plats shall be recorded by the Zoning Administrator in the office of the
Martin County Register of Deeds within 30 days after approval. Any such plat must be signed by
the Chairperson of the Planning Board and the Mayor. The Board of Commissioners may for good
cause extend the period allowed for recording for an additional period not to exceed 275 days.
5. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether conditional or
otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval was granted shall not be changed for a period of
two (2) years after the date of minor subdivision approval in accordance with NC G.S. 160A-385.1.
6. The Zoning Administrator, without the necessity of submission to the Planning Board, may
approve a minor subdivision involving only one (1) lot upon which is situated an existing structure
not requiring the issuance of a building permit for occupancy.
D. MAJOR SUBIDIVISION APPROVAL
For all major subdivisions of land, the following procedure shall hereafter be followed in the
submission, review of, and action upon all subdivision plats for lands within the Subdivision Jurisdiction of
Williamston, North Carolina.
1. THE SKETCH PLAN (Optional)
Before the subdivider makes application for approval of the preliminary plat, a sketch plan of the
proposed subdivision may be prepared and submitted to the Williamston Planning Board for
review. The sketch shall be drawn at a scale of not less than two hundred (200) feet to one (1)
inch. The sketch plan and application fee shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator not less
than 7 working days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Board at which the
sketch plan will be reviewed.
Contents of the Sketch Plan
The sketch plan shall contain or be accompanied by the following information:
1. The proposed name and location of the subdivision.
2. The name and address of the owner and the subdivider.
3. The total acreage in the tract to be subdivided.
4. The tentative street and lot arrangement.
5. The approximate rights-of-way, easements, and lot lines.
6. The average lot area and approximate number of lots.
7. The existing uses of land throughout the subdivision.
16
SECTION FOUR
PLAT PREPARATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE
8. The zoning classification of the tract.
9. A vicinity map showing the general location of the parcel.
Planning Board Review
At the time the sketch plan is submitted, it shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator for
general compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and placed on the agenda of the next
regular meeting of the Planning Board; the subdivider or his representative shall discuss plans for
development of the proposed subdivision; the Planning Board shall advise the subdivider as to the
regulations which pertain to the proposed development and the procedure the subdivider should
follow in preparing and submitting subdivision plats. This stage does not constitute approval.
2. THE PRELIMINARY PLAT (Required)
The subdivider shall have a preliminary plat prepared for submission to the Planning Board. Five
(5) copies of the proposed subdivision plat and of any required supplemental material shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator, along with the application fee. The preliminary plat shall
be prepared be a registered surveyor, engineer, or qualified land planner.
Contents of the Preliminary Plat
The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale not greater than two hundred (200) feet to one (1)
inch and shall contain or be accompanied by the following information:
1. The scale, north point, and date.
2. The proposed name of the subdivision.
3. The name and address of the owner, the subdivider, and of the registered surveyor, or
engineer, or qualified land planner.
4. A vicinity map showing the location of the proposed subdivision, the accurate boundary
of the subdivision, and existing or proposed streets.
5. The names and locations of adjoining subdivisions and streets, the location and
ownership of adjoining unsubdivided property, and the location of town limits, if falling
within or immediately adjoining the tract.
6. The existing zoning classification of the tract.
7. The boundaries of the tract to be subdivided with all bearings and distances indicated;
and the proposed location and width of streets, alleys, easements, and other rights-of-way
and setback lines and approximate lot dimensions.
8. The location of existing buildings, railroads, and bridges.
17
SECTION FOUR
PLAT PREPARATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE
9. The land contour with vertical intervals of five (5) feet.
10. The location of all marshes, water, water courses, ditches, drainage channels, and subsurface
drainage structures, and the proposed method of disposing of all runoff from the
proposed subdivision, and the location and size of all drainage easements relating thereof,
whether they are located within or outside of the proposed plat.
11. The plans for sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains, culverts, electric and gas
lines, and other surface and subsurface structures and pipelines existing within or
immediately adjacent to the proposed subdivision, showing connections to existing systems
or proposals for developing new water supply, storm drainage, and sewage disposal
systems. Storm and sanitary sewer profiles, cross-sections, and sizes shall be provided.
12. The right-of-way of streets, pavement widths and grades, and street names. Street
profiles and cross-sections shall be provided.
13. The lot lines, lot dimensions, lot and block numbers, and minimum building setback
lines along street rights-of-way.
14. Areas to be used for purposes other than residential, if any, with the purpose, location,
and dimensions of each indicated.
15. The total acreage in the tract, average in public or other land usage, and average lot
size, total number of lots, and linear feet in streets.
16. A letter station that a Preliminary Evaluation of the property’s water supply and septic
potential has been completed by the Environmental Health Section of the Martin County
Health Department if municipal service is not available.
17. Any other supplemental material or information considered by either the subdivider or
the Planning Board to be pertinent to the review of the preliminary plat.
Zoning Administrator Action
a. The Zoning Administrator shall review the preliminary plat for compliance with the
requirements above. If any required information is not included, the subdivider shall be notified in
writing of the non-compliance, and no further action will take place until the subdivider complies.
b. When the plat shall meet all information requirements, the Zoning Administrator shall
certify the completeness of the application by date and signature and shall distribute copies of the
plat to the agencies listed under Section Four B. “Application”, for their review and comments.
These agencies shall have 10 working days from the certification of completeness to reply. All
comments shall become a part of the application package.
c. After the 10 day agency review period, the Zoning Administrator shall provide copies of
the preliminary plat and agency comments to members of the Town Board of Commissioners as a
preview and opportunity to comment.
18
SECTION FOUR
PLAT PREPARATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE
Planning Board Action
a. The Planning Board shall review and take final action on each preliminary plat within sixty
(60) days of the date on which the application is declared complete by the Zoning Administrator.
All agency comments shall be included as part of the application package forwarded to the
Planning Board for consideration. Failure of the Planning Board to take action in the specified
time shall be grounds for the subdivider to submit the preliminary plat to the Town Board of
Commissioners for review.
b. Upon completion of the preliminary plat review, the Planning Board shall approve,
approve conditionally, or disapprove the plat.
(1) If the preliminary plat is approved, approval shall be noted on three (3) copies of the
plat by the Planning Board Chairman. One (1) of these copies shall be transmitted to the
subdivider, one (1) copy shall be placed in the application file, and one (1) copy shall be
retained by the Planning Board.
(2) In the case of conditional approval, the reasons for conditional approval and the
conditions to be met shall be specified in writing. One (1) copy of such reasons and
conditions shall be filed with the copy of the plat retained by the Planning Board and
another shall be given to the subdivider. The Planning Board may require the subdivider to
submit a revised preliminary plat with all recommended changes made before approving
the plat.
(3) When a preliminary plat is disapproved, the Planning Board shall specify the reasons
for such actions in writing. One (1) copy of such reasons shall be retained by the Planning
Board, and one (1) copy shall be given to the subdivider. If the preliminary plat is
disapproved, the subdivider may make the recommended changes and submit a revised
preliminary plat.
c. Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning Board, the subdivider may proceed
with the preparation of the final plat.
3. THE FINAL PLAT (Required)
The subdivider shall submit five (5) copies of the final plat (one [1] drawn in ink on film or mylar
for recording in the Register of Deeds Office; and four [4] additional copies) to the Zoning
Administrator not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the
Planning Board at which the plat is to be considered for final approval.
19
SECTION FOUR
PLAT PREPARATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE
Time of Submission
The final plat of the proposed subdivision shall be submitted to the Planning Board and the Board
of Commissioners for final approval within one (1) year of the date on which the preliminary plat
was approved. If not submitted for final approval within such time the preliminary plat shall be
considered as shaving been disapproved unless the Board of Commissioners agrees to an extension
of time.
Drafting
The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as it was approved; and shall
comply with the provisions of the Section 47-30.1 of the North Carolina General Statutes. The
final plat shall be prepared by a registered surveyor or engineer and shall be drawn at a scale not
greater than two hundred (200) feet to one (1) inch.
Contents of the Final Plat
The final plat shall constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the
subdivider proposes to record within 30 days; such portion shall conform to all requirements of this
ordinance and shall show the following information as a supplement to the approved preliminary
plat:
1. The exact boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided fully dimensioned by lengths and
bearings, and the location of boundary lines of adjoining lands, with adjacent subdivisions
identified by official names.
2. The accurate locations and descriptions of all monuments, markers, and control points.
3. Sufficient engineering data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground every straight
or curved boundary line, street line, lot line, right-of-way line, and setback line, including
linear dimensions, bearings, or deflection angles, radii, arcs, chords, central angles, and
tangent distances for the center line of curved streets and curved property lines that are not
the boundary of curved streets. All dimensions shall be measured to the nearest one tenth
(1/10) of a foot and all angles to the nearest minute.
4. The location of all rights-of-way, easements, and areas to be dedicated to public use with
the purpose of each stated.
5. The location, purpose, and dimensions of areas to be used for purposes other than
residential and public.
6. The blocks numbered consecutively throughout the entire subdivision and the lots
numbered consecutively through each block.
20
SECTION FOUR
PLAT PREPARATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE
7. The width, and names where appropriate of all proposed streets and alleys, and of all
adjacent streets, alleys, and easements which shall be properly located.
8. The plans for water mains, sanitary sewers, and storm sewers showing sizes, crosssections,
and profiles, as required by the Planning Board in its preliminary approval.
9. The name of the subdivision, the owner, and the surveyor or engineer.
10. The date of the survey and plat preparation, a north arrow, and graphic scale.
11. The deed restrictions proposed for the subdivision, if any.
12. Any other information considered by either the subdivider or the Planning Board to be
pertinent to the review of the final plat.
13. The following certifications shall also appear on each copy of the final plat submitted to
the Planning Board by the subdivider (see text in Appendix A):
a. Certificate of Approval by the Planning Board, signed by the Chairman.
b. Certificate of Ownership and Dedication, signed by owner(s).
c. Certificate of Approval of the Design and Installation or Guarantee of Installation of
Streets, Utilities, and Other Required Improvements, signed by the Town Administrator
and the Public Works Supervisor.
d. Certificate of Survey and Mapping, signed and sealed by surveyor or engineer.
e. Certificate of Approval by the Town Board of Commissioners signed by the Mayor.
14. Reference to any separate instruments, including restrictive covenants, filed in the Register
of Deeds Office which directly affect the land being subdivided.
Planning Board Action
1. The Planning Board shall review the final plat for conformance to the Development Plan of
the Town of Williamston, the requirements of this ordinance, and any other specifications
which were agreed upon at the time of the review of the preliminary plat.
2. During its review of the final plat, the Planning Board may request that the Town Board
appoint an engineer or surveyor to check the accuracy of the subdivision layout and the
final plat. If substantial errors are found, the surveying costs shall be charged to the
subdivider. The final plat shall be checked for conformity with the preliminary plat.
21
SECTION FOUR
PLAT PREPARATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE
3. The Planning Board shall act upon the final plat within sixty (60) days after it has been
submitted for final approval. A specified additional time may be mutually agreed to if
additional information is required. If the Planning Board fails to take action in the allotted
time or to mutually agree to a time extension, the subdivider may apply directly to the
Board of Commissioners for final plat review.
4. If the final plat is disapproved by the Planning Board, the reasons for such action shall be
stated in writing. The reasons for disapproval shall refer specifically to those parts of the
Development Plan or ordinance, or regulation with which the plat does not comply. One
(1) copy of such reasons and one (1) copy of the proposed subdivision plat shall be
retained by the Planning Board. One (1) copy of such reasons with the tracing and
remaining prints of the proposed subdivision shall be transmitted to the subdivider. The
subdivider may make the recommended changes after which a revised final plat may be
submitted to the Planning Board.
5. When the Planning Board approves the final plat, such approval shall be indicated on each
copy of the plat by the signed Planning Board Certificate of Approval. The final plat shall
then be submitted to the Town Board of Commissioners for final review.
Action by Town Board of Commissioners
1. The final plat shall be submitted to the Town Board of Commissioners for their action.
The Town Board of Commissioners shall consider the recommendations made by the
Planning Board and shall approve or disapprove the final plat within forty-five (45) days of
the final action by the Planning Board.
2. The approval of the final plat and acceptance of the public ways, easements, and other land
dedicated to public use shall be shown on the original and on four (4) prints of the final
plat by the Certificate of Approval of the Town Board of Commissioners. The original
tracing of the plat shall be recorded by the Zoning Administrator in the Martin County
Registry, one (1) print shall be kept in the application records by the Zoning Administrator,
one (1) print shall be returned to the subdivider; one (1) print shall be filed with the Town
Clerk, and one (1) print shall become a permanent record of the Planning Board.
3. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether conditional or
otherwise, upon which major subdivision approval was granted shall not be changed for a
period of two (2) years after the date of minor subdivision approval in accordance with NC
G.S. 160A-385.1.
4. If the final plat is disapproved by the Town Board of Commissioners, the reasons for
disapproval shall be stated in writing. One (1) copy of such reasons shall be retained by
the Board of Commissioners, one (1) copy shall be transmitted to Planning Board, and one
(1) copy shall be given to the subdivider.
Recording of Plat
After final approval of the plat and the affixing of all required signatures, the original
mylar of the final plat shall be recorded by the Zoning Administrator in the Martin County Registry
within thirty (30) days of approval by the Williamston Town Board of Commissioners.
22
SECTION FOUR
PLAT PREPARATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE
E. RE-SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES
If no lots in an approved subdivision have been sold, the land can be re-subdivided by
following the same procedure, rules, and regulations as prescribed herein for an original subdivision.
If lots have been sold, the land may be re-subdivided provided that (1) no lot or tract of
land shall be created or sold that is smaller than the size shown on the approved plan; (2) drainage
easements and rights-of-way shall not be changed; (3) street alignment and block sizes shall not be
changes; (4) the character of the area shall be maintained.
If, in the opinion of the Planning Board, any variance from the approved plan offers a
substantial improvement over the approved plan and will not be detrimental in any way to the previous lot
purchasers in the subdivision, the Planning Board may waive the above stipulations.
23
SECTION FIVE
DESIGN STANDARDS
A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Land subject to flooding and land deemed by the Planning Board to be uninhabitable for
other reasons shall not be platted for residential occupancy, or for such other uses as may increase danger to
health, life, or property, or aggravate the flood hazard. Such land within a proposed subdivision shall be set
aside for such uses as will not be endangered by periodic or occasional flooding, or will not produce
unsatisfactory living conditions.
1. The precise boundaries of the flood plain areas of the Town and its extraterritorial limits
shall be determined by existing floor insurance maps.
B. SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
The following standards for urban design shall be minimum requirements; where other
official engineering and public works standards and specifications are more stringent, such higher standards
shall be used.
1. STREETS
a. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall
conform to all of the elements of official plans for the community and shall be designed in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
b. Minor streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
c. There shall be no private streets platted in any subdivision. Every subdivided property
shall be served from a publicly dedicated street.
d. When a planned subdivision is adjacent to a major highway, the Planning Board may
require a marginal access street to provide access for lots fronting on the arterial street or
highway.
e. Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with other existing and named
streets shall bear the assigned name of the existing streets. In no case, shall the name for
proposed streets duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street names.
f. The street pattern shall be such as to cause no hardship in the subdividing of adjacent
properties.
g. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their
control is placed in the Town under conditions approved by the Planning Board and
acceptable to the subdivider.
h. Curb and gutter improvements shall be installed by the developer for all new streets
inside the corporate limits according to the town’s standard specifications. Unless
specified as a condition by the Town, curb and gutter will not be required for new streets
outside the corporate limits.
24
SECTION FIVE
DESIGN STANDARDS
2. RIGHT-OF-WAY AND PAVEMENT WIDTHS
Minimum street right-of-way and pavement widths shall be in accordance with the
current Thoroughfare Plan and minimum design criteria specified by the Town’s Standard
Specifications. Generally these are as follows:
_______________________________________________________________________________
STREET TYPES RIGHT-OF-WAY/PAVEMENT WIDTH
INSIDE CITY LIMITS OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS
(Curb & Gutter Req.) (If Shoulders Allowed)
_______________________________________________________________________________
Major Streets 60’ / 36’ 60’ / 36’
Collector Streets 50’ / 34’ 50’ / 20’
Minor Streets 40’ / 26’ 45’ / 18’
Marginal Access Streets 40’ / 26’ 45’ / 18’
Culs-de-sac 50’ / 35’ 50’ / 35’
Alleys 30’ N/A
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
3. GRADES
a. Street grades shall conform in general to the topography. The minimum slope on any street
shall not be less than three-tenths (.03) percent nor more than five (5) percent for major
thoroughfares and collector streets nor more than eight (8) percent for other streets.
b. Grades approaching intersections shall not exceed five percent (5%) for a distance of not
less than one hundred (100) feet from the centerline of said intersection.
c. Vertical curves shall have such length as necessary to provide safe sight distances and shall
be approved by the Planning Board.
4. HORIZONTAL CURVES
Where a centerline deflection angle of more than ten (10) degrees occurs, a circular curve shall
be introduced, having a centerline radius of not less than the following:
a. Major Streets 300 feet
b. Collector Streets 200 feet
c. Local or Minor Streets 100 feet
A tangent of not less than one hundred (100) feet in length shall be provided between curves.
25
SECTION FIVE
DESIGN STANDARDS
5. INTERSECTIONS
Street Intersections shall be laid out as follows:
a. Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street shall intersect at
less than seventy-five (75) degrees.
b. Intersections with an arterial street shall be at least eight hundred (800) feet apart measured
from centerline to centerline, and intersections with an expressway shall be controlled and
determined by the Planning Board.
c. Property lines at street intersections shall be curved with a minimum radius of fifteen (15)
feet and where the angle of street intersection is less than seventy-five (75) degrees, the
Planning Board may require a greater radius. Where a street intersects a highway, the
design standards of the State of North Carolina Highway Commission shall apply.
d. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be
avoided.
6. CUL-DE-SAC
A cul-de-sac shall not exceed five hundred (500) feet in length measured from the entrance to
the center of the turn-around. A street designed to be permanently closed shall be provided at
the closed end with a turn-around having a minimum right-of-way diameter of one hundred
(100) feet and a minimum travel surface diameter of seventy (70) feet or a circular driveway
twenty (20) feet wide around an island improved with suitable landscaping. Adequate sewer
and water line right-of-way should be reserved to eliminate waterline dead ends and to provide
sewerage outfalls.
7. ALLEYS
a. Alleys shall be discouraged, but may be allowed in commercial and industrial sections.
The Planning Board may require alleys in these areas to provide for service access, such as
off-street loading, unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses
proposed.
b. The width of an alley to service commercial and industrial areas shall be not less than
thirty (3) feet. Dead end alleys, if allowed, shall be provided with adequate turn-around
facilities at the dead end as determined by the Planning Board.
c. Alleys are not permitted in residential districts except when the Planning Board determines
special conditions warrant a secondary means of access. No alley shall front on a major
street.
26
SECTION FIVE
DESIGN STANDARDS
8. EASEMENTS
Utility and other easements shall be provided as follows:
a. Where a subdivision is transversed by a water course, drainage way, channel, or stream,
there shall be provided a storm easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially
with the lines of such water course, and such further width or construction, or both, as will
be adequate for the purpose, as determined by the Planning Board.
b. Unless a developer can specifically show that such are not needed to meet Town standards
for utilities or drainage, easements not less than ten (10) feet wide, centered on lot lines for
both underground and aboveground facilities, for use by both public and private utilities
shall be provided along each rear lot line. A five (5) foot easement along side lot lines, of
individual lots may be required where necessary for use by public and private utilities.
9. PEDESTRIAN PATHWAYS
a. The Planning Board may require pedestrian easements for walkways, bicycle paths, etc., to
be provided through the interior of blocks having a length greater than eight hundred (800)
feet where such easements are needed to provide adequate pedestrian circulation, or access
to schools, shopping centers, churches or transportation facilities. Pedestrian easements
shall be at least four (4) feet wide and shall be laid out along property lines. Such
pathways shall be part of the street right-of-way when associated with streets.
b. Lakes, ponds, creeks, and similar areas within the Town will be accepted for maintenance
only if such acceptance is recommended by the Planning Board and approved by the Board
of Commissioners.
10. BLOCKS
Blocks shall be laid out with special attention given to the type of use contemplated.
a. Block lengths shall not exceed eight hundred (800) feet without a variance, nor in any case
be greater than fifteen hundred (1,500) feet; nor shall blocks be less than four hundred
(400) feet in length. If variance is granted for a block design greater than eight hundred
(800) feet, the Planning Board shall require pedestrian pathway to be located in a central
position.
b. Blocks shall have a sufficient width to allow two (2) tiers of lots of minimum depth.
Blocks may consist of single tier lots where such are required to separate residential
development from through vehicular traffic or nonresidential uses.
11. BUILDING SETBACK LINES
The minimum building setback or the distance between the street right-of-way line and the
building line shall not be less than that prescribed in the Zoning Ordinance for the Town of
Williamston for the appropriate zone or zones in which the subdivision exists.
27
SECTION FIVE
DESIGN STANDARDS
12. LOTS
a. Lot sizes, shapes, and locations shall be made with due regard to topographic
conditions, contemplated use, and the surrounding area. Every lot shall front
or abut a street for a distance of at least fifty (50) feet.
b. Where public water and sewer facilities are available, every lot shall be required
to utilize the municipal services and all lots shall contain not less than the area
prescribed in the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Williamston for the appropriate
zone or zones in which the subdivision exists.
c. Residential lots in areas of the extraterritorial jurisdiction where public sewer and
water facilities are not available shall have a minimum size of at least twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet in area, unless approved by the county Environmental
Health Specialist.
d. Corner lots for residential use shall have an extra width of ten (10) feet to permit
adequate building setback from side streets.
e. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary
to separate residential development from through traffic on nonresidential uses.
f. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
g. Depth and width of properties laid out for commercial or industrial uses shall be
adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the
type of use and development contemplated.
13. PUBLIC UTILITIES
Water and sewer utilities shall be provided in accordance with requirements of the N. C.
Division of Environmental Management, the Division of Environmental Health, and Williamston
Town Standard Specifications.
14. DRAINAGE
Stormwater runoff shall be addressed in accordance with requirements of the N.C. Division of
Environmental Management and with Town Standard Specifications.
28
SECTION SIX
IMPROVEMENTS
Final plats for all subdivisions shall not be approved until all the required improvements listed in
this section have been installed or the subdivider has guaranteed to the satisfaction of the Town Board of
Commissioners that such improvements will be installed.
All improvements will be made in conformity with the requirements and standards set forth in this
ordinance and the Town of Williamston Standard Specifications. All improvements shall be inspected and
approved by the Public Works Supervisor and the Town Administrator as conforming to the requirements
of the Town. All improvement specifications of the Town of Williamston are on file in the Office of the
Town Clerk.
No municipal services or facilities will be extended or furnished by the Town of Williamston to
any subdivision established hereafter either inside or outside the Corporate Limits until the subdivider has
installed the required improvements listed in this section or has guaranteed to the satisfaction of the Board
of Commissioners of the Town of Williamston that such improvements will be installed.
A. GUARANTEES IN LIEU OF COMPLETED IMPROVEMENTS
No final subdivision plat shall be approved by the Town Board of Commissioners or accepted
for record by the Register of Deeds of Martin County until the required improvements have been
constructed in a satisfactory manner and approved by the Town Administrator or, in lieu of such prior
construction, the Town Board of Commissioners may accept a bond with surety and condition satisfactory
to the town in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the installation. The Public Works Supervisor will
be asked to estimate the cost of improvements. The Town may also accept in lieu of bond a certified check
or cash deposit with the Town of Williamston equal to the estimated cost of the installation. With either of
these guarantees, improvements may be made and utilities installed without cost to the Town or County in
the event of default by the subdivider. A contract shall be entered into between the Town and the
developer detailing the terms and methods of guarantees.
The owner of the subdivision shall require the contractor constructing streets, curbs, gutter,
sidewalks, drainage facilities, or water and sewer lines to give bond guaranteeing the work against defects.
B. IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED
Permanent Survey Reference Markers
Permanent survey reference markers shall be installed in all subdivisions in accordance
with North Carolina General Statutes 39-32.1 through 39-32.4 and the following
requirements:
29
SECTION SIX
IMPROVEMENTS
Permanent Concrete Monuments
Permanent concrete monuments four (4) inches in diameter or square, three (3) feet long,
shall be placed at not less than two (2) corners of the subdivision, provided that
additional monuments shall be placed where necessary so that no point within the
subdivision lies more than five hundred (500) feet from a monument. Two (2) or more
of the required monuments shall be designed as concrete corners. The top of each
monument shall have an indented cross metal pin, or metal plats to identify properly
the location of the point. All monuments shall be shown on the final plat.
Steel or Iron Markers
Steel or iron markers shall be set at all lot and property corners and at all other survey
points not marked by monuments. Such markers shall be set at points of curve, points of
tangency, reference points, and points of intersection. Survey markers shall be at least
three-fourths (3/4) inches in diameter, and shall be sunk vertically into the ground until the
top is approximately four (4) inches above the finished grade, except in sidewalks, streets,
and other similar surfaces where the markers shall be flush with such surface.
Street Paving
All new streets shall be paved in accordance with design standards listed in Section Five,
B. 2 and the Town’s Standard Specifications manual.
Street Grading
The subdivider of any subdivision designed to be used for residential, commercial,
industrial, or other purposes shall clear and grade all streets according to prevailing
specifications of the Town of Williamston. The Public Works Supervisor shall provide
such criteria to a subdivider during the preliminary plat review process, or before at the
subdivider’s request. Street grading may not be substituted for street paving
improvements.
Street Name Markers (Signs)
Street name markers (signs) shall be provided at all street intersections and at any other
point within the subdivision as deemed necessary by the Town. The placement and
construction of such signs shall conform to specifications of the Town of Williamston and
shall be installed by the Town. No name shall duplicate or be phonetically similar to any
currently existing street.
30
SECTION SIX
IMPROVEMENTS
Water Supply
Every lot in every subdivision within the town limits of Williamston shall be supplied by
the developer with water from the Town of Williamston. The water system shall be
constructed by the developer in accordance with the water services policies of the Town of
Williamston and under the supervision of the Town Public Works Supervisor.
Where public water service is available, lots shall be required to utilize municipal service.
All individual water supplies outside the town limits shall be located, constructed, and
operated in accordance with standards and specifications of the North Carolina Division of
Environmental Health. Minimum line size and design flow requirements shall be in
accordance with Town Standard Specifications and the Division of Environmental Health.
Fire Hydrants
The subdivider shall install fire hydrants as recommended by the Fire Chief where a public
water supply is available.
Sewage Disposal
Where a subdivision is within the town limits, the subdivider shall provide connection to
the sewer system of the Town of Williamston in order to provide sewer service to every lot
within the subdivision. Sewer connections shall be constructed under the supervision and
approval of the Public Works Supervisor.
Where public sewer service is available, lots shall be required to utilize municipal service.
Where public sewer service is not available, proposed sites for individual sewage disposal
systems outside the town limits shall be investigated by an environmental Health Specialist
with the Martin County Environmental Health Section to determine whether or not such
individual facilities are feasible. Approval of the County Environmental Health Specialist
must be in writing. When individual sewage disposal systems are allowable, the minimum
lot size shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. If the need is demonstrated by the
results of percolation tests and subsoil investigations, the minimum lot sizes may be
increased to the needed size. Smaller lots may be considered if allowed by State law or
regulations.
Surface Water Drainage
A plan to accommodate stormwater runoff shall be a required part of every major
subdivision plat approved by the Board of Commissioners and shall be in accordance with
all State regulations governing stormwater runoff and Town Standard Specifications.
(1) No surface water shall empty into a sanitary sewer.
31
SECTION SIX
IMPROVEMENTS
(2) Where, in the opinion of the Town Planning Board or Board of Commissioners, a
public stormwater sewer is reasonably accessible, before a subdivision is approved and
accepted, the subdivider shall connect with the public storm sewer system. He shall
provide all grading and all structure necessary to carry the water to the public storm
drainage system. Drainage and construction of drainage structures shall conform to town
specifications and standards.
(3) Where a public storm drainage system is not accessible, before a subdivision is
approved and accepted by the Town of Williamston, the subdivider shall do all grading and
provide all drainage structures necessary to properly carry the water to locations approved
in the final plat.
(4) Where drainage ditches exceed grades of four percent (4%), the ditches shall be
improved in accordance with town standards.
(5) For all major subdivisions, a professional evaluation of the proposed drainage plan
shall be provided by the Developer, including a Statement of Impact describing the effects
of the proposed drainage system on downstream drainage based on the ten-year storm
flow. If the Statement of Impact finds adverse impacts on downstream flows, the
developer must provide a plan to mitigate such adverse impacts.
Sidewalks
Sidewalks may be required along officially designated major thoroughfares and may be
required along any minor or collector street where considerable pedestrian traffic is
expected. Sidewalks shall be constructed in the street right-of-way and installed in
accordance with specified town standards by the Town Board of Commissioners.
Street Trees
It is recommended that trees be planted along the streets in all subdivisions. The planting
of trees is considered a service to be expected of the subdivider, as well as good business
practice. Trees are a protection against excessive heat and glare and enhance the
attractiveness and value of property. Trees shall be planted inside the property line where
they are less subject to injury, decrease the change of motor accidents, and enjoy more
favorable conditions for growth.
Electrical and Telephone Service
All electrical, telephone, and telegraph utility main and service connections shall be
installed according to Town Standard Specifications and prevailing practices of companies
providing such services.
32
SECTION SIX
IMPROVEMENTS
Street Lights
Street lights shall be required at intervals and within design standards in accordance with
prevailing Town Standard Specifications as well as the standards of the power company.
Curb and Gutter
Curb and gutter shall be routinely installed by the subdivider for all new streets inside the
City Limits, and for any other new streets as a condition placed by the Town, according to
existing Town Standard Specifications.
Dumpster Pads
Concrete dumpster pads shall be repaired in all subdivisions except single family
residential according to Town Standard Specifications.
33
APPENDIX A
CERTIFICIATIONS
Forms for final certification: The following certificates shall be lettered or rubber stamped on the final plat
in such a manner as to insure legible reproduction:
34
(A0 CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL BY THE PLANNING BOARD
I, ______________________________________, Chairman of the Planning Board, do hereby certify that
said Board fully approved the final plat of the subdivision entitled_________________________________,
on the ____ day of ______________________, 20___.
__________________________________________________
Chairman
(B) CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP AND DEDICATION
I (We) hereby certify that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown and described hereon and
that I (we) hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my (our) free consent, establish minimum building
lines, and dedicate all streets, alleys, walks, parks, and other sites to public or private use are noted.
Further, I (we) certify the land as shown hereon is within the platting jurisdiction of the Town of
Williamston, North Carolina.
_________________________________________________
Owner
___________________
Date
______________________________________
Owner
35
(C) CERTIFICATION OF APPROVAL OF THE INSTALLATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF
STREETS, UTILITIES, AND OTHER REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
I do hereby certify (1) that streets, utilities and other required improvements have been installed in an
acceptable manner and according to town specifications and standards in the subdivision entitled
_________________________________________, or (2) that a guarantee of the installations of the
required improvements in an amount or manner satisfactory to the Town of Williamston has been
received.
________________ __________________________________________
Date Town Administrator (if improvements are not installed)
________________ __________________________________________
Date Public Works Supervisor (if improvements are installed)
(D) CERTIFICATE OF ACCURACY
I hereby certify that the plan shown and described hereon is a true and correct survey to the accuracy
required by the Williamston Planning Board and that the monuments and markers have been placed in
accordance with Williamston’s Subdivision Regulations.
___________________ _____________________________________________
Date Registered Engineer or Surveyor
36
(E) CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL BY THE TOWN BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
I, ___________________________________, Mayor of the Town of Williamston, do hereby certify that
the Board of Commissioners fully approved the final plat of the subdivision entitled __________________
________________________________________, on the _________ day of ________________, 20___.
__________________________________________________
Mayor
37
APPENDIX B
SAMPLE PLATS
The following plats are intended to be simple examples which show some of the plat requirements listed in
this document. No example herein addresses all situations nor specifically satisfies all of the Town of
Williamston’s requirements. Developers are encouraged to work closely with the administrator of this
ordinance and with their own design professionals in order to fully comply with stated requirements.

1
Town of Williamston
Fire Prevention Ordinance
Section 12
(Updated August 7, 2017)
2
TOWN OF WILLIAMSTON
FIRE PREVENTION
TABLE OF CONTENTS Page 2
Definitions 3
Section 12-1 Jurisdiction 7
Section 12-2 Purpose 7
Section 12-3 Relationship to Laws and Standards 7
Section 12-4 Application of Ordinance 7
Section 12-5 Duties of the Fire Chief 8
Section 12-6 Authority to Enter Premises 8
Section 12-7 Inspection of Buildings and Premises 8
Section 12-8 Permits 9
Section 12-9 Site Plan Approval 9
Section 12-10 New Construction Approval 9
Section 12-11 Immediately Dangerous or Hazardous Conditions 10
Section 12-12 Notice of Violation and Order to Correct 10
Section 12-13 Enforcement of Chapter 11
Section 12-14 Appeals 12
Section 12-15 Primary Fire District 13
Section 12-16 Installation of Aboveground Tanks in Primary Fire Dist. 13
Section 12-17 Installation and Removal of Aboveground and 13
Underground Storage Tanks in Other than the
Primary Fire District
Section 12-18 Installation of Knox Boxes 16
Section 12-19 Sprinklered Occupancies 16
Section 12-20 Alarm Communications System 16
Section 12-21 False Fire Alarms 17
Section 12-22 Hazardous Locations Identification System 18
Section 12-23 Hazardous Materials Data Storage Boxes 18
Section 12-24 Street Addresses 19
Table 12-24.1 Address Number Sizes 21
Section 12-25 Enforcement 21
Section 12-26 Open Burning Prohibited 22
Section 12-27 Fire Lanes Establishment 22
Section 12-28 Hazardous Materials Response, Recouping Cost 25
Section 12-29 Severability 25
Revisions 26
3
DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following definitions shall apply:
AGST: Above ground storage tank or a tank designed and approved to store flammable or combustible liquids or gases at or above normal atmospheric pressure while situated above ground.
Amusement Building A building that is temporary permanent or mobile that contains a device or system that conveys passengers or provides a walkway along, around or over a course in any direction as a form of amusement arranged so that the egress path is not readily apparent due to visual or audio distractions or an intentionally confounded egress path or is not readily available because of the mode of conveyance through the building or structure.
Authority Having Jurisdiction: The Chief of the fire department or his designee.
Automatic Fire Extinguishing Systems An approved system of devices and equipment which automatically detects a fire and discharges an approved fire extinguishing agent onto or in the area of a fire.
Canopy A structure, enclosure or shelter constructed of fabric or pliable materials supported by any manner, except by air or the contents it protects, and is open without sidewalls or drops on 75% (percent) or more of the perimeter.
Carnivals A circus, carnival, tent show, theater, skating ring, dance hall or other place of assembly in or under which persons gather for any purpose.
Combustible Liquid A liquid having a closed cup flash point at or above 100 degrees Fahrenheit.
4
Compressed Gas Systems An assembly of equipment designed to contain, distribute or transport compressed gases. It can consist of a compressed gas container or containers, reactors, and appurtenances, including pumps, compressors and connecting piping and tubing.
Covered Mall Buildings A single building enclosing a number of tenants and occupants such as retail stores, drinking and dining establishments, entertainment and amusement facilities, passenger transportation terminals offices and other similar uses wherein two or more tenants have a main entrance into one or more malls.
Exhibits and Trade Shows An operational permit is required to operate exhibits and trade shows.
Explosives A chemical compound, mixture or device, the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion. The term includes, but is not limited to, dynamite, black powder, pellet powder, initiating explosives, detonators, safety fuses, squibs, detonating cords, igniter cord, igniters and display fire works, 1.3G (class B fireworks)
Fire Alarms and Detection Systems A system or portion of a combination system consisting of components and circuits arranged to monitor and annunciate the status of fire alarm or supervisory signal-initiating devices and to initiate the appropriate response to those signals.
Fire Pumps Water pumps and related fuel tanks, jockey pumps, controllers and generators that are a part of a fire extinguishing system.
Fireworks Any composition or devices, which are explosive materials, designed to produce audible or visible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation.
Flammable Liquid A liquid having a closed cup flash point below 100 degrees Fahrenheit.
5
Fumigation The utilization within an enclosed space of a fumigant in concentrations that is hazardous or acutely toxic to humans.
Hazardous Material Occupancies To install, repair damage to, or abandon, remove, place temporarily out of service, or close, or substantially modify a storage facility or other area regulated by Chapter 27 when the hazardous materials in use storage exceed the amounts listed in table 105.6.20 of NC Fire Code.
Knox Box: A rapid entry key security system consisting of a hardened steel box installed at a strategic location outside of a building in which master keys to a facility are placed. The Knox Box is then locked by a representative of the fire department. In the event of an emergency, the fire department has rapid access to the building via use of the keys stored in the Knox Box.
N.C.A.C. The North Carolina Administrative Code.
N.C.D.E.N.R. The North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources.
N.C.G.S. The General Statutes of the State of North Carolina.
NFPA 101 The Life Safety Code.
NFPA 72 The National Fire Alarm Code.
NFPA The National Fire Protection Association.
Private Fire Hydrants Is that hydrant and its appurtenances on private property between a source of water and the hydrant.
Pyrotechnics A chemical mixture that produces visible light displays or sounds though a self-propagating, heat- releasing chemical reaction which is initiated by ignition.
6
Spraying or Dipping An operation utilizing flammable or combustible liquids or the application of combustible powders.
Sprinkler and Standpipe Systems An integrated system of underground and overhead piping designed in accordance with fire protection engineering standards.
Tents A structure, enclosure or shelter constructed of fabric or pliable material supported by any manner except by air or the contents that it protects.
Thermal Insecticide Fogging The utilization of insecticidal liquids passed through thermal fog-generating units where, by means of heat, pressure and turbulence, such liquids are transformed and discharged in the form of fog or mist blown into an area to be treated.
UGST Underground storage tank or a tank designed and approved to store flammable or combustible liquids or gases at or above normal atmospheric pressure while situated underground.
7
CHAPTER 12
Code of Ordinances
Fire Prevention
TITLE:
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Fire Prevention Code of the Town of Williamston, North Carolina.
SECTION 12-1 JURISDICTION
This chapter is effective as allowed by law, in all areas of the municipality, the municipal extraterritorial jurisdiction, and within the Williamston and Skewarkee Fire Districts.
SECTION 12-2 PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this chapter to prescribe regulations consistent with the most current edition of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code, and nationally recognized good practices for the safeguarding of life and property from the hazards of fire and explosions arising from the storage, handling, and the use of flammable, combustible, and hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life and property in the use or occupancy of buildings or premises.
SECTION 12-3 RELATIONSHIP TO LAWS AND STANDARDS
The provisions of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code, as amended periodically, are incorporated by reference herein. In the event that any provision of this ordinance is in material conflict with a provision of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code, then the State code provision shall take precedence over the conflicting provision of this ordinance.
SECTION 12-4 APPLICATION OF ORDINANCE
a) The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to new and existing conditions and structures, and to the repair, use, occupancy and maintenance of existing buildings or structures specified in the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code, and to other conditions hazardous to life or property.
b) Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed as applying to the transportation of any substance shipped in compliance with regulations prescribed by state and federal law or as applying to the military forces of the United States.
c) This ordinance shall apply only to commercial occupancies and common areas of multi-family dwellings. This ordinance shall not apply to one and two family dwellings or individual living spaces located in multi-family dwellings.
8
SECTION 12-5 DUTIES OF THE FIRE CHIEF
The duties of the Fire Chief shall include but are not limited to:
a) Keeping the Town Administrator and the Board of Commissioners informed of the progress and development of the Fire Department.
b) Keeping the Town Administrator and the Board of Commissioners informed of any matters pertaining to the present condition and future expansion of the Fire Department.
c) Serving as the Town Administrator’s and Board of Commissioner’s advisor concerning requirements of the State fire insurance rating bureau.
d) Conducting fire prevention inspections of public schools required by N.C.G.S. 115C, and fire prevention inspections of licensed day care facilities, licensed foster care homes, and licensed rest home facilities as required by North Carolina state law.
e) Conducting periodic fire inspections of buildings, structures and premises within the Town’s corporate limits and within the Town’s extraterritorial jurisdiction, and within the Williamston and Skewarkee fire districts.
f) Conducting investigations of fires of a suspicious nature so as to determine their point of origin and cause.
g) Assisting school authorities in developing and managing fire prevention programs for each public school within the Town’s corporate and extraterritorial limits.
h) Maintaining an adequate staff of fire inspectors certified by the North Carolina Code Officials Qualification Board to properly execute all provisions of this chapter.
SECTION 12-6 AUTHORITY TO ENTER PREMISES
The Fire Chief or his designee may, at all reasonable hours, enter any building or premises for the purpose of conducting any inspection or investigation allowed under provisions of this ordinance, and for which he is authorized by North Carolina General Statutes.
SECTION 12-7 INSPECTION OF BUILDINGS AND PREMISES
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to inspect, or cause to be inspected, according to the attached schedule, all buildings and premises except the interiors of one and two family dwellings, for the purpose of (1) ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire or to endanger life from fire, and (2) enforcing the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code, or any violations of the provisions or intent of this ordinance creating a
9
fire hazard. The Fire Chief or his designee shall charge inspection fees for inspections of buildings according to the schedule set forth in this ordinance, except when such buildings are owned by state or local government, and for all reinspections made to ascertain compliance with a notice of violation and order of correction issued under this ordinance.
The following Inspection Schedule is adopted for the Town of Williamston:
Once every year (Hazardous, Institutional, High Rise, Assembly and Residential except one and two family dwellings and only interior common areas of dwelling units of multi-family occupancies)
Once every two years (Educational (except public schools) and Industrial)
Once every three years (Business, Mercantile, Storage, Churches and Synagogues)
Exception: The Primary fire district as defined in section 12-15. The inspection schedule for all commercial buildings within the primary fire district will be on an annual inspection cycle.
SECTION 12-8 PERMITS
Chapter 1, section 105 of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code titled Permits, is hereby adopted by reference. All persons, corporations or entities desiring to open a business, expand an operation, or manufacture a new product for which a permit is required, within the Town of Williamston, the extraterritorial jurisdiction, or the Williamston or Skewarkee fire districts, shall obtain all permits required by this section before a Permit to operate and certificate of occupancy is issued.
The Fire Chief or his designee shall issue all applicable Fire Prevention Code Permits to businesses which require such permits under the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code. Permits will be valid for the period shown on the face of the permit. The Fire Chief or his designee shall charge a fee for such permits in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in Appendix “A” of this ordinance.
All permits required by the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code or this ordinance may be combined into a single permit at the rate of the highest permit fee applicable. Non-profit or other tax supported agencies may be exempt from permit fees. Renewal of permits shall coincide with the mandatory state inspection schedule for all occupancies.
SECTION 12-9 SITE PLAN APPROVAL
The Fire Chief or his designee shall review construction or development site plans to ensure compliance with chapter 5 of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code before final site plan approval is granted.
SECTION 12-10 NEW CONSTRUCTION APPROVAL
10
a) The Fire Chief or his designee shall review and approve all commercial and multi-family residential building plans to ensure compliance with the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code before final approval is granted.
b) The Fire Chief or his designee shall conduct inspections of buildings under construction to insure compliance with the provisions of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code before the Building Inspector issues a certificate of occupancy for the building.
SECTION 12-11 IMMEDIATELY DANGEROUS OR HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS
Whenever the Fire Chief or his designee finds in any building or upon any premises
dangerous conditions or materials as described below, he shall order such dangerous
conditions or materials be removed or remedied in such manner as the Fire Chief or his
designee may specify:
a) Dangerous storage or unlawful amounts of combustible, flammable, or explosive or otherwise hazardous materials;
b) Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed equipment for handling or using combustible, flammable or explosive or otherwise hazardous materials;
c) Dangerous accumulations of rubbish, waste paper, boxes, shavings, or other highly combustible materials;
d) Accumulations of dust or waste material in air conditioning or ventilation systems, or of grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts, or inadequate clearances to unprotected combustible materials from hoods, grease extractors, and ducts;
e) Obstructions to or in fire escapes, designated access openings in exterior walls for fire department use, stairs, passageways, doors or windows liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department or impede egress of occupants in the case of fire, including locked or blocked fire exits;
f) Overcrowding in violation of occupancy limits established pursuant to the North Carolina State Building Code and required under the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code.
SECTION 12-12 NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND ORDER TO CORRECT
When the Fire Chief or his designee determines that a violation of this ordinance exists or that any commercial building or structure required to have a permit under the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code does not have a valid permit in effect, he shall issue a notice of violation and order to correct the violation. Such notice and order shall:
11
a) State the nature of the violation and the penalty to be imposed;
b) Direct the violator to pay any unpaid fees and/or civil penalties by mailing the order and a check or money order to the Town of Williamston, or by personally paying the amount at the Town of Williamston Town Hall;
c) Notify the violator that a failure to pay any unpaid fees or penalties within the prescribed time may subject the violator to civil action in the nature of debt for the collection of any unpaid fees or additional penalties and may be collected by penalty plus any additional penalties, together with the cost of the action to be taxed by the court;
d) Provide and state that any unpaid penalty must either be paid as set forth above, or the failure to pay must be cleared by the Fire Chief within a specified period of time from the issuance of the violation notice and correction order. The notice and order shall further state that if the violation is not corrected and the order is not cleared within the specified time period, the filing of a civil complaint for the collection of any unpaid penalty may be initiated, together with other legal proceedings, including the filing of criminal charges. As used herein, an order will be deemed “cleared” when either (i) full payment has been made, or (ii) arrangements for payment have been made, or (iii) the violator has made a prima facie showing to the Fire Chief that the notice and order was issued as a result of mistake, inadvertence, or neglect, and (iv) all identified violations of Fire Prevention Codes have been corrected.
e) Service of Notice of Violation and Order to Correct shall be made upon the
owner, operator, or occupant, or other person having control over the premises where the violation exists. Service shall be made by delivering a copy of the notice and order by hand delivery or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to owner, operator, occupant, or tenant at his last known address listed in the Martin County Tax Assessors records, or by leaving a copy of the notice and order with an agent or employee of such person. If the owner, operator, occupant or tenant cannot be located on the premises, the Fire Chief or his designee may effectuate service by affixing a copy of the notice and order prominently on the main entrance of the building where the violation exists.
Where correcting the violation will require improvement to real property or may result in administrative penalties against the property owner, the property owner must be notified by mailing a copy of the notice and order to the owner’s address as listed in the Martin County Tax Assessors Office.
SECTION 12-13 ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER
a) Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor under N.C.G.S. 160A-175 and N.C.G.S. 14-4. Additionally, the Fire Chief or his designee may enforce the provisions of this ordinance in civil court and seek any and all appropriate remedies authorized by N.C.G.S. 160A-175. Each day’s continuing violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
12
b) Compliance with the Fire Chief’s Notice of Violation and Order to Correct
1) Immediate Action Orders: The Fire Chief or his designee may issue immediate correction orders for violations of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code that constitute an imminent hazard to life and property. Failure to correct such violation within twenty-four (24) hours shall result in imposition of a civil penalty in the amount of Two Hundred dollars ($200.00) per day, per violation, until the violation has been completely corrected and the Fire Chief’s Correction Order to correct shall so state. The order shall also state that if the violation is not corrected within twenty-four (24) hours, a civil complaint for collection of penalties and any unpaid fees owed under this chapter may be initiated and that other legal proceedings including criminal prosecution related to the violation may be initiated. The Fire Chief or his designee shall also have the authority to cause all public utilities serving the business, building, or premises where the violation takes place to be terminated, and to affect the closing of the business building or premises until such time as the violation is completely corrected, or the imminent hazard to life removed. Repeated violations shall subject the violator to higher civil penalties set forth in this ordinance.
2) Other Correction Orders: All other correction orders issued under this ordinance for violations that do not constitute imminent hazards shall be corrected within thirty (30) days. Failure to correct such violations within thirty (30) days shall result in the imposition of civil and/or criminal penalties as set out in Appendix “A” of this ordinance.
SECTION 12-14 APPEALS
a) Any person who has been served with a Notice of Violation and Order for Correction of violations of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code may appeal the notice and order to the North Carolina Department of Insurance, North Carolina Building Code Council within ten (10) days from the date of issuance.
b) Any person who has been served with a Notice of Violation and Order for Correction of violations of the provisions of this ordinance which are not violations of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code, or which relate to fees or penalties charged under this ordinance may appeal to the Town of Williamston Board of Commissioners. Appeals must be filed in writing, within ten (10) days from the date of issuance of the order, and delivered to the Town of Williamston Town Administrator. Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Town Administrator will bring the matter of the appeal to the attention of the Mayor and Board of Commissioners at the next scheduled meeting of the Board. The decision of the Board of Commissioners is final.
13
SECTION 12-15 PRIMARY FIRE DISTRICT
The Town of Williamston Primary Fire District shall include the area of the Town of Williamston defined by the boundaries set herein: the area from the Rail Trail at Railroad Street North to Park Free Drive and from Haughton Street to Watts Street. Limitations regarding the use, storage, or sale of flammable, combustible, or otherwise hazardous materials shall apply to the Primary Fire District as referred to in the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code, NFPA Standards, and this Ordinance. Limitations regarding the class and type of construction within the Primary Fire District shall also apply.
SECTION 12-16 INSTALLATION OF ABOVEGROUND TANKS WITHIN THE PRIMARY FIRE DISTRICT
a) For purposes of this section, the term “motor fuel” shall mean a refined or blended petroleum product used for the propulsion of self-propelled motor vehicles, including all products commonly or commercially known or sold as gasoline.
b) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect or maintain an above ground storage tank capable of holding 1,000 gallons or more of motor fuel in the primary fire district. It shall also be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to allow such above ground storage tank to be erected or maintained on property owned by that person, firm or corporation.
c) Above ground storage tanks of less than 1,000 gallons capacity shall be thermally protected against a flammable liquid fuel fire for a minimum of two (2) hours duration.
SECTION 12-17 INSTALLATION AND REMOVAL OF ABOVE GROUND AND UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS IN OTHER THAN THE PRIMARY FIRE DISTRICT
a) Above ground Storage Tanks: Any person, firm or corporation desiring to install an above ground storage tank for the use or storage of any flammable or combustible liquid within any section of the Town of Williamston or the extraterritorial jurisdiction, other than the Primary Fire District must first comply with the provisions of this section.
1) Installation of Above Ground and Underground Storage Tanks
a) A permit as set out in Appendix “A” of this ordinance shall first be obtained from the Fire Chief or his designee.
b) At the time the permit is obtained, a copy of the site plan detailing
14
the exact location of the installation of the tank shall be furnished to the Fire Chief or his designee for review. Upon approval of the site plan, the Fire Chief or his designee will issue the permit for the installation of the tank.
c) After installation, but before any flammable or combustible liquid is introduced into the tank, the Fire Chief or his designee will inspect the installation to insure compliance with all applicable regulations. At this inspection, the Fire Chief or his designee will witness an approved pressure test of the tank and all piping when required.
d) After all requirements of this section are met, the Fire Chief or his designee will approve the tank for the use stated on the permit.
2) Removal of Above Ground Storage Tanks
a) A permit as set out in Appendix “A” of this ordinance shall first be obtained from the Fire Chief or his designee.
b) The contents of the tank shall have been pumped out, and the tank purged
to remove any vapors or product left in the tank.
c) The tank shall be opened and left open to allow the escape of any
residual vapors.
d) Prior to the actual removal of the tank, the Fire Chief or his designee will
witness a competent person sample the air in the tank for the presence of a
concentration of flammable vapors.
e) Upon approval of all requirements of this section, the Fire Chief or his
designee will approve the removal of the tank.
3) Removal of Underground Storage Tanks:
a) A permit as set out in Appendix “A” of this ordinance shall first be obtained from the Fire Chief or his designee.
b) At the time of application for permit, proof of approval by the N.C. Department of Environment and Natural Resources as to notification of removal of an UGST must be shown.
c) All flammable vapors must be removed by purging with confirmation by monitoring with an appropriate combustible gas monitor by a competent person. Removal of flammable vapors shall be conducted by a schooled operator in the use of such equipment.
d) All suction, inlet, gauge, and vent lines shall be disconnected.
15
e) The tank shall be removed from the excavation hole and placed on a transport vehicle. The tank shall be posted with a sign stating, “Tank has contained petroleum product (not vapor free) Not suitable for storage of food or liquid intended for human or animal consumption”.
f) Tanks shall remain in the ground until ready for removal from site. Tanks are to be removed from site as soon as possible after being removed from the excavation hole. In no case shall a tank remain above ground on site overnight.
g) In the event of a spill or evidence of a leak, sample(s) of undisturbed soil shall be collected by the property owner or his agent, in accordance with N.C.D.E.N.R. regulations, and analyzed for contamination by a state approved laboratory at the property owners’ expense. The site shall be cleaned of contamination according to N.C.D.E.N.R. regulations. The Fire Chief or his designee shall be notified in writing when the site has been properly cleaned, and may make inspection of the work to assure that the site has been cleaned appropriately.
4) Abandoning Underground Storage Tanks in Place.
a) A permit as set out in Appendix “A” shall first be obtained from the Fire Chief or his designee.
b) At the time of application for permit, proof of approval by N.C.D.E.N.R. shall be shown.
c) All flammable or combustible liquids shall be removed from the tank.
d) The tank shall be purged and checked for flammable vapors with an appropriate combustible gas monitor by a competent person.
e) Removal of flammable vapors shall be conducted by person(s) schooled in the use of such equipment.
f) All suction, inlet, gauge, and vent lines shall be disconnected and removed or capped and sealed.
g) The tank shall be filled with concrete, sand or other approved material.
h) In the event of a spill or leak, samples of undisturbed soil shall be collected in accordance with N.C.D.E.N.R. regulations, and analyzed for contamination by a state approved laboratory. The site shall be cleaned of contamination in accordance with N.C.D.E.N.R. regulations. The Fire Chief or his designee shall be notified in writing when the site has been properly cleaned, and may make inspection of the work to assure that the site has been cleaned appropriately.
16
SECTION 12-18 INSTALLATIONS OF KNOX BOX SYSTEMS
All new or newly renovated commercial buildings, all commercial buildings equipped with an automatic fire sprinkler system, building fire alarm system and businesses established after the implementation of this code shall provide a “Knox Box” key entry system. All existing commercial buildings shall provide a “Knox Box” system in accordance with criteria adopted by the Town. The “Knox Box” shall be mounted at the exterior entrance to the occupancy on the door handle side of the primary entrance at a height of no less than four (4) feet and no more than seven (7) feet from finished floor level, or at other location(s) as specified by the Fire Chief or his designee. The “Knox Box” shall be approved by the Town of Williamston Fire Department and shall be in place before a certificate of occupancy is issued. Forms for ordering the “Knox Box” are available from the Fire Department. Average delivery time is five (5) to six (6) weeks. Keys to access the facility or tenant spaces within the facility shall be provided to the Fire Department by the owner/manager or tenant.
SECTION 12-19 SPRINKLERED OCCUPANCIES
a) All occupancies required by the North Carolina Fire Code to have sprinkler systems installed shall have those systems installed prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued. Plans for all sprinkler systems shall be submitted to the Fire Chief or his designee at least two (2) weeks prior to beginning construction for the purpose of plans review.
b) A dedicated sprinkler riser room is required providing an entry door to the room from the exterior of the building. The exterior door leading to the dedicated sprinkler riser room shall be labeled with minimum three (3) inch lettering designating “SPRINKLER RISER ROOM” in a contrasting color. Durable vinyl lettering is suggested.
SECTION 12-20 ALARM COMMUNICATION SYSTEM
a) All buildings equipped with automatic sprinkler systems are required to have alarm communication equipment which complies with NfiPA 72. Equipment must be fully functional and reporting to an Underwriters Laboratories approved central receiving station before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the facility.
b) When a building is protected by an automatic sprinkler system and has a fire alarm system, the fire alarm control panel or a remote annunciator panel shall be placed in the sprinkler riser room. This control panel shall have the capacity of silencing and resetting the alarm system. Adjacent to the fire alarm control panel shall be a framed zone map. Sprinkler zone nomenclature shall correspond with the zone map.
17
SECTION 12-21 FALSE FIRE ALARMS
a) Definitions - words, terms, and phrases when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
1) Alarm System: Any mechanism, equipment or device which is designed to operate automatically or manually to transmit a signal, message or warning of an occurrence which the Fire Department is expected to respond to.
2) False Alarm: Activation of an alarm system eliciting a response by the Fire Department when a situation requiring such a response does not exist. This shall include accidental, avoidable and unnecessary alarm activation due to user error, equipment malfunction, and/or improper or unsuited equipment, but does not include alarms activated by unusually severe weather conditions or other extraordinary circumstances beyond the control of the user.
b) False Alarm Policy
1) If an alarm system generates two false alarms in any thirty (30) day period, the Fire Chief or his designee shall notify the owner or operator of the premises where the alarm system is installed, in writing, that such alarm system is in violation of the Town of Williamston False Alarm Policy.
2) If at any time during the thirty (30) day period following written notification of violation, the same alarm system generates a false alarm, the owner of the business where the alarm system is installed shall be liable to the Town of Williamston for a civil penalty in the following amounts:
First false alarm $ 75.00
Second false alarm 150.00
Third false alarm 250.00
Fourth and subsequent 500.00
3) If the owner or operator of the premises is able to demonstrate that an otherwise false alarm may have been triggered by the proper operation of the fire alarm system equipment, the above penalties may be waived.
18
SECTION 12-22 HAZARDOUS LOCATIONS IDENTIFICATION SYSTEM
All commercial enterprises, businesses or industries in the Town of Williamston, its extraterritorial jurisdiction, or in the Williamston and Skewarkee fire districts which use, store or manufacture on-site, hazardous materials in quantities equal to or greater than the reportable quantities listed in the Environmental Protection Agencies’ List of Lists must identify such commercial enterprise, business or industry to responding emergency apparatus by the use of the NFiPA 704-M marking system. This nationally recognized four color square-on-point sign uses a numbering system from 0 – 4 to identify the fire, health, reactivity, and specific hazards of the location marked. The proper code for each section of the 704-M sign shall be obtained from the Material Safety Data Sheets maintained by the facility. A minimum sign size of fifteen (15) inches shall be posted at the main entrance to said facility, and shall include the codes for the highest hazards encountered facility wide. A separate twelve (12) inch sign shall be affixed to any outside above ground tank or storage building where hazardous materials meeting the above requirements are stored. Individual signs marking tanks or storage buildings shall indicate the hazard class of the product stored in said tank or building.
SECTION 12-23 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS DATA STORAGE BOXES
a) All commercial enterprises, businesses or industries in the Town of Williamston, its extraterritorial jurisdiction, or in the Williamston and Skewarkee fire districts which use, store or manufacture on-site hazardous materials that must be reported under State Right-to-Know laws, N.C.G.S. 95-173, et seq., or under Title III of the Federal Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act and the regulations promulgated thereunder and the North Carolina State Fire Code, must have an approved on-site hazardous materials data storage box at each facility where hazardous materials may be found.
b) This data storage box must contain keys providing access to secured portions of the facility. The box shall contain current specific information to assist fire departments and hazardous materials teams responding to emergencies at the facility, including but not limited to facility maps or plans showing the type and location of hazardous materials, Tier II forms, lists of chemicals with CAS (chemical abstract service) numbers, Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS), telephone numbers for facility employees and other persons to be contacted in case of such emergencies.
c) All information requested on the data storage sheets must be on forms provided by the Town of Williamston or on an approved format and must be placed in the date storage box. Such information must be updated continuously to insure its accuracy.
19
d) The data storage box shall be of the type designated and approved by the Fire Chief or his designee, and shall be located at or near the primary entrance to the facility and installed in accordance with the Fire Chiefs specifications.
SECTION 12-24 STREET ADDRESSES
In accordance with section 505 of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code, all new and existing buildings shall display a number or address in such a manner as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or roadway. The purpose and intent of this section is to provide a uniform system of street addresses for all properties and buildings throughout the Town in order to facilitate provisions of adequate public safety and emergency response service and to minimize difficulty in locating properties and buildings.
a) Definitions: The following words and phrases when used in this section shall have the following interpretation assigned to them.
1) Address Administrator: The Town employee designated to assign street address numbers to properties in Williamston.
2) Building: A totally enclosed structure having a roof supported by columns or walls. For the purpose of this ordinance, each separate and distinct unit within a single structure shall also be considered a separate building
3) Official Address Number: The street address assigned by the Address Administrator which uniquely identifies a particular building or lot. This term is synonymous with “street address number”.
4) Driveway/Private Street: An access way owned and maintained by private interests leading to a building, use or structure.
5) Public Street: A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic.
b) Administration & Application: The Town of Williamston will be responsible for the interpretation and administration of this section including:
1) Assigning all numbers for properties and buildings
2) Maintaining address records of each property and building
3) Changing existing addresses when necessary to achieve sequential numbering along a street or regularizing an existing numbering scheme.
4) Designating individual unit addresses within multi-family housing.
20
c) Display of Street Address Numbers: Street address numbers shall be clearly displayed so that the location can be identified easily from the street.
1) The official address number of single family residential units shall be displayed on the side of the dwelling which is most clearly visible from the street.
2) If the official address number is not visible from the public street or private street that serves as the primary access road to the building on which the address number is located, or if the subject building is located more than fifty (50) feet from such access road, the address numbers shall also be displayed at the end of the driveway or easement nearest the road which provides access to the building. Each number or letter shall be at least six (6) inches in height, three fourth (3/4) inches in width, and of a contrasting color to the mounting surface.
3) Numerals identifying the address number of a single family dwelling displayed on a road side mailbox shall be at least three (3) inches in height, and of a contrasting color to the mounting surface.
4) Each numeral for buildings containing multiple dwelling units shall be at least eight (8) inches in height and of a contrasting color to the mounting surface, and shall be placed on the side of the building facing the road or on the end of the building nearest the road in such a manner as to be readily visible.
a) Individual units of multi-family dwellings shall be identified by affixing the unit number or letter designation above the main entrance door to each individual unit, or by affixing said number or letter to the main entrance door.
b) All lettering and numerals used for addresses on multi-family dwelling units shall be at least three (3) inches in height and of a contrasting color to the mounting surface.
5) Building addresses for non-residential buildings may be displayed in one of two options:
a) Option I: Addresses placed directly on the building. Under this option, the letters or numerals will be placed in the front upper quarter portion of the building on the side of the building which is most clearly visible from the street or streets accessing the building.
21
b) Option II: Building addresses may be placed on a sign with individual addresses placed on the door of each leased or owned space. Under this option a sign permit must be obtained from the Town of Williamston Zoning Administrator
c) Numerals or letters for non-residential buildings shall be installed in accordance with Table 12-24.1 or as designated by the Fire Chief or his designee.
d) Numerals or letters shall be of a color contrasting to the color of the mounting surface.
e) The Fire Chief or his designee will have the authority to authorize and approve alternate methods of displaying street address numbers that are in keeping with the intent of this ordinance when strict adherence to these standards cannot reasonably be met.
Table 12-24.1 ADDRESS NUMBER SIZES
DISTANCE FROM BUILDING TO STREET MINIMUM SIZE
0 – 75 feet 4” in height & ½” in width
76 feet and greater 18” in height & 1 ½” width
Note: On multi-story buildings, the size of the letter / numeral will be increased in proportion to the building height and distance from the street.
SECTION 12-25 ENFORCEMENT
a) No building permit shall be issued until an official street address number has been assigned for the building lot or unit.
b) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the official street address number is properly displayed.
c) Owners or occupants of buildings that do not comply with the provisions of this section will be notified in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
22
SECTION 12-26 OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED
No person, business or firm shall cause, allow, or permit open burning of refuse or other
material within the corporate limits of the Town of Williamston, or within any area of the
extraterritorial jurisdiction which would conflict with the provisions of the North
Carolina Fire Prevention Code, or the North Carolina Air Pollution Control Act, 15
NCAC 2D.0525, Control and Prohibition of Open Burning, 15A NCAC 2D.1900, and
N.C.G.S. 142-215.3(a)(1), and N.C.G.S. 143-215.107(a)(5).
SECTION 12-27 FIRE LANES ESTABLISHMENT
The establishment of fire lanes shall be determined by the Fire Chief or his designee in
accordance with the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code, section 503.3 and Appendix D.
Upon establishment of the fire lane, the building occupant shall mark said fire lane to the
following specifications:
a) Areas designated as fire lanes shall have their boundaries borders, and curbs clearly marked with yellow, red, or white paint.
b) The words “No Parking, Fire Lane” shall be clearly marked with yellow, red, or white paint in contrasting letters within the fire lane with a minimum of twelve (12) inch high lettering.
c) It shall be the responsibility of the building occupant to maintain the markings, and to keep the fire lane free of obstructions.
d) No person shall obstruct a designated fire lane with merchandise, building materials, vehicles, displays or any other obstructions of any kind. This prohibition includes all fire lanes in shopping centers or mall parking lots, and any and all other public vehicular areas. Violation of this section shall subject the offender to a fine of fifty ($50.00) dollars.
23
Fire Lane Pavement Marking Specifications
24
25
SECTION 12-28 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RESPONSE, RECOUPING COST
The Town of Williamston Fire / Rescue / EMS Department may recoup the cost of manpower, apparatus, equipment, and supplies used during the response to a hazardous materials incident. The Town of Williamston will bill the individual or entity deemed responsible for the hazardous materials incident. The amount billed will be the actual cost to the Town. Any bill for costs incurred during a hazardous materials response shall be due upon receipt, and shall be paid within thirty (30) days. In the event that said payment is not received within the time allotted, the Town of Williamston may seek relief as allowed by law, including civil and criminal penalties.
SECTION 12-29 SEVERABILITY
If all or part of this ordinance or application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the ordinance which can be given separate effect and to this end the provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable.
26
Town of Williamston
Revisions
Date
Section Revised
Remarks
02/07/2005
Original Adoption
10/17/2011
Revised and Adopted
08/07/2017
Revised and Adopted
27

TOWN OF WILLIAMSTON
Water use
ordinance
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
SECTION I DEFINITIONS…………………………………………… 2
SECTION II APPLICATION FOR SERVICE….……………………. 3
SECTION III CONNECTIONS………………………………………… 4
SECTION IV OUTSIDE CONNECTIONS…………………………… 5
SECTION V OPERATIONS..………………………………………… 5
SECTION VI PROHIBITED ENTRY………..……………………….. 6
SECTION VII POWERS AND AUTHORITY FORINSPECTION….. 6
SECTION VIII INTERCONNECTIONS………………………………... 6
SECTION IX MEASUREMENT OF FLOW………………………….. 6
SECTION X WATER USE CHARGES AND FEES……………….... 6
SECTION XI DEPOSIT REQUIRED………………………………..... 7
SECTION XII BILLING…………………………………...……………. 8
SECTION XIII CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY…………………………... 9
SECTION XIV EXTENSIONS TO MAINS AND SERVICES………… 9
SECTION XV CONSTRUCTION/RECONSTRUCTION OR
ABANDONMENT OF BUILDING SERVICE AND
CONNECTOINS……………………………..……… 10
SECTION XVI SUSPENSION OF SERVICE………………...………… 10
SECTION XVII COMPLAINTS/ADJUSTMENTS……...……………… 11
SECTION XVIII PROTECTION FROM DAMAGES…...……………… 11
SECTION XIX ABRIDGMENT OR MODIFICATION…...………… 12
SECTION XX REPEALING CLAUSE…………..……………………. 12
SECTION XXI EFFECTIVE DATE………………..…………………… 12
- 2 -
1. Approving Authority. The Director of Public Works of the Town of Williamston, or his designated representative.
2. Complete Water Works System. All of the works necessary involved in: (1) the transport of water to individual homes, buildings, in other authorized discharge points from a plant or facility where treatment or storage of the water is accomplished; (2) the supply of and treatment of the waters to remove impurities; and (3) the storage of the waters from the treatment process.
3. Construction. Any one or more of the following: Preliminary planning to determine the feasibility of supply facilities, treatment works, storage or public water mains, engineering, architectural, legal, fiscal, or economic investigations or studies, surveys, designs, plans, working drawings, specifications, procedures, or other necessary actions, erection, building, acquisition, alteration, remodeling, improvements, or extension of supply facilities, treatment works, storage facilities or public water mains, or the inspection or supervision of any of the foregoing items.
4. Distribution Main. A water main intended to carry waters to residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions.
5. Industrial user. (1) Any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of a publicly owned treatment works which consumes the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day of water and which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented.
6. Interference. Disruption of the publicly owned treatment works operations, which contributes to a violation of any of the Safe Drinking Water Standards.
7. Main. A pipe or conduit for carrying water.
8. mg/1. (denoting milligrams per liter) Parts per million by weight. (1 part per
million = 1 milligram per liter)
9. Person. Any individual, business entity, partnership, corporation, governmental Agency or political subdivision.
10. Publicly Owned Water Works. (POWW) Water supply, treatment, storage and any mains that transport waters to the consumers. The municipality which owns the treatment works has jurisdiction over all components of and use of the POWW.
11. Public Water Main. A water main which is controlled by the Town and in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights.
12. Replacement. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the POWW to maintain the capability and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term “operation and maintenance” includes replacement.
13. Shall is mandatory; May is permissive.
- 3 -
14. Town. The Town of Williamston.
15. Trunk Main. A water main whose primary purpose is to transport waters to Distribution Mains from a treatment supply or storage facilities.
16. Useful Life. Estimated period during which a treatment works will be operated.
17. User. Any person, including the party contracting for the account, utilizing the Town water works for water supply; and any person using a lot, parcel of land, building or other premises connected to and consuming water from the water distribution system of the Town, and who pays, or who is or would be legally responsible for the payment of utility rates or charges made against said premises upon its connection to the water distribution system of the Town.
18. User Charge. A charge levied on users of a publicly owned treatment works.
19. Water. Waters that have been treated so as to be drinkable in accordance with the standards of the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act.
SECTION II. APPLICATION FOR SERVICE
1. Service will be supplied only to those who have made application and have paid the deposit.
2. The user will make application for service in person, at the Town Hall and at the same time, make any deposit guarantee required by Section XI.
3. The Town may reject any application for service when the applicant is delinquent in payment of bills incurred for services previously supplied at any location.
4. The Town may reject any application for service not available under a standard rate of which involves excessive service cost, or which may affect the supply of service to other customers or for other good and sufficient reasons.
5. Normal service size shall be ¾ inch unless the applicant has special water demand requirements, in which case the service size must be approved by the Approving Authority.
6. Trailer courts and multi-dwelling water service size to be required:
a. 3/4” Service 1 Trailer/1 Dwelling
1” Service 2-5 Trailers/ 2-5 Apartments/Hotel Rooms
2” Service 6-20 Trailers/6-20 Apartments/Motel Rooms
b. Service size for more than 20 units to be determined on case-by-case
basis.
c. Cost of service installation shall be paid by Owner.
7. Where service is furnished to rental property, the property owner shall be
- 4 -
responsible for the initial service installation charge and shall connect to the system within 90 days of availability after which time there will be a monthly minimum bill for water service availability. Tenants will be required to make a deposit and pay any meter installation fee prior to the time they receive service. Upon termination of occupancy of rental property, the tenant or owner shall notify the Town, who will make a final reading and may remove the meter. The deposit will be applied by the Town toward the final billing. Any balance will be refunded to the tenant. Property owner(s) will be responsible for water usage and damages to Town water system in cases where there is not a tenant account.
8. Where service is furnished to a home or business, the property owner shall be responsible for the initial service installation charge and shall connect to the system within 90 days of availability after which time there will be a monthly minimum fee for water service availability. The owner will be required to make a deposit and pay any meter installation fee prior to the time they receive service.
SECTION III. CONNECTIONS
1. The construction of laterals for the connection of the water pipes on any
lot with public water mains and the necessary excavation thereof shall be
performed only by the Town.
2. Every house or building abutting any water main shall have a separate
connection. The Town may construct a single water service lateral of
sufficient size to the property or curb line; provided, that each house or
business is connected through a separate water meter. Approved complexes,
such as mobile home parks and Housing Authority projects may be served
with a single master water meter if approved by the Approving Authority and
shall be billed based on the number of individual users served. Users that do
not share common facilities (restrooms, etc.) or are constructed or situated in
such a way as to be recognizable as a separate user shall be billed as an
individual user.
When two or more meters are to be installed on the same premises for different consumers, they shall be closely grouped and each shall be clearly designated to which consumer it applies. Apartments, mobile homes, or other structures with living quarters shall be considered a separate user and shall require a separate service and account.
3. All water meters, meter boxes, pipes and other equipment furnished and used by the Town in installing any water connection shall be and remain the property of the Town.
4. The Town may install its meter at the property line or, at the Town’s option, on the consumer’s property or in a location mutually agreed upon.
5. Piping on the consumer’s premises must be so arranged that the connections
are conveniently located with respect to the Town’s lines or mains.
6. If the consumer’s piping on his premises is so arranged that the Town is called
upon to provide additional meters, a separate account shall be established for
- 5 -
each meter.
7. A suitable place shall be provided by the consumer for placing his meter
unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader.
8. The consumer’s piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the
consumer at the consumer’s expense in a safe and efficient manner and in
accordance with the Town’s rules and in full compliance with the sanitary
regulations of the North Carolina Division of Health Services.
9. The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cut-off and appropriate
backflow prevention device on his side of the meter, and the Town will
provide a cut-off valve on the Town’s side of such meter.
10. Water connections shall be made into existing taps constructed by the City to
serve a lot. In the event a tap is not existing, one will be provided as close as
possible to the location requested by the customer. When lines are
constructed by the city, water service lines shall be constructed to the point
where the meter box will be set.
11. Each user shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to
the Town, a perpetual easement and right-of-way across any property owned
or controlled by the user whenever said perpetual easement and right-of-way
is necessary for the Town water facilities and lines, so as to be able to furnish
services to the user.
SECTION IV. OUTSIDE CONNECTIONS
Connections may be made outside the corporate limits of the Town in accordance with the policies and users fees from time to time adopted by the Town.
SECTION V. OPERATIONS.
1. No person, except the director of public works or chief of the fire department,
or persons authorized to act by them, shall take or in any way use water from public hydrants, unless such person shall first apply to the Approving Authority for permission to do so and such approval is granted, in writing, including any conditions for such approval. Any person using or obtaining water from a public fire hydrant except as herein authorized, shall be assessed a penalty as set forth in the fee schedule in addition to the charge for water actually used or obtained.
2. All meters, except such as are required to be furnished or maintained by particular users of water or those damaged by customer intent or negligence, shall be kept in good repair and working order by and at the expense of the Town. Meters furnished or maintained by particular users of water shall be kept in good repair and working order by the user. It shall be unlawful for any person to break, or in any way damage, or cause to be broken (or damaged) or to make inaccessible, any public fire hydrant, water meter, meter box, or gate valve box connected to the Town’s water system. It shall be the duty of the person having caused such damage to report the incident to the Police Department or Public Works Department. If any of the above are damaged
- 6 -
through any means other than by a Town employee, the customer responsible for payment of the account shall be responsible for repair or replacement costs.
3. The Town reserves the right at any time to shut off the water in case of
accident or for the purpose of making connections or repairs.
4. No person, except the director of public works or chief of the fire department,
or persons authorized to act by them, shall open, close, or in any way operate any valve on the water distribution system, unless such person shall first apply to the Approving Authority for permission to do so and such approval is granted, in writing, including any conditions of such approval. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, tamper with, by-pass, damage, cause to be damaged, or otherwise render ineffective any meter, valve, or locking device.
5. Persons requesting water service activation shall ensure that plumbing is
properly connected, secure, and all fixtures or faucets are closed to prevent
flooding or other damage to building or dwelling. The Town will not be liable for any damages caused by flooding occurring through private plumbing.
SECTION VI. PROHIBITED ENTRY
No person shall be permitted to enter the water supply, treatment, or storage facilities nor any pumping station unless accompanied by the person in charge, and under no circumstances shall any person handle or in any way come in contact with any part of the machinery or other equipment.
SECTION VII. POWERS AND AUTHORITY FOR INSPECTION
The duly authorized employees and representatives of the Town, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provision of this ordinance.
SECTION VIII. INTERCONNECTIONS
No private water piping system shall be connected nor remain connected to the publicly owned water works if it is also connected to another water supply source (public or private), whether said source is valved or not.
SECTION IX. MEASUREMENT OF FLOW
The volume of flow used in computing water use charges shall be based upon metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter reading maintained by the Town.
SECTION X. WATER USE CHARGES AND FEES
1. User charge shall be the charge levied on all users including, but not limited
to, persons, firms, corporations or governmental entities that consume, cause
or permit the consumption of water from the publicly owned water works. The minimum charge, according to a schedule of charges as from time to time set by the Town, shall be applied for temporary turn-ons.
2. The user charge shall at a minimum, reflect the costs of operation and
- 7 -
maintenance (including replacement) of the publicly owned water works.
3. Each user shall pay his proportionate share of operation and maintenance
(including replacement) costs based on volume of flow.
4. The Town of Williamston Board of Commissioners shall review not less than
annually the water consumption of users, the total costs of operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the complete water works system, and the user charge system. The user charge shall be revised if necessary, to accomplish the following.
a. Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance costs
among users as provided herein.
b. Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and maintenance
costs necessary to the proper operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the publicly owned water works.
5. The Town, to the extent practicable, will record usage not directly attributable to customers (such as flushing and firefighting) in order to include this usage in the setting of rates.
6. Each user shall be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate.
7. Determination of the user charge rates shall be as calculated in accordance with the Town of Williamston User Charge System.
8. Connection charges and Deposits shall be payable in advance according to a schedule of charges as from time to time set by the town.
9. For violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance relating to service the
Town may at the expiration of 15 days after mailing a written notice to the address of the customer, as reflected on the Town’s records, remove the meter and discontinue service. Where the meter is thereafter reinstalled, the customer shall first pay to the Town a reinstallation fee according to a schedule of charges as from time to time set by the Town.
No reinstallation will be made unless all delinquent service bills and the reinstallation fee have been paid in full.
10. Fees for permits shall be payable in advance in amounts as from time to time set by the Town.
11. All fees and charges are subject to review and adjustment by the Board of Commissioners from time to time.
SECTION XI. DEPOSIT REQUIRED
1. Deposits shall be required in amounts as from time to time set by the Town.
Deposits shall not draw interest.
- 8 -
2. Upon discontinuance of service and after satisfactory payment of outstanding water bills, the remainder of initial deposit shall be refunded to the contracting party or his authorized agent.
3. The person in whose name the deposit is made shall be responsible for payment of all bills for water consumed.
4. Where a deposit is required, a separate deposit shall be made for each meter installed.
5. The deposit may be transferred in the event a contracting party moves to another location served with town water and sewer; however deposits may not be transferred to another contracting party.
6. The contracting party, either in person or through his duly authorized representative or agent, shall apply for and discontinue water and sewer service. Property owners shall provide evidence of sole ownership or, in cases or multiple ownership, of an ownership interest. Tenants shall provide evidence of the authority or permission from the owner to occupy the property as a tenant. In cases where the property served is leased or rented to more than one tenant and services rendered to more than one tenant are measured by the same meter, the owner or owners shall be the contracting party and are legally obligated to pay the water and sewer fees.
7. The contracting party shall provide government issued identification and proof of address as a condition for establishing a water and sewer service. Acceptable forms of identification include drivers’ license, state identification cards, military identifications and passports.
8. The contracting party, either in person or through his duly authorized representative or agent, shall
SECTION XII. BILLING
1. Bills will be sent through the United State mail notifying all persons of the
amount and date due.
2. Bills are due on the 10th day of every month. Persons not having paid their bills by the 10th day of the month will be delinquent. No exception will be made for due dates falling on weekends and holidays. For any bill remaining unpaid on the 20th day of the month, a late fee will be assigned. For any bill remaining unpaid on the 21st day of the month, the connection with the water system serving the premises will be severed and will only be reconnected after the delinquent bill, including late fee, is paid in full. Reconnection shall be made at the contracting party’s expense as stated in Section X of this ordinance.
(Ord. 2016-85, passed 3-7-2016)
3. Charge for services commences when the meter is installed.
- 9 -
4. Readings from different meters will not be combined for billing, irrespective of the fact that said meters may be for the same or different premises, or for the same or different users, or for the same or difference services.
5. At the discretion of the Approving Authority, a letter may be sent to each delinquent patron on the advising that service will be discontinued if the bill is not paid by a date certain, and that the delinquent fee will be charged before service is restored.
6. Customers are responsible for knowing when bills are due and failure of the consumer to receive a bill shall not constitute a defense to a delinquent charge.
SECTION XIII. CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY
1. Not less than three days notice shall be given, in person or writing, to the Town office to discontinue service or to change occupancy.
2. The contracting party or the owner if more than one tenant is served by one meter, shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longest.
SECTION XIV. EXTENSIONS TO MAINS AND SERVICES
1. The Town may construct extensions to its water lines to points which are within its service area but the Town shall not be required to make such installation unless the consumer makes application for service and advances to the Town the entire cost of the installation.
2. All line extensions shall be evidenced by contract signed by the Town and the person advancing funds for said extension, but each contract shall be null and void unless approved by the Town Board of Commissioners.
3. No refund shall be made from any revenue received from any lines leading up to or beyond the particular line extension covered by contract.
4. Water distribution lines to serve subdivisions will be handled as follows:
a. The developer will submit plans and specifications sealed by an engineer
licensed to practice in North Carolina for review and approval by the Town, its engineer and the North Carolina Division of Health Services.
b. Materials, methods, and procedures shall be consistent with those of the Town.
c. The developer will install the lines in accordance with the approved plans.
d. Upon completion of the new extension, the developer will deed the complete facility, to include all right-of-ways, instruments needed, for the operation and maintenance of the facility to the Town. (The Town will provide 40% of water/sewer line costs and engineering/survey costs not to exceed $200.00 per running foot of street center line for qualified housing development in city limits or areas petitioned for annexation. These costs would be re-imbursed after the
- 10 -
developer has completed sub-division construction and homes have been built on at least 51% of the lots in the sub-division.)
e. The determination of feasibility of service shall be determined by the Board of Commissioners, including but not limited to the following circumstances:
Availability of Town funds
Availability of developer funds
Number of signed users
Availability of water supply
Number of potential users
Anticipated future growth of area
Approval of funding agencies
SECTION XV. CONSTRUCTION/RECONSTRUCTCION OR ABANDONMENT OF BUILDING SERVICE AND CONNECTIONS
Any person who shall construct or cause to be constructed new buildings with water system
piping or additions with water piping within the corporate limits of the Town of Williamston shall meet the following requirements.
1. A permit to install new connections, or piping from existing connection to
building, or piping from an existing building to a new building, shall be obtained from the Town. Such permits may be issued after the Town’s determination that each separate dwelling or business unit shall have separate connections to the water distribution system. The Town may waive this requirement in unusual cases (i.e. multi-story apartment complex).
2. Responsibility for the proper installation of water piping in accordance with approved plans shall be with the property owner, or his agent or contractor. The responsible person shall be designated upon applying for the required permit.
3. The cost of processing permits shall be included in the connection charge or applicable fee.
4. Piping and connections to new or existing service connections shall be inspected by the Approving Authority or a designated representative. Existing services proposed for reuse shall be inspected by the Approving Authority or a designated representative prior to connections.
5. Any person who shall demolish or cause to be demolished any existing building with water service shall be required to notify the Approving Authority.
SECTION XVI. SUSPENSION OF SERVICE
1. The Town reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for the
following reasons:
a. To prevent fraud or abuse. The connection by a user of his or her water supply to separate premises which has had its water service discontinued shall be considered fraud or abuse.
- 11 -
b. Consumer willful disregard of the Town’s rules.
c. Emergency repairs.
d. Insufficiency of supply due to circumstances beyond the Town’s control.
e. Legal processes.
f. Direction of public authorities.
g. Strike, riot, fire, flood, accident, or any unavoidable cause.
2. The Town may, in addition to exercising any and all other remedies provided by law, permanently refuse service to any person, firm or corporation which has violated the provisions of North Carolina General Statute 14 – 151.1. As an alternative, the Town may require a bond in accordance with the provisions of its Sanitary Sewer Use Ordinance.
3. Each water service account shall be treated as a separate entity for purposes of cut-off for nonpayment, regardless of the name in which the account is registered.
SECTION XVII. COMPLAINTS/ADJUSTMENTS
1. If the user believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, to the town before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claims, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service. The user may pay such bill under protest and said payment shall not prejudice his claim.
2. The Town may make special meter readings at the request of the user for a fee as from time to time set by the Town, provided that if such special readings disclose that the meter was over read, no charge will be made.
3. Meters will be tested at the request of the user upon payment to the Town of a fee as from time to time set by the Town, provided that if the meter is found to over-register beyond 5 per centum of the correct volume, no charge will be made.
4. If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the Town’s representatives, or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the user shall pay an amount estimated by the Town from the record of his previous bills and from other data considered relevant by the Town.
SECTION XVIII. PROTECTION FROM DAMAGES
It shall be a misdemeanor to intentionally or willfully break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any equipment or materials of the Town of Williamston used for the purpose of making tests or examinations and left upon the premises of a user; and it shall be a misdemeanor to intentionally or willfully break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any portion or part of the publicly owned water works.
SECTION XIX. ABRIDGMENT OR MODIFICATION
- 12 -
1. No promise, agreement or representation of any employee of the Town shall be binding upon the Town unless it shall have been agreed upon in writing and signed by the proper officers of the Town.
2. Modifications of any charges or of any portion of this ordinance shall be made only by the Board of Commissioners of the Town.
SECTION XX. REPEALING CLAUSE
All ordinances or parts of ordinances or rules and regulations, in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed. If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to such section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, or provision so adjudged, and the remainder of this ordinance shall be deemed valid and effective.
SECTION XXI. EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall take effect and be in full force to include all existing and future users from and after the 13th day of July, 2015.
___________________________
Mayor, Town of Williamston
ATTEST:
________________________________
Town Clerk

Page 1 of 27
SEWER USE ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page #
SECTION 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.1 Purpose and Policy 2
1.2 Definitions and Abbreviations 2
SECTION 2 - GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS
2.1 Prohibited Discharge Standards 8
2.2 National Categorical Pretreatment Standards 9
2.3 Local Limits 10
2.4 State Requirements 10
2.5 Right of Revision 10
2.6 Dilution 10
2.7 Pretreatment of Wastewater 10
2.8 Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans 11
2.9 Hauled Wastewater 11
SECTION 3 - FEES
3.1 Purpose 12
3.2 User Charges 12
3.3 Surcharges 12
3.4 Pretreatment Program Administration Charges 13
SECTION 4 - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE
4.1 Wastewater Dischargers 13
4.2 Wastewater Permits 13
SECTION 5 - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
5.1 Baseline Monitoring Reports 17
5.2 Compliance Schedule Progress Reports 18
5.3 Reports on Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard; Deadline 18
5.4 Periodic Compliance Reports 18
5.5 Reports of Changed Conditions 18
5.6 Reports of Potential Problems 19
5.7 Reports from Unpermitted Users 19
5.8 Notice of Violation/Repeat Sampling and Reporting 19
5.9 Notification of the Discharge of Hazardous Waste 20
5.10 Analytical Requirements 20
5.11 Grab and Composite Sample Collection 20
5.12 Timing 21
5.13 Record Keeping 21
5.14 Electronic Reporting 21
SECTION 6 - COMPLIANCE MONITORING
6.1 Monitoring Facilities 21
6.2 Inspection and Sampling 21
6.3 Search Warrants 22
SECTION 7 - CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION 22
SECTION 8 - ENFORCEMENT
8.1 Administrative Remedies 22
8.2 Civil Penalties 23
8.3 Other Available Remedies 24
8.4 Remedies Nonexclusive 25
SECTION 9 - ANNUAL PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE 25
SECTION 10 – ADJUDICATORY HEARINGS 25
SECTION 11 - AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS
11.1 Upset 26
11.2 Bypass 26
SECTION 12 - SEVERABILITY 27
SECTION 13 - CONFLICT 27
SECTION 14 - EFFECTIVE DATE 27
Page 2 of 27
SECTION 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.1 Purpose and Policy
This ordinance sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and
treatment system for the Town of WILLIAMSTON, N.C. and enables the Town of Williamston to comply with all
applicable State and Federal laws, including, the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code §1251 et seq.) and the
General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR, Part 403).
The objectives of this ordinance are:
(a) To prevent the introduction of pollutants and wastewater discharges into the municipal wastewater
system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge;
(b) To prevent the introduction of pollutants and wastewater discharges into the municipal wastewater
system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into any waters of the State or
otherwise be incompatible with the system;
(c) To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the municipal system;
(d) To protect both municipal personnel who may be affected by sewage, sludge, and effluent in the
course of their employment as well as protecting the general public;
(e) To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the
municipal wastewater system; and
(f) To ensure that the municipality complies with its NPDES permit conditions, sludge use and
disposal requirements and any other Federal or State laws to which the municipal wastewater
system is subject.
This ordinance provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system,
through the issuance of permits to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for
the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting and provides for the setting
of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.
This ordinance shall apply to all users of the municipal wastewater system, as authorized by N.C.G.S. 160A-312
and/or 153A-275. The Town of Williamston shall designate an administrator of the Publicly Owned Treatment
Works or POTW and pretreatment program hereafter referred to as the POTW Director. Except as otherwise
provided herein, the POTW Director shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. Any
powers granted to or imposed upon the POTW Director may be delegated by the POTW Director to other Town of
Williamston personnel.
By discharging wastewater into the Town of Williamston’s wastewater system, industrial users located within or
outside the Town of Williamston’s city limits agree to comply with the terms and conditions established in this
Ordinance, as well as any permits, enforcement actions, or orders issued hereunder.
1.2 Definitions and Abbreviations
(a) Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in
this ordinance, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:
(1) Act or "the Act". The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean
Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §1251, et seq.
(2) Approval Authority. The Director of the Division of Water Quality of the North Carolina
Department of Environment and Natural Resources or his designee.
(3) Authorized Representative of the Industrial User.
(i) If the industrial user is a corporation, authorized representative shall mean:
(A) the president, secretary, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge
of a principal business function, or any other person who performs
similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation, or
B) the manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation
facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including
Page 3 of 27
having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and to initiate and to direct comprehensive
measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with
environmental laws and regulations; who can ensure that the necessary
systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and
accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and to
whom authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to
the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
(ii) If the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, an authorized
representative shall mean a general partner or the proprietor, respectively.
(iii) If the industrial user is a Federal, State or local government facility, an
authorized representative shall mean a director or highest official appointed or
designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the
government facility, or their designee.
(iv) The individuals described in paragraphs i-iii above may designate another
authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization
specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the
facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is
submitted to the Town of Williamston.
v) If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate because a
different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the
facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a
new authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted
to the POTW Director prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an
authorized representative.
(4) Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5)
days at 20º centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g. mg/l).
(5) Building Sewer. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the
POTW.
(6) Bypass. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment
facility.
(7) Categorical Standards. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or Pretreatment
Standard.
(8) Discharge. The introduction of any material into the POTW.
(9) Control Authority. Refers to the POTW organization if the POTW organization’s
Pretreatment Program approval has not been withdrawn.
(10) Environmental Protection Agency, or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the Administrator or
other duly authorized official of said agency.
(11) Grab Sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without
regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.
(12) Holding Tank Waste. Any waste from holding tanks, including but not limited to such
holding tanks as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuumpump
tank trucks.
(13) Indirect Discharge. The discharge or the introduction from any nondomestic source
regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1317), into the POTW.
(14) Industrial User or User. Any person which is a source of indirect discharge.
(15) Interference. The inhibition, or disruption of the POTW collection system, treatment
processes, operations, or its sludge process, use, or disposal, which causes or contributes
to a violation of any requirement of the Control Authority’s NPDES permit, collection
system permit or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with specified
Page 4 of 27
applicable State and Federal statutes, regulations, or permits. The term includes
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with section
405 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed
pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA)(42 U.S.C. §6901, et seq.), the Clean
Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, the Marine Protection Research and
Sanctuary Act (MPRSA) or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any
State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of (SWDA) applicable to the
method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.
(16) Medical Waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products,
pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes,
potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
(17) National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard. Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections
307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. §1317) which applies to a specific category of
industrial users, and which appears in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
(18) National Prohibitive Discharge Standard or Prohibitive Discharge Standard. Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in
section 2.1 of this ordinance and are developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act
and 40 CFR, section 403.5.
(19) New Source.
(1) Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there may be a
discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the
publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under section 307(c)
of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307(c), provided that:
(A) the building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at
which no other source is located; or
(B) the building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants
at an existing source; or
(C) the production or wastewater generating processes of the building,
structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new
facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the
existing source, should be considered.
(2) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a
modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new
building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of section (1)(B)
or (C) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or
production equipment.
(3) For purposes of this definition, construction of a new source has commenced if
the owner or operator has:
(A) Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction
program:
1. Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment;
or
2. Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or
removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
(B) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can
Page 5 of 27
be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a
contractual obligation under this definition.
(20) Noncontact Cooling Water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct
contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.
(21) National Pollution Discharge Elimination System, or NPDES, Permit. A permit issued
pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. §1342), or pursuant to N.C.G.S. 143-215.1
by the State under delegation from EPA.
(22) Non-discharge Permit. A permit issued by the State pursuant to G.S. 143-215.1(d) for a
waste which is not discharged directly to surface waters of the State or for a wastewater
treatment works which does not discharge directly to surface waters of the State.
(23) Pass Through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the State in quantities
or concentrations which, alone or with discharges from other sources, causes a violation,
including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation of the Control
Authority’s NPDES permit, collection system permit or a downstream water quality
standard even if not included in the permit.
(24) Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal
entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all
Federal, State, and local government entities.
(25) pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed as standard units,
and calculated as the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
(26) Pollutant. Any "waste" as defined in N.C.G.S. 143-213(18) and dredged spoil, solid
waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste and
certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, metals,
BOD, COD, toxicity, and odor).
(27) POTW Director. The chief administrative officer of the Control Authority or his/her
delegate.
(28) POTW Treatment Plant. That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to
wastewater.
(29) Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or
the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW collection system
and/or treatment plant. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical,
chemical, or biological processes, or process changes or other means, except as
prohibited by 40 CFR Part 403.6(d).
(30) Pretreatment Program. The program for the control of pollutants introduced into the
POTW from non-domestic sources which was developed by the Town of Williamston in
compliance with 40 CFR 403.8 and approved by the approval authority as authorized by
N.C.G.S. 143-215.3(a)(14) in accordance with 40 CFR 403.11.
(31) Pretreatment Requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to
pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard.
(32) Pretreatment Standard. Any prohibited discharge standard, categorical standard, or local
limit which applies to an industrial user.
(33) Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) or Municipal Wastewater System. A
treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. §1292) which is owned
in this instance by the Town of Williamston. This definition includes any devices or
systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of
municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes,
and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. For
the purposes of this ordinance, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey
Page 6 of 27
wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the Town of Williamston who are, by
contract or agreement with the Town of Williamston, or in any other way, users of the
POTW of the Town of Williamston.
(34) Severe Property Damage. Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the user's
treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and
permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the
absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by
delays in production.
(35) Significant Industrial User or SIU. An industrial user that discharges wastewater into a
publicly owned treatment works and that:
(A) Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater
to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewaters); or
(B) contributes more than 5% of any design or treatment capacity (i.e., allowable
pollutant load) of the wastewater treatment plant receiving the indirect
discharge, or
(C) is subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR Part 403.6 and
40 CFR chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471; or
(D) is designated as such by the Control Authority on the basis that the industrial
user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation, or
for violating any Pretreatment Standard or requirement, or for contributing to
violations of the POTW’s effluent limitations and conditions in its NPDES
permit, or for contributing to violations of the POTW’s receiving stream
standard, or for limiting the POTW’s sludge disposal options.
(36) Significant Noncompliance. A status of noncompliance defined as follows:
(A) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in
which sixty-six (66) percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter (not including flow) during a six month period exceed (by
any magnitude) a numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(l);
(B) Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which
thirty-three (33) percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the
numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement including instantaneous limits,
as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(l) multiplied by the applicable TRC; (TRC =
1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, 1.2 for all other pollutants (except flow
and pH);
(C) Any other violation of a Pretreatment Standard or Requirement as defined by 40
CFR Part 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or
narrative standard) that the Control Authority and/or POTW determines has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass
through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public);
(D) Any discharge of a pollutant or wastewater that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in
either the Control Authority’s or the POTW's, if different from the Control
Authority, exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR Part
403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) and Section 8.1(e) of this SUO to halt or prevent such a
discharge;
(E) Violations of compliance schedule milestones, contained in a pretreatment
permit or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing construction,
and attaining final compliance by 90 days or more after the schedule date.
(F) Failure to provide reports for compliance schedule, self-monitoring data,
baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, and compliance reports
within 30 days from the due date.
Page 7 of 27
(G) Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
(H) Any other violation or group of violations that the Control Authority and/or
POTW determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the
local pretreatment program.
(37) Slug Load or Discharge. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which has a
reasonable potential to cause Interference or Pass-Through, or in any other way violates
the POTW’s regulations, local limits, or Industrial User Permit conditions. This can
include but is not limited to spills and other accidental discharges; discharges of a nonroutine,
episodic nature; a non-customary batch discharge; or any other discharges that
can cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 2.1 of this
ordinance.
(38) Standard Industrial Classification (SIC). A classification pursuant to the Standard
Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office
of Management and Budget, 1987.
(39) Storm Water. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation
and resulting there from.
(40) Suspended Solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is
suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory
filtering.
(41) Upset. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the
reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent
caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
(42) User. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the discharge of material into the
POTW.
(43) Wastewater. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings,
commercial buildings, industrial facilities, mobile sources, treatment facilities and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and storm water that may be
present, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed into or permitted to enter the
POTW.
(44) Wastewater Permit. As set forth in section 4.2 of this ordinance.
(45) Waters of the State. All streams, rivers, brooks, swamps, sounds, tidal estuaries, bays,
creeks, lakes, waterways, reservoirs and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained
within, flow through, or border upon the State or any portion thereof.
(b) This ordinance is gender neutral and the masculine gender shall include the feminine and viceversa.
(c) Shall is mandatory; may is permissive or discretionary.
(d) The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and the plural shall include the
singular as indicated by the context of its use.
(e) The following abbreviations when used in this ordinance, shall have the designated meanings:
(1) BOD Biochemical Oxygen Demand
(2) CFR Code of Federal Regulations
(3) COD Chemical Oxygen Demand
(4) EPA Environmental Protection Agency
(5) gpd Gallons per day
(6) l Liter
(7) mg Milligrams
(8) mg/l Milligrams per liter
(9) N.C.G.S. North Carolina General Statutes
(10) NPDES National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
(11) O & M Operation and Maintenance
Page 8 of 27
(12) POTW Publicly Owned Treatment Works
(13) RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(14) SIC Standard Industrial Classification
(15) SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act
(16) TSS Total Suspended Solids
(17) TKN Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen
(18) U.S.C United States Code.
SECTION 2 - GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS
2.1 Prohibited Discharge Standards
(a) General Prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed into the POTW, directly
or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which causes interference or pass through. These general
prohibitions apply to all users of a POTW whether or not the user is a significant industrial user or
subject to any National, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
(b) Specific Prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed into the POTW the
following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited
to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140ºF (60ºC) using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(2) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the
POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids greater than one half inch (1/2") in
any dimension.
(3) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts
that will cause interference or pass through.
(4) Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 10.0 or wastewater having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage to the POTW or equipment.
(5) Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants, (BOD,
etc) in sufficient quantity, (flow or concentration) either singly or by interaction with
other pollutants, to cause interference with the POTW.
(6) Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150º F (66º C), or which will inhibit
biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in Interference, but in no case
wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to
exceed 104º F (40º C).
(7) Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the
POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.
(8) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW
Director in accordance with section 2.9 of this ordinance.
(9) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids or other wastewater which, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or
hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
(10) Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW
such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to
interfere with the reclamation process. In no case, shall a substance discharged to the
POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal regulations
or permits issued under section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean
Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or State criteria applicable to the sludge
management method being used.
(11) Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process,
including, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which
consequently imparts sufficient color to the treatment plant's effluent to render the waters
injurious to public health or secondary recreation or to aquatic life and wildlife or to
adversely affect the palatability of fish or aesthetic quality or impair the receiving waters
for any designated uses.
Page 9 of 27
(12) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically
approved by the POTW Director in compliance with applicable State or Federal
regulations.
(13) Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling
water and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the POTW
Director.
(14) Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 100 mg/l
unless authorized by the POTW Director.
(15) Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes.
(16) Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the POTW Director in a
wastewater discharge permit.
(17) Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts, or other chelating agents which will
produce metallic complexes that interfere with the municipal wastewater system.
(18) Any material that would be identified as hazardous waste according to 40 CFR Part 261
if not disposed of in a sewer except as may be specifically authorized by the POTW
Director.
(19) Any wastewater causing the treatment plant effluent to violate State Water Quality
Standards for toxic substances as described in 15A NCAC 2B .0200.
(20) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's
effluent to fail a toxicity test.
(21) Recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy.
(22) Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the municipal wastewater system.
(23) At no time, shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of
discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent (5%)
nor any single reading over ten percent (10%) of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the
meter.
Pollutants, substances, wastewater, or other wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or
stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the municipal wastewater system. All floor drains
located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial user's pretreatment facility
before connecting with the system.
When the POTW Director determines that a user(s) is contributing to the POTW, any of the above
enumerated substances in such amounts which may cause or contribute to interference of POTW operation
or pass through, the POTW Director shall:
1) advise the user(s) of the potential impact of the contribution on the POTW in accordance
with section 8.1; and
2) take appropriate actions in accordance with section 4 for such user to protect the POTW
from interference or pass through.
2.2 National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are required to comply with applicable standards as set out in 40
CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 and incorporated herein.
(a) Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the
concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the POTW Director may impose equivalent
concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
(b) When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not
regulated by the same standard, the POTW Director shall impose an alternate limit using the
combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(c) A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove,
pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its
Page 10 of 27
discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the
categorical pretreatment standard.
(d) A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR
403.15.
(e) A user may request a removal credit adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40
CFR 403.7.
2.3 Local Limits
An industrial waste survey is required prior to a User discharging wastewater containing in excess of the following
average discharge limits.
BOD 250 mg/l
TSS 250 mg/l
NH3 25 mg/l
Arsenic 0.003 mg/l
Cadmium 0.003 mg/l
Chromium 0.05 mg/l (total chromium)
Copper 0.061 mg/l
Cyanide 0.015 mg/l
Lead 0.049 mg/l
Mercury 0.0003 mg/l
Nickel 0.021 mg/l
Silver 0.005 mg/l
Zinc 0.175 mg/l
Industrial Waste Survey information will be used to develop user-specific local limits when necessary to ensure that
the POTW's maximum allowable headworks loading are not exceeded for particular pollutants of concern. Userspecific
local limits for appropriate pollutants of concern shall be included in wastewater permits. The POTW
Director may impose mass based limits in addition to, or in place of concentration based limits.
2.4 State Requirements
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than Federal
requirements and limitations or those in this ordinance.
2.5 Right of Revision
The Town of Williamston reserves the right to establish limitations and requirements which are more stringent than
those required by either State or Federal regulation if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in
section 1.1 of this ordinance or the general and specific prohibitions in section 2.1 of this ordinance, as is allowed by
40 CFR 403.4.
2.6 Dilution
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the National
categorical pretreatment standards, unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard, or in any
other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the Town of Williamston or the State.
2.7 Pretreatment of Wastewater
(a) Pretreatment Facilities
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this ordinance and
wastewater permits issued under section 4.2 of this ordinance and shall achieve compliance with
all National categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section
2.1 of this ordinance within the time limitations as specified by EPA, the State, or the POTW
Director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided,
operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities
and operating procedures shall be submitted to the Town of Williamston for review, and shall be
approved by the POTW Director before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and
operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the
facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the Town of Williamston under the
Page 11 of 27
provisions of this ordinance. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
operation shall be reported to and be approved by the POTW Director prior to the user's initiation
of the changes.
(b) Additional Pretreatment Measures
(1) Whenever deemed necessary, the POTW Director may require users to restrict their
discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only
into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage
wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be
necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user’s compliance with the
requirements of this ordinance.
(2) The POTW Director may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and
maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control
facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued
solely for flow equalization.
(3) Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the POTW
Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive
amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the
POTW Director and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as
needed and/or, at a minimum, as required under the conditions of the Town of
Williamston’s Policy to install and maintain Grease/Oil/Grit Interceptors by the user at
their expense.
(4) Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and
maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
2.8 Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans:
(a) The POTW Director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs a plan or other
action to control and prevent slug discharges and accidental discharges as defined in Section
1.2(a) (36). All SIUs must be evaluated within one year of being designated an SIU. The POTW
Director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan or
other specific action. Alternatively, the POTW Director may develop such a plan for any user.
(b) All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the
potential for spills and other accidental discharge, discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, a
non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load. Also see Sections 5.5 and 5.6.
(c) An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges;
(2) Description of stored chemicals;
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW Director of any accidental or slug
discharge, as required by section 5.6 of this ordinance; and
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such
procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas,
handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for
containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment
for emergency response.
2.9 Hauled Wastewater
(a) Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the POTW
Director, and at such times as are established by the POTW Director. Such waste shall not violate
section 2 of this ordinance or any other requirements established by the Town of Williamston.
The POTW Director may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits.
(b) The POTW Director shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge
permits. The POTW Director may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain
wastewater discharge permits. The POTW Director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled
Page 12 of 27
industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of
this ordinance.
(c) Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the POTW Director.
No load may be discharged without prior consent of the POTW Director. The POTW Director
may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The
POTW Director may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load
prior to discharge.
(d) Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall
include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck
identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste.
The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether
any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
SECTION 3 - FEES
3.1 Purpose
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the wastewater disposal system of
the Town of Williamston for the implementation of the program established herein. The applicable charges or fees
shall be set forth in a schedule of sewer use charges and fees by the POTW Director and approved by the Town of
Williamston’s Board. A copy of these charges and fees will be made available from the POTW Director.
3.2 User Charges
A user charge shall be levied on all users including, but not limited to, persons, firms, corporations or governmental
entities that discharge, cause or permit the discharge of sewage into the POTW.
(a) The user charge shall reflect, at least, the cost of debt service, operation and maintenance
(including replacement) of the POTW.
(b) Each user shall pay its proportionate cost based on volume of flow.
(c) The Manager of the Town of Williamston shall review annually the sewage contributions of users,
the total costs of debt service, operation and maintenance of the POTW and will make
recommendations to the Council or Board serving the Town of Williamston for adjustments in the
schedule of charges and fees as necessary.
(d) Charges for flow to the POTW not directly attributable to the users shall be distributed among all
users of the POTW based upon the volume of flow of the users.
3.3 Surcharges
The amount of the surcharges will be based upon the volume of flow and the character and concentration of the
constituents of the wastewater:
(a) The volume of flow used in determining the total discharge of wastewater for payment of user
charges and surcharges shall be based on the following:
(1) Metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter readings maintained by the
Town of Williamston; or
(2) If required by the Town of Williamston or at the individual discharger’s option, other
flow monitoring devices which measure the actual volume of wastewater discharged to
the sewer. Such devices shall be accessible and safely located, and the measuring system
shall be installed in accordance with plans approved by the Town of Williamston. The
metering system shall be installed and maintained at the user’s expense according to
arrangements that may be made with the Town of Williamston.
(3) Where any user procures all or part of his or her water supply from sources other than the
Town of Williamston, the user shall install and maintain at his or her own expense a flow
measuring device of a type approved by the Town of Williamston.
(b) The character and concentration of the constituents of the wastewater used in determining
surcharges shall be determined by samples collected and analyzed by the Town of Williamston.
Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative of the actual discharge and
shall be analyzed using procedures set forth in 40 CFR Part 136.
Page 13 of 27
(c) The determination of the character and concentration of the constituents of the wastewater
discharge by the POTW Director or his duly appointed representatives shall be binding as a basis
for charges.
3.4 Pretreatment Program Administration Charges
The schedule of charges and fees adopted by the Town of Williamston may include charges and fees for:
(a) reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the Pretreatment Program;
(b) monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
(c) reviewing slug control plans, including accidental and/or slug load discharge procedures and
construction plans and specifications;
(d) permitting;
(e) other fees as the Town of Williamston may deem necessary to carry out the requirements of the
Pretreatment Program.
SECTION 4 - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE
4.1 Wastewater Dischargers
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or discharge to the POTW without first obtaining the permission of the
Town of Williamston. When requested by the POTW Director, a user must submit information on the nature and
characteristics of its wastewater within thirty (30) days of the request. The POTW Director is authorized to prepare
a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information.
4.2 Wastewater Permits
All significant industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial user permit prior to the commencement of
discharge to the POTW. Existing industrial users who are determined by the POTW Director to be significant
industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial user permit within 180 days of receiving notification of the
POTW Director's determination. Industrial users who do not fit the significant industrial user criteria may at the
discretion of the POTW Director be required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit for non-significant industrial
users.
(a) Significant Industrial User Determination
All persons proposing to discharge non-domestic wastewater, or proposing to change the volume
or characteristics of an existing discharge of non-domestic wastewater shall request from the
POTW Director a significant industrial user determination. If the POTW Director determines or
suspects that the proposed discharge fits the significant industrial user criteria he will require that a
significant industrial user permit application be filed.
(b) Significant Industrial User Permit Application
Users required to obtain a significant industrial user permit shall complete and file with the Town
of Williamston an application in the form prescribed by the POTW Director and accompanied by
an application fee in the amount prescribed in the schedule of charges and fees. Significant
industrial users shall apply for a significant industrial user permit within 90 days after notification
of the POTW Director's determination in 4.2(a) above. The application shall include at a
minimum:
(A) name of industrial user;
(B) address of industrial user;
(C) standard industrial classification (SIC) code(s) or expected classification and
industrial user category;
(D) wastewater flow;
(E) types and concentrations (or mass) of pollutants contained in the discharge;
(F) major products manufactured or services supplied;
(G) description of existing on-site pretreatment facilities and practices;
(H) locations of discharge points;
(I) raw materials used or stored at the site;
(J) flow diagram or sewer map for the industrial user;
(K) number of employees;
(L) operation and production schedules; and
(M) description of current and projected waste reduction activities in accordance
with G.S. 143-215.1(g);
Page 14 of 27
(N) any other information as may be deemed necessary by the POTW Director to
evaluate the permit application.
(c) Application Signatories and Certification
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by the current
authorized representative of the user on file with the Control Authority and/or Municipality as
defined in Section 1.2(a)(3) and contain the following certification statement:
“I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.”
(d) Application Review and Evaluation
The POTW Director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information.
(1) The POTW Director is authorized to accept applications for the Town of Williamston and
shall refer all applications to the POTW staff for review and evaluation.
(2) Within 30 days of receipt the POTW Director shall acknowledge and accept the complete
application; or if not complete, shall return the application to the applicant with a
statement of what additional information is required.
(e) Tentative Determination and Draft Permit
(1) The POTW staff shall conduct a review of the application and an on-site inspection of the
significant industrial user, including any pretreatment facilities, and shall prepare a
written evaluation and tentative determination to issue or deny the significant industrial
user permit.
(2) If the staff's tentative determination in Paragraph (1) above is to issue the permit, the
following additional determinations shall be made in writing:
(A) proposed discharge limitations for those pollutants proposed to be limited;
(B) a proposed schedule of compliance, including interim dates and requirements,
for meeting the proposed limitations; and
(C) a brief description of any other proposed special conditions which will have
significant impact upon the discharge described in the application.
(3) The staff shall organize the determinations made pursuant to Paragraphs (1) and (2)
above and the general permit conditions of the Town of Williamston into a significant
industrial user permit.
(f) Permit supporting documentation. The Control Authority staff shall prepare the following
documents for all Significant Industrial User permits.
(1) An allocation table (AT) listing permit information for all Significant Industrial Users,
including but not limited to permit limits, permit effective and expiration dates, and a
comparison of total permitted flows and loads with Division approved maximum
allowable loadings of the POTW, including flow, on forms or in a format approved by
the Division. The AT shall be updated as permits are issued or renewed, and as permits
are modified where the permitted limits or other AT information is revised.
(2) The basis, or rationale, for the pretreatment limitations, including the following:
(A) documentation of categorical determination, including documentation of any
calculations used in applying categorical pretreatment standards; and
(B) documentation of the rationale of any parameters for which monitoring has been
waived under 40 CFR Part 403.12(e)(2).
(g) Final Action on Significant Industrial User Permit Applications
(1) The POTW Director shall take final action on all applications not later than 90 days
following receipt of a complete application.
Page 15 of 27
(2) The POTW Director is authorized to:
(A) issue a significant industrial user permit containing such conditions as are
necessary to effectuate the purposes of this ordinance and N.C.G.S. 143-215.1;
(B) issue a significant industrial user permit containing time schedules for achieving
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements;
(C) modify any permit upon not less than 60 days notice and pursuant to section
4.2(i) of this ordinance;
(D) revoke any permit pursuant to section 8.1 of this ordinance;
(E) suspend a permit pursuant to section 8.1 of this Ordinance;
(F) deny a permit application when in the opinion of the POTW Director such
discharge may cause or contribute to pass-through or interference of the
wastewater treatment plant or where necessary to effectuate the purposes of G.S.
143-215.1.
(h) Permit Modification
(1) Modifications of permits shall be subject to the same procedural requirements as the
issuance of permits except as listed below. Any changes or new conditions in the permit
shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
(A) changes in the ownership of the discharge when no other change in the permit is
indicated,
(B) a single modification of any compliance schedule not in excess of four months,
(C) modification of compliance schedules (construction schedules) in permits for
new sources where the new source will not begin to discharge until control
facilities are operational.
(2) Within 9 months of the promulgation of a National categorical pretreatment standard, the
wastewater discharge permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require
compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard.
Where a user, subject to a National categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously
submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by section 4.2(b),
the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 180 days after the
promulgation of the applicable National categorical pretreatment standard.
(3) A request for a modification by the permittee shall constitute a waiver of the 60-day
notice required by G.S. 143-215.1(b) for modifications.
(i) Permit Conditions
(1) The POTW Director shall have the authority to grant a permit with such conditions
attached as he believes necessary to achieve the purpose of this ordinance and N.C.G.S.
143-215.1. Wastewater permits shall contain, but are not limited to, the following:
(A) a statement of duration (in no case more than five years);
(B) a statement of non-transferability;
(C) applicable effluent limits based on categorical standards or local limits or both;
(D) applicable monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping
requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to
be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on
Federal, State and local law;
(E) requirements for notifying the POTW in the event of an accidental discharge or
slug load as defined in Section 1.2(a)(36);
(F) requirements to implement a Plan or other controls for prevention of accidental
discharges and/or slug loads as defined in Section 1.2(a)(36), if determined by
the POTW Director to be necessary for the User and,
(G) requirements for immediately notifying the POTW of any changes at its facility
affecting the potential for spills and other accidental discharges, or slug load as
defined in 1.2(a) (36). Also see Sections 5.5 and 5.6;
Page 16 of 27
(H) a statement of applicable civil and/or criminal penalties for violation of
pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable compliance
schedule.
(2) In addition, permits may contain, but are not limited to, the following:
(A) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, and/or requirements
for flow regulation and equalization.
(B) Limits on the instantaneous, daily and/or monthly average and/or maximum
concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater pollutants or
properties.
(C) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or construction of
appropriate containment devices, etc., designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent
the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works.
(D) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the
amount of pollutants discharged to the municipal wastewater system.
(E) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the
wastewater discharged to the system.
(F) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling
facilities and equipment.
(G) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations,
frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests, and reporting
schedules.
(H) Requirements for immediate reporting of any instance of noncompliance and for
automatic re-sampling and reporting within thirty (30) days where selfmonitoring
indicates a violation(s).
(I) Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment standards and requirements.
(J) Requirements for submission of periodic self-monitoring or special notification
reports.
(K) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plans and records relating to
wastewater discharges as specified in section 5.13 and affording the POTW
Director, or his representatives, access thereto.
(L) Requirements for prior notification and approval by the POTW Director of any
new introduction of wastewater pollutants or of any significant change in the
volume or character of the wastewater prior to introduction in the system.
(M) Requirements for the prior notification and approval by the POTW Director of
any change in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process used by the
permittee.
(N) A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the permittee of
responsibility for compliance with all applicable Federal and State pretreatment
standards, including those which become effective during the terms of the
permit.
(O) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the [POTW Director] to ensure
compliance with this ordinance, and State and Federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
(j) Permit Duration
Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be
issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date.
(k) Permit Transfer
Wastewater permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge
permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises,
or a new or changed operation.
(l) Permit Reissuance
Page 17 of 27
A significant industrial user shall apply for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit
application in accordance with section 4.2 a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the
existing permit.
SECTION 5 - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
5.1 Baseline Monitoring Reports
(a) Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment
standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)
(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to
discharge to the POTW shall submit to the POTW Director a report which contains the
information listed in paragraph (b), below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of
their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the
promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the POTW Director a report
which contains the information listed in paragraph (b) below. A new source shall report the
method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source
also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
(b) Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
(1) Identifying Information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator and owner.
(2) Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the
facility.
(3) Description of Operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production,
and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This
description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of
discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
(4) Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum
daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other
streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40
CFR 403.6(e).
(5) Measurement of Pollutants.
(A) The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.
(B) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration,
and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the POTW Director, of
regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass,
where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
section [5.10] of this ordinance.
(C) Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section
5.11 of this ordinance and 40 CFR 403.12(b) and (g), including 40 CFR
403.12(g)(4).
(6) Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's current authorized representative as
defined in Section 1.2(a)(3) and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional
operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements.
(7) Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet
the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such
additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be
later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in
section 5.2 of this ordinance.
(8) Signature and Certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified
in accordance with section 4.2(c) of this ordinance.
Page 18 of 27
5.2 Compliance Schedule Progress Reports
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by section 5.1(b) (7) of this ordinance:
(a) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and
completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are
not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for
major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting
routine operation);
(b) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;
(c) The user shall submit a progress report to the POTW Director no later than fourteen (14) days
following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum,
whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and
(d) In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the [POTW
Director].
5.3 Reports on Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard; Deadline
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards,
or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user
subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the POTW Director a report containing the
information described in section 5.1(b) (4-6) of this ordinance. For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a
reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation),
this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with section 4.2(c) of this ordinance.
5.4 Periodic Compliance Reports
Municipalities may sample and analyze user discharges in lieu of requiring the users to conduct sampling and
analysis.
(a) All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the POTW Director but in no
case less than once every six months, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the applicable flows
for the reporting period. Sampling and analysis must be performed in accordance with procedures
set out in section 5.10 and 5.11 of this ordinance. All periodic compliance reports must be signed
and certified in accordance with section 4.2(c) of this ordinance.
(b) If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more
frequently than required by the POTW Director, using the procedures prescribed in section 5.10
and 5.11 of this ordinance, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
5.5 Reports of Changed Conditions
Each user must notify the POTW Director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system
which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least [thirty (30)] days before the change. The
permittee shall not begin the changes until receiving written approval from the Control Authority and/or
Municipality. See Section 5.6(d) for other reporting requirements.
(a) The POTW Director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary
to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit
application under section 4.2 of this ordinance.
(b) The POTW Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 4.2 of this ordinance
or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 4.2 of this ordinance in response
to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
(c) For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow or
pollutant increases of 20 percent ( 20 %) or greater, and the discharge of any previously
unreported pollutants, increases or decreases to production; increases in discharge of previously
reported pollutants; discharge of pollutants not previously reported to the Control Authority
Page 19 of 27
and/or Municipality; new or changed product lines; new or changed manufacturing processes
and/or chemicals; or new or changed customers.
5.6 Reports of Potential Problems
(a) In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a
non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in Section
1.2(a)(36), that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone
and notify the POTW Director of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the
discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the
user.
(b) Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the [POTW
Director], submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the
measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not
relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result
of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall
such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed
pursuant to this ordinance.
(c) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place
advising employees who to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (a), above.
Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised
of the emergency notification procedure.
(d) All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the
potential for spills and other accidental discharge, discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, a
non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in Section 1.2(a)(36).
5.7 Reports from Unpermitted Users
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the
POTW Director as the POTW Director may require.
5.8 Notice of Violation/Repeat Sampling and Reporting
(a) If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the POTW Director
within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the
sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the POTW Director within
thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. If allowed by the POTW Director the user
is not required to resample:
(1) if the POTW Director monitors at the user's facility at least once a month; or
(2) if the POTW Director samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user
receives the results of this sampling.
(b) If the POTW Director has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user and
the POTW sampling of the user indicates a violation, the POTW Director shall repeat the
sampling and obtain the results of the repeat analysis within thirty (30) days after becoming aware
of the violations, unless one of the following occurs:
(1) the POTW Director monitors at the user's facility at least once a month; or
(2) the POTW Director samples the user between their initial sampling and when the POTW
receives the results of this initial sampling; or
(3) the POTW Director requires the user to perform sampling and submit the results to the
POTW Director within the 30 day deadline of the POTW becoming aware of the
violation.
Page 20 of 27
5.9 Notification of the Discharge of Hazardous Waste
The Town of Williamston prohibits the discharge of any hazardous wastes without notification to and approval by
the POTW Director.
(a) Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA
Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities, in writing,
of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a
hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the
hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type
of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than one hundred (100)
kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the
following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user:
an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass
and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharge during the calendar month,
and an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream expected
to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place no
later than 180 days before the discharge commences. The user shall not begin the discharge until
receiving written approval from the Town of Williamston. Any notification under this paragraph
need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharge. However, notifications of
changed conditions must be submitted under section 5.5 of this ordinance. The notification
requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of sections 5.1, 5.3, and
5.4 of this ordinance.
(b) Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (a) above, during a calendar month in
which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes
are acute hazardous wastes as specific in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more
than fifteen (15) kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity
of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time
notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of
any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
(c) In the case of any new regulation under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional
characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the
user must notify the POTW Director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division
Director, and State hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety
(90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
(d) In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program
in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has
determined to be economically practical.
(e) This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be
discharged by this ordinance, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable Federal or State law.
5.10 Analytical Requirements
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless
otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain
sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in
accordance with procedures approved by EPA and the Town of Williamston.
5.11 Grab and Composite Sample Collection
(a) All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring
and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good
working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its
discharge.
(b) Grab Samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, volatile organic
compounds, and any other pollutants as required by 40 CFR 136. The POTW shall determine the
number of grabs necessary to be representative of the User’s discharge. See 40 CFR 403.12(g) (5)
Page 21 of 27
for additional grab sample number requirements for BMR and 90 Day Compliance Reports.
Additionally, the POTW Director may allow collection of multiple grabs during a 24 hour period
which are composited prior to analysis as allowed under 40 CFR 136.
(c) Composite Samples: All wastewater composite samples shall be collected with a minimum of
hourly aliquots or grabs for each hour that there is a discharge. All wastewater composite samples
shall be collected using flow proportional composite collection techniques, unless timeproportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the POTW Director. When
authorizing time-proportional composites or grabs, the samples must be representative and the
decision to allow the alternative sampling must be documented.
5.12 Timing
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed,
postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report
shall govern.
5.13 Record Keeping
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this ordinance shall retain, and make available for inspection and
copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this ordinance and any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of
such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the
person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical
techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at
least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the
user or the Town of Williamston, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the
POTW Director.
5.14 Electronic Reporting
The POTW Director may develop procedures for receipt of electronic reports for any reporting requirements of this
Ordinance. Such procedures shall comply with 40 CFR Part 3. These procedures shall be enforceable under Section
8 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 6 - COMPLIANCE MONITORING
6.1 Monitoring Facilities
The Town of Williamston requires the user to provide and operate at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to
allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The
monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the Town of Williamston may, when such
a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public
street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation
of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.
Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of the Town of Williamston and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the Town of
Williamston.
6.2 Inspection and Sampling
The Town of Williamston will inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this ordinance is
being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is
created or discharged shall allow the Town of Williamston, approval authority and EPA or their representative ready
access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying or in the performance of any of their duties. The Town of Williamston, approval authority
and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling,
inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which
would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary
arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the Town
of Williamston, approval authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of
Page 22 of 27
performing their specific responsibilities. Denial of the Town of Williamston’s, approval authority's, or EPA's
access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this ordinance. Unreasonable delays shall constitute denial of
access.
6.3 Search Warrants
If the Town of Williamston, approval authority, or EPA has been refused access to a building, structure, or property,
or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of
the Town of Williamston designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or any permit or order issued hereunder,
or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the Town of Williamston,
approval authority, or EPA may seek issuance of a search warrant from the court having jurisdiction within the
Town of Williamston.
SECTION 7 - CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
(a) Information and data provided by an industrial user to the POTW Director pursuant to this ordinance identifying
the nature and frequency of a discharge, shall be available to the public without restriction. All other information
which may be so submitted by an industrial user to the POTW Director in connection with any required reports shall
also be available to the public unless the industrial user or other interested person specifically identifies the
information as confidential upon submission and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the POTW Director that
the disclosure of such information or a particular part thereof to the general public would divulge methods or
processes entitled to protection as trade secrets.
(b) Information provided by an industrial user to the POTW Director that is determined to be entitled to confidential
treatment shall be made available upon written request to the Division of Water Quality or any state agency for uses
related to the Pretreatment Program, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit,
collection system permit, stormwater permit, and/or Non-discharge permit, and for uses related to judicial review or
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
(c) Information and data received by the Division or other state agency under paragraph (b) above shall be subject
to the processes set forth in G.S. 143-215.3C.
SECTION 8 - ENFORCEMENT
8.1 Administrative Remedies
(a) Notification of Violation
Whenever the POTW Director finds that any industrial user has violated or is violating this
Ordinance, wastewater permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained therein or
any other pretreatment requirement the POTW Director may serve upon such a person a written
notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days from the date of this notice, an
explanation for the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to
the Town of Williamston by the user. Submission of this plan does not relieve the discharger of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
(b) Consent Orders
The POTW Director is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary
compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for
the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the discharger to
correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall
have the same force and effect as an administrative order issued pursuant to section 8.1(d), below.
(c) Show Cause Hearing
The POTW Director may order any industrial user who causes or is responsible for an
unauthorized discharge, has violated this ordinance or is in noncompliance with a wastewater
discharge permit to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. In the
event the POTW Director determines that a show cause order should be issued, a notice shall be
served on the user specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action,
the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or
certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be
made on any agent or officer of a corporation.
Page 23 of 27
The POTW Director shall review the evidence presented at the hearing and determine whether the
proposed enforcement action is appropriate.
A show cause hearing under this section is not a prerequisite to the assessment of a civil penalty
under section 8.2 nor is any action or inaction taken by the POTW Director under this section
subject to an administrative appeal under section 10.
(d) Administrative Orders
When the POTW Director finds that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate this
ordinance, permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement the POTW
Director may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in
noncompliance to do any of the following:
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements;
(2) Comply in accordance with a compliance time schedule set forth in the order;
(3) Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the event of a continuing or threatened
violation;
(4) Disconnect unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances
are installed and properly operated within a specified time period.
(e) Emergency Suspensions
The POTW Director may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or wastewater permit
when such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons or the environment, interferes with the POTW or causes the POTW to violate any
condition of its NPDES or Non-discharge permit.
Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater
permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. A hearing will be held within 15 days
of the notice of suspension to determine whether the suspension may be lifted or the user's waste
discharge permit terminated. In the event of a failure to comply voluntarily with the suspension
order, the POTW Director shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or
endangerment to any individuals. The POTW Director shall reinstate the wastewater permit and
the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncompliant discharge.
The industrial user shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the POTW Director prior
to the date of the above-described hearing.
(f) Termination of Permit or Permission to Discharge
The POTW Director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit or permission to discharge for
good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
(1) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of their
discharge;
(2) Failure to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
(3) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or
monitoring; or,
(4) Violation of conditions of the permit or permission to discharge, conditions of this
ordinance, or any applicable State and Federal regulations.
Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the proposed termination of their wastewater
permit and will be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 8.1 of this ordinance why
the proposed action should not be taken.
8.2 Civil Penalties
(a) Any user who is found to have failed to comply with any provision of this ordinance, or the
orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, may be assessed a civil penalty of up to
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) per day per violation.
Page 24 of 27
(1) Penalties between $10,000 and $25,000 per day per violation may be assessed against a
violator only if:
(A) For any class of violation, only if a civil penalty has been imposed against the
violator with in the five years preceding the violation, or
(B) In the case of failure to file, submit, or make available, as the case may be, any
documents, data, or reports required by this ordinance, or the orders, rules,
regulations and permits issued hereunder, only if the POTW Director determines
that the violation was intentional and a civil penalty has been imposed against
the violator within the five years preceding the violation.
(b) In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the POTW Director shall consider the following:
(1) The degree and extent of the harm to the natural resources, to the public health, or to
public or private property resulting from the violation;
(2) The duration and gravity of the violation;
(3) The effect on ground or surface water quantity or quality or on air quality;
(4) The cost of rectifying the damage;
(5) The amount of money saved by noncompliance;
(6) Whether the violation was committed willfully or intentionally;
(7) The prior record of the violator in complying or failing to comply with the pretreatment
program;
(8) The costs of enforcement to the Town of Williamston.
(c) Appeals of civil penalties assessed in accordance with this section shall be as provided in section
10.
8.3 Other Available Remedies
Remedies, in addition to those previously mentioned in this ordinance, are available to the POTW Director who may
use any single one or combination against a noncompliant user. Additional available remedies include, but are not
limited to:
(a) Criminal Violations.
The District Attorney for the applicable Judicial District may, at the request of the Town of
Williamston, prosecute noncompliant users who violate the provisions of N.C.G.S. 143-215.6B.
Note: Under North Carolina law, it is a crime to negligently violate any term, condition, or
requirement of a pretreatment permit, or negligently fail to apply for a pretreatment permit, issued
by local governments (G.S. 143-215.6B(f)), to knowingly and willfully violate any term,
condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit, or knowingly and willfully fail to apply for a
pretreatment permit, issued by local governments (G.S. 143-215.6B(g)), to knowingly violate any
term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit issued by local governments, or
knowingly fail to apply for a pretreatment permit, knowing at the time that a person is placed in
imminent danger of death or serious bodily injury, (G.S. 143-215.6B(h), and to falsify information
required under Article 21 of Chapter 143 of the General Statutes (G.S. 143-215.6B(i)).
(b) Injunctive Relief
Whenever a user is in violation of the provisions of this ordinance or an order or permit issued
hereunder, the POTW Director, through the City Attorney, may petition the Superior Court of
Justice for the issuance of a restraining order or a preliminary and permanent injunction which
restrains or compels the activities in question.
(c) Water Supply Severance
Whenever an industrial user is in violation of the provisions of this ordinance or an order or permit
issued hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and service will only
recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated ability to comply.
(d) Public Nuisances
Any violation of the prohibitions or effluent limitations of this ordinance or of a permit or order
issued hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed
by the POTW Director. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions
Page 25 of 27
of the appropriate ordinances of the Town of Williamston governing such nuisances, including
reimbursing the POTW for any costs incurred in removing, abating or remedying said nuisance.
8.4 Remedies Nonexclusive
The remedies provided for in this ordinance are not exclusive. The POTW Director may take any, all, or any
combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be
in accordance with the Town of Williamston’s enforcement response plan. However, the POTW Director may take
other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the POTW Director is empowered to take
more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user.
SECTION 9 - ANNUAL PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE
At least annually, the POTW Director shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful
public notice within the jurisdiction(s) served by the POTW, a list of those industrial users which were found to be
in significant noncompliance, also referred to as reportable noncompliance, in 15A NCAC 2H .0903(b)(34), with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, during the previous 12 months.
SECTION 10 – ADJUDICATORY HEARINGS
Hearings: The local government may conduct hearings in accordance with its regular hearing procedure.
(a) Adjudicatory Hearing. An applicant whose permit is denied, or is granted subject to conditions he
deems unacceptable, a permittee/user assessed a civil penalty under section 8.2, or one issued an
administrative order under section 8.1 shall have the right to an adjudicatory hearing before the
POTW Director or other hearing officer appointed by the POTW Director upon making written
demand, identifying the specific issues to be contested, to the POTW Director within 30 days
following receipt of the significant industrial user permit, civil penalty assessment, or
administrative order. Unless such written demand is made within the time specified herein, the
action shall be final and binding and further appeal is barred. For modified permits, only those
parts of the permit being modified may be adjudicated. The hearing officer shall make a
final decision on the contested permit, penalty, or order within 45 days of the receipt of the written
demand for a hearing. The POTW Director shall transmit a copy of the hearing officer's decision
by registered or certified mail as described in paragraph (b) below. The decision is a final decision
for the purposes of seeking judicial review. The terms and conditions of a permit under appeal
shall be as follows:
(1) New Permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in the General Courts of Justice, of
the terms or conditions of a newly issued permit, the terms and conditions of the entire
permit are stayed and the permit is not in effect until either the conclusion of judicial
review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution.
(2) Renewed Permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in the General Courts of
Justice, of the terms or conditions of a renewed permit, the terms and conditions of the
existing permit remain in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the
parties reach a mutual resolution.
(3) Terminated Permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in the General Courts of
Justice, of a terminated permit, no permit is in effect until either the conclusion of judicial
review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution.
(b) Official record. When a final decision is issued under paragraph (a) above, the Hearing Officer
shall prepare an official record of the case that includes:
(1) All notices, motions, and other like pleadings;
(2) A copy of all documentary evidence introduced;
(3) A certified transcript of all testimony taken, if testimony is transcribed. If testimony is
taken and not transcribed, then a narrative summary of any testimony taken.
(4) A copy of the final decision of the Hearing Officer.
(c) Judicial Review. Any person against whom a final order or decision of the Hearing Officer is
entered, pursuant to the hearing conducted under paragraph (a) above, may seek judicial review of
the order or decision by filing a written request for review by the Superior Court of Martin
County within 30 days after receipt of notice by registered or certified mail of the order or
decision, but not thereafter, along with a copy to the Town of Williamston. Within 30 days after
Page 26 of 27
receipt of the copy of the written request for review by the Court, the Hearing Officer shall
transmit to the reviewing court the original or a certified copy of the official record.
SECTION 11 – AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS
11.1 Upset
(a) An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph (b), below, are met.
(b) A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through
properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:
(1) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
(2) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in
compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and
(3) The user has submitted the following information to the POTW Director within twentyfour
(24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a
written submission must be provided within five (5) days):
(A) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
(B) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not
corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and
(C) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of
the noncompliance.
(c) In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have
the burden of proof.
(d) Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an
enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
(e) Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance
with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility
until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment
facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
11.2 Bypass
(a) A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or
requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient
operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (b) and (c) of this
section.
(b)(1) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the
POTW Director, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible.
(2) A user shall submit oral notice to the POTW Director of an unanticipated bypass that
exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it
becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5)
days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall
contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including
exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW Director may waive the written report on a caseby-
case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours.
(c)(1) Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW Director may take an enforcement action against a
user for a bypass, unless
(A) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe
property damage;
(B) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary
treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal
periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate
Page 27 of 27
back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable
engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods
of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
(C) The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (b) of this section.
(2) The POTW Director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects,
if the POTW Director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph
(c)(1) of this section.
SECTION 12 - SEVERABILITY
If any provision, paragraph, word, section or article of this ordinance is invalidated by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections, and chapters shall not be affected and shall
continue in full force and effect.
SECTION 13- CONFLICT
All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this ordinance are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict.
SECTION 14 - EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect on the ______ day of ______, 2012.
INTRODUCED the ____ day of ____________, 2012.
PASSED this ___ day of _________, 2012.
AYES:
NAYS:
ABSENT:
NOT VOTING:
APPROVED this ___ day of __________, 2012.
_______________________________
MAYOR, Town of Williamston, N.C.
ATTEST: __________________ (Seal) Town Clerk
Published the ____ day of ____________, 2012.

