THE CODE OF THE CITY OF WASHINGTON, NORTH CAROLINA 
____________ 
Published in 2009 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
WASHINGTON, NORTH CAROLINA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Archie Jennings 
Mayor 
____________ 
Gil Davis 
Doug Mercer 
Ed Moultrie, Jr. 
William Pitt 
Bobby Roberson, Mayor Pro Tem 
City Council 
____________ 
James C. Smith 
City Manager 
____________ 
Franz Holscher 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Cynthia S. Bennett 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Washington, North Carolina. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1993 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1993 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been provided catchlines to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Daniel Walker, Code Attorney, and Karen Barrington, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Cynthia Bennett, City Clerk; former Mayor Judy Jennette and Council Members; and Carolyn Stroud, paralegal for the City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Washington, North Carolina. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Washington, North Carolina. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Washington, North Carolina. 2009. 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF WASHINGTON, NORTH CAROLINA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WASHINGTON, NORTH CAROLINA: 
    Section 1. With the exception of Section 2-97(i), the Code entitled "The Code of the City of Washington, North Carolina," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 40, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 10, 2009, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to review any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued pursuant thereto shall be punished as provided by North Carolina General Statute § 14-4. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense unless otherwise expressly provided. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section hereafter enacted, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies authorized law, including but not limited to abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after August 10, 2009 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective February 8, 2010. 
Passed and adopted by the City Council this 8th day of February, 2010. 
/s/   N. Archie Jennings, III   Mayor 
  N. Archie Jennings, III     ATTEST: 
/s/   Cynthia S. Bennett   City Clerk 
  Cynthia S. Bennett     Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the City Council, held on the 8th day of February, 2010. 
/s/   Cynthia S. Bennett   City Clerk 
  Cynthia S. Bennett     
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 10-4   5-10-2010 Included Supp. No. 2 10-5   6-14-2010 Included Supp. No. 2 10-6   7-26-2010 Included Supp. No. 2 10-7   8- 9-2010 Included Supp. No. 2 10-8   9-13-2010 Included Supp. No. 2 10-9  11- 8-2010 Included Supp. No. 2 10-10 12-13-2010 Included Supp. No. 2 11-1   2-14-2011 Included Supp. No. 3 11-2   2-14-2011 Included Supp. No. 3 11-3   2-14-2011 Included Supp. No. 3 11-4   3-14-2011 Included Supp. No. 3 11-5   3-14-2011 Included Supp. No. 3 11-6   5- 2-2011 Included Supp. No. 3 11-7   6-13-2011 Included Supp. No. 3 11-8   6-13-2011 Included Supp. No. 3 11-9   7-18-2011 Included Supp. No. 3 11-10  8- 8-2011 Included Supp. No. 3 11-11  8- 8-2011 Included Supp. No. 3 11-12 11-14-2011 Included Supp. No. 3 11-13 11-14-2011 Included Supp. No. 3 12-1   2-13-2012 Included Supp. No. 3 12-2   2-13-2012 Included Supp. No. 3 12-3   4- 9-2012 Included Supp. No. 4 12-4   8-13-2012 Included Supp. No. 4 12-5  10- 8-2012 Included Supp. No. 4 13-1   5-13-2013 Included Supp. No. 5 13-2   7- 1-2013 Included Supp. No. 5 13-3  10- 7-2013 Included Supp. No. 5 13-4  10- 7-2013 Included Supp. No. 5 13-5  10- 7-2013 Included Supp. No. 5 13-6  10-28-2013 Included Supp. No. 5 13-7  12- 9-2013 Included Supp. No. 5 14-1   4-14-2014 Included Supp. No. 6 14-2   4-14-2014 Included Supp. No. 6 14-3   5-12-2014 Included Supp. No. 6 14-4   6- 9-2014 Included Supp. No. 6 14-5   9- 8-2014 Included Supp. No. 6 14-6   9- 8-2014 Included Supp. No. 6 14-7  10- 6-2014 Included Supp. No. 6 14-8  11-24-2014 Included Supp. No. 6 15-1   3-23-2015 Included Supp. No. 7 15-2   4-13-2015 Included Supp. No. 7 15-3   5-11-2015 Included Supp. No. 7 15-4   5-11-2015 Included Supp. No. 7 15-5   5-11-2015 Included Supp. No. 7 15-6   7-13-2015 Included Supp. No. 7 15-7   8-10-2015 Included Supp. No. 7 15-8   8-10-2015 Included Supp. No. 7 15-9   9-28-2015 Included Supp. No. 7 15-10 11- 9-2015 Included Supp. No. 7 16-1  8- 8-2016 Included Supp. No. 8 17-1  3-13-2017 Included Supp. No. 9 17-2  3-13-2017 Included Supp. No. 9 17-3  6-26-2017 Included Supp. No. 9 17-4  8-14-2017 Included Supp. No. 9 17-5 12-11-2017 Included Supp. No. 9 18-1  2-12-2018 Included Supp. No. 9 18-2  5-14-2018 Included Supp. No. 10 18-3  5-14-2018 Included Supp. No. 10 18-4  6-11-2018 Included Supp. No. 10 18-5  6-11-2018 Included Supp. No. 10 18-6  7- 9-2018 Included Supp. No. 10 18-7  7- 9-2018 Included Supp. No. 10 18-8  8-13-2018 Included Supp. No. 10 18-12 12-10-2018 Included Supp. No. 10 18-13 12-10-2018 Included Supp. No. 10 19-1  1-14-2019 Included Supp. No. 10 19-2  1-14-2019 Included Supp. No. 10  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
THE CHARTER OF THE CITY OF WASHINGTON 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the city as ratified by the General Assembly on June 21, 1996. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same citation to state statutes as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, CORPORATE POWERS, AND BOUNDARIES 

Section 1.1. - Incorporation. 
    The City of Washington, North Carolina, in Beaufort County and the inhabitants thereof shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate, under the name of the City of Washington, hereinafter at times referred to as the "City." 
Section 1.2. - Powers. 
    The City shall have and may exercise all of the powers, duties, rights, privileges, and immunities conferred upon the City of Washington specifically by this Charter or upon municipal corporations by general law. The term "general law" is employed herein as defined in G.S. 160A-1. 
Section 1.3. - Corporate Boundaries. 
    The corporate boundaries shall be those existing at the time of ratification of this Charter, as set forth on the official map of the City and as they may be altered from time in accordance with law. An official map of the City, showing the current municipal boundaries, shall be maintained permanently in the office of the City Clerk and shall be available for public inspection. Upon alteration of the corporate limits pursuant to law, the appropriate changes to the official map shall be made and copies shall be filed in the office of the Secretary of State, the Beaufort County Register of Deeds, and the appropriate board of elections. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNING BODY 

Section 2.1. - City Governing Body; Composition. 
    The Mayor and the City Council shall be the governing body of the City. 
Section 2.2. - City Council; Composition; Terms of Office. 
    The Council shall be composed of five [(5)] members to be elected by all the qualified voters of the City for terms of two [(2)] years, or until their successors are elected and qualified. 
Section 2.3. - Mayor; Term of Office; Duties. 
    The Mayor shall be elected by all the qualified voters of the City for a term of two [(2)] years or until his or her successor is elected and qualified. The Mayor shall be the official head of the City government and preside at meetings of the Council, shall have the right to vote only when there is an equal division on any question or matter before the Council, and shall exercise the powers and duties conferred by law or as directed by the Council. 
Section 2.4. - Mayor Pro Tempore. 
    The Council shall elect one [(1)] of its members as Mayor Pro Tempore to perform the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor's absence or disability, in accordance with general law. The Mayor Pro Tempore shall serve in such capacity until the organizational meeting following the next regular municipal election, despite the contrary provisions of G.S. 160A-70. 
Section 2.5. - Meetings. 
    In accordance with general law, the Council shall establish a suitable time and place for its regular meetings. Special and emergency meetings may be held as provided by general law. 
Section 2.6. - Quorum; Voting Requirements. 
    Notwithstanding the contrary provisions of G.S. 160A-74, a majority of the members elected to the Council shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. Official actions of the Council and all votes shall be taken in accordance with the applicable provisions of general law, particularly G.S. 160A-75. 
Section 2.7. - Qualifications for Office; Compensation; Vacancies. 
    The qualifications and compensation of the Mayor and Council members shall be in accordance with general law. Vacancies shall be filled as provided in G.S. 160A-63. 
Section 2.8. - Prohibition on Holding Other City Positions. 
    Neither the Mayor nor any members of the Council shall hold any other office or position of trust, profit, or honor under the City government. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTIONS 

Section 3.1. - Regular Municipal Elections. 
    Regular municipal elections shall be held in each odd-numbered year in accordance with the uniform municipal election laws of North Carolina. Elections shall be conducted on a nonpartisan basis and the results determined using the nonpartisan plurality method as provided in G.S. 163-292. 
Section 3.2. - Election of Mayor. 
    A Mayor shall be elected in each regular municipal election. 
Section 3.3. - Election of Council Members. 
    Five council members shall be elected in each regular municipal election. 
Section 3.4. - Special Elections and Referenda. 
    Special elections and referenda may be held only as provided by general law or applicable local acts of the General Assembly. 
ARTICLE IV. - ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION 

Section 4.1. - Form of Government. 
    The City shall operate under the council-manager form of government, in accordance with Part 2 of Article 7 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes [G.S. ch. 106A, art. 7, pt. 2]. 
Section 4.2. - City Manager; Appointment; Powers and Duties. 
    The Council shall appoint a City Manager who shall be responsible for the administration of all departments of the City government. The City Manager shall have all the powers and duties conferred by general law, except as expressly limited by the provisions of this Charter, and the additional powers and duties conferred by the Council, so far as authorized by general law. 
Section 4.3. - Manager's Personnel Authority; Role of Elected Officials. 
    As chief administrator, the City Manager shall have the power to appoint, suspend, and remove all officers, department heads, and employees in the administrative service of the City, with the exception of the City Attorney and the City Clerk, and any other official whose appointment or removal is specifically vested in the Council by this Charter or by general law. Neither the Council nor any of its members shall take part in the appointment or removal of department heads and employees in the administrative service of the City, except as provided by this Charter. Except for the purpose of inquiry, or for consultation with the City Attorney, the Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager, Acting Manager, or Interim Manager, and neither the Council nor any of its members shall give any specific orders to any subordinates of the City Manager, Acting Manager, or Interim Manager, either publicly or privately. 
Section 4.4. - City Attorney. 
    The City Council shall appoint a City Attorney licensed to practice law in North Carolina. It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to represent the City, advise City officials, and perform other duties required by law or as the Council may direct. 
Section 4.5. - City Clerk. 
    The City Council shall appoint a City Clerk to keep a journal of the proceedings of the Council, to maintain official records and documents, to give notice of meetings, and to perform such other duties required by law or as the Council may direct. 
Section 4.6. - Finance Director. 
    The City Manager shall appoint a Finance Director to perform the duties designated in G.S. 159-25 and such other duties as may be prescribed by law or assigned by the Manager. 
Section 4.7. - Other Administrative Officers and Employees. 
    The Council may authorize other positions to be filled by appointment by the City Manager, and may organize the City government as deemed appropriate, subject to the requirements of general law. 
ARTICLE V. - STREET IMPROVEMENTS 

Section 5.1. - Assessments for Street Improvements; Petition Unnecessary. 
    In addition to any authority granted by general law, the Council may, without the necessity of a petition, order street improvements and assess the costs thereof against abutting property, exclusive of the costs incurred at street intersections, according to one [(1)] or more of the assessment bases set forth in Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes [G.S. ch. 160A, art. 10], upon the following findings of fact: 
(1)  The street improvement project does not exceed twelve hundred (1,200) linear feet; and 
(2)  a.  The street or part thereof is unsafe for vehicular traffic or creates a safety or health hazard, and it is in the public interest to make such improvement; or 
b.  It is in the public interest to connect two [(2)] streets, or portions of a street already improved; or 
c.  It is in the public interest to widen a street, or part thereof, which is already improved; provided, that assessments for widening any street or portion of a street without a petition shall be limited to the cost of widening and otherwise improving such street in accordance with street classification and improvement standards established by the City's thoroughfare or major street plan for the particular street or part thereof. 
Section 5.2. - Street Improvement Defined. 
    For the purposes of this Article, the term "street improvement" shall include grading, regrading, surfacing, resurfacing, widening, paving, repaving, and the construction or reconstruction of curbs, gutters, and street drainage facilities. 
Section 5.3. - Procedure; Effect of Assessment. 
    In ordering street improvements without a petition and assessing the costs thereof under authority of this Article, the Council shall comply with the procedures provided by Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes, except those provisions relating to petitions of property owners and the sufficiency thereof. The effect of the act of levying assessments under authority of this Article shall be the same as if the assessments were levied under authority of Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes. 
ARTICLE VI. - SIDEWALKS 

Section 6.1. - Property Owner's Responsibility. 
    It shall be the duty of every property owner in the City to keep clean and free of debris, trash, and other obstacles or impediments the sidewalks abutting his or her property. 
Section 6.2. - City Cleaning or Repair; Costs Become Lien. 
    The City Council may by ordinance establish a procedure whereby City forces may remove from any sidewalk any debris, trash, ice, or snow upon failure of the abutting property owner after [ten] (10) days' notice to do so. In such event, the cost of such removal shall become a lien upon the abutting property equal to the lien for ad valorem taxes and may thereafter be collected either by suit in the name of the City or by foreclosure of the lien in the same manner and subject to the same rules, regulations, costs, and penalties as provided by law for the foreclosure of the lien on real estate for ad valorem taxes. 
ARTICLE VII. - REMOVAL OF MOTOR VEHICLES 

Section 7.1. - Liens for Removal of Motor Vehicles. 
    The Council may establish charges to be made for the cost of removing abandoned motor vehicles from private property. When the City causes the removal of any such vehicle from private property pursuant to an ordinance permitting such removal, and the owner or other person having control of said property fails to pay the cost of the removal within thirty (30) days after it becomes due, the amount of the cost of removal of the vehicle shall become a lien against the real property from which the vehicle was removed; said cost shall be placed upon the City's tax books against the property and may be collected and foreclosed in the same manner as taxes are collected and foreclosed, or by suit, as the City may determine. 
ARTICLE VIII. - EXTRATERRITORIAL POWERS 

Section 8.1. - Extraterritorial Jurisdiction. 
    The City shall have and may exercise all of the powers granted by Article 19 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes within an extraterritorial area which it shall define. The extraterritorial area may extend up to one and one-half [(1 1/2)] mile outside the corporate limits, or the distance authorized by G.S. 160A-360, whichever is greater. 
ARTICLE IX. - RIVER REGULATION 

Section 9.1. - No-Wake Zone During Special Events. 
    The no-wake speed zone established in the Pamlico River by Section 2 of Chapter 434 of the 1993 Session Laws does not apply during special events as designated by ordinance adopted by the Council or order issued by the City Manager. Any ordinance or order issued pursuant to this section shall designate the duration of the exemption and the territorial area to which the exemption applies. Any order issued by the City Manager pursuant to this section shall be recorded in the City's ordinance book. 
ARTICLE X. - PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS 

Section 10.1. - Conflicts of Interest. 
    No officer, department head, employee, or board or commission member shall make or participate in the making of any contract with the City in which he or she may be in any manner financially interested, directly or indirectly. Any such person who has such an interest in any proposed contract shall make known that interest and shall refrain from participation in the making of any such contract. The willful concealment of such a financial interest or the willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office or position, and any violator shall forfeit his office or position. Violation of this section with the knowledge express or implied of the person, firm, or corporation contracting with the City shall render the contract void. 
Section 10.2. - Disposal of Surplus Personal Property. 
    The City may dispose of personal property valued at two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or less for any one [(1)] item or group of items using the procedures authorized in G.S. 160A-266(c). 
ARTICLE XI. - CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY 

Section 11.1. - Settlement of Claims by City Manager. 
    The City Manager may settle claims against the City for: (i) personal injuries or damages to property, when the amount involved does not exceed the amount of the applicable insurance deductible and does not exceed the actual loss sustained, including loss of time, medical expenses, and any other expenses actually incurred; and (ii) the taking of small portions of private property which are needed for the rounding of corners at street intersections, when the amount involved in any such settlement does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and does not exceed the actual loss sustained. Settlement of a claim by the City Manager pursuant to this section shall constitute a complete release of the City from any and all damages sustained by the person involved in such settlement in any manner arising out of the accident, occasion, or taking complained of. All such releases shall be approved by the City Attorney. 
ARTICLE XII. - FINANCE AND TAXATION 

Section 12.1. - Occupancy Tax Authorized. 
    The City shall be authorized to levy a room occupancy and tourism development tax as specified by Chapter 158, Session Laws of 1991, and any subsequent acts. Sections 2(a) and 2(b) of Chapter 158, Session Laws of 1991, are hereby repealed, and appointments and terms of the City of Washington Tourism Development Authority shall be as specified in Sections 12.2 and 12.3 of this Charter. 
Section 12.2. - Tourism Development Authority. 
    When the Council adopts an ordinance levying a room occupancy tax as authorized by Chapter 158, Session Laws of 1991, it shall also adopt an ordinance creating the City of Washington Tourism Development Authority, which shall be a public authority under the Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act. The ordinance shall provide that the Authority shall be composed of seven [(7)] members to be appointed by the Council. One [(1)] member shall be a Council member, and the remaining six [(6)] members shall be persons with a keen interest in tourism in the City of Washington. All members of the Authority shall serve without compensation. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments, and members appointed to fill vacancies shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. The Authority shall elect its Chair from among the members and create and fill other offices as it wishes. The term of the Chair shall be one [(1)] year with eligibility for reelection, but no member may serve as Chair for more than two [(2)] one-year terms in succession. The Authority shall meet at the call of the Chair or of any three [(3)] members and shall adopt rules of procedure to govern its meetings. The Finance Director for the City of Washington shall be the ex officio finance officer of the Authority. 
Section 12.3. - Terms of Authority Members. 
    Members of the Authority shall serve three-year staggered terms. Those members serving on the date of ratification of this Charter shall complete the remainder of their terms and their positions shall be filled as the terms expire. 
ARTICLE XIII. - FIREMAN'S SUPPLEMENTAL RETIREMENT FUND 

Section 13.1. - Fireman's Supplemental Retirement Fund. 
    The Washington Fireman's Supplemental Retirement Fund shall continue as authorized by Chapter 418, Session Laws of 1975, and any subsequent acts. Terms and appointments of trustees shall be in accordance with G.S. 58-84-30. The Secretary of the Board of Trustees of the Supplemental Retirement Fund shall notify the City Clerk of the election or appointment of representatives to the Board of Trustees. 
ARTICLE XIV. - MINIMUM HOUSING/ABANDONED BUILDINGS 

Section 14.1. - Buildings Vacated and Closed for One [(1)] Year. 
    The City may exercise the authority contained in G.S. 160A-443(5a). 
    Ratified the 21st day of June, 1996. 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Incorporation, corporate boundaries, and powers, art. I. 

Sec. 1-1. - Code designation and citation. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of the City of Washington, North Carolina," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Washington City Code." 
(Code 1972, § 1-1; Code 1993, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Code of ordinances, G.S. 160A-77; pleading and proving city ordinances, G.S. 160A-79. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    And, or. The term "and" may be read as the term "or," and the term "or" as the term "and," where the sense requires it. 
    City. The term "the city" means the City of Washington, in the County of Beaufort and the State of North Carolina. 
    City Council or Council. The term "City Council" or "Council" means the governing body of the City of Washington, North Carolina. 
Charter reference- Governing body, art. II. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Code of the City of Washington, North Carolina, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day is Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
    County. The term "county" means the County of Beaufort in the State of North Carolina. 
    Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    NCAC, NC Admin. Code. The statute abbreviations "NCAC" and "NC Admin. Code" signify the North Carolina Administrative Code. 
    N.C.G.S., G.S., N.C. Gen. Stat. The statute abbreviations "N.C.G.S.," "G.S.," and "N.C. Gen. Stat." signify the North Carolina General Statutes. 
    Number. Terms used in the singular include the plural and the plural includes the singular number. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in like cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Officers, departments, Boards, etc. Whenever reference is made to any officer, department, Board, commission or other agent, agency or representative, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the term "of the City of Washington, North Carolina." 
    Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, those hours shall mean standard time or daylight saving time, as may be in current use in this city. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to any property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such property. 
    Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Shall; may. The term "shall" is mandatory, and the term "may" is permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street, between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "state" shall be construed to mean the State of North Carolina. 
    Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the city and means the entire width of the right-of-way between abutting property lines. 
    Tenant; occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Writing. The terms "writing" and "written" include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1972, § 1-2; Code 1993, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Time, G.S. 1-593 and 1A-1; rule 6; rules for construction of statutes, G.S. 12-3; definition ["street" defined], G.S. 20-4.01. 
Sec. 1-3. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances adopted prior to the adoption of this Code and included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1972, § 1-3; Code 1993, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines, history notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part thereof, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes following sections and the references and notes throughout the Code are informational only, with no legal effect on the substantive provisions, and are merely for the benefit of the user of this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 1-4; Code 1993, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted by the City Council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1972, § 1-5; Code 1993, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
    Except where expressly provided otherwise: 
(a)  Wherever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city or in any rule, regulation, order or notice of any officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in him or it, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor; or 
(b)  Wherever in such Code, ordinance, rule, regulation, order or notice the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefor; 
the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance, rule, regulation, order or notice shall be punished as provided in G.S. 14-4 for each separate violation. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance, rule, regulation, order or notice shall continue shall constitute a separate offense, except as may otherwise be specifically provided. 
(Code 1972, § 1-6; Code 1993, § 1-6; Ord. No. 00-1, 2-14-2000) 
State Law reference- Judgment confessed; bond given to secure fine and costs, G.S. 6-47 et seq.; enforcement of ordinances, G.S. 160A-175. 
Sec. 1-7. - Fees. 
    Except where otherwise stated, the Council shall set all fees annually in conjunction with the adoption of the City budget by reducing said fees to a schedule to be adopted as part of and included in the City budget. Said schedule thereof shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. Any reference in this Code to a fee or other monetary term where the amount is not given shall refer to an amount set from time to time by the Council, pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1993, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - Certain ordinances not affected by and may be omitted from Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(a)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(b)  Any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this Code; 
(c)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(d)  Any annual tax levy; 
(e)  Any right or franchise conferred by ordinance or resolution of the city; 
(f)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated; 
(g)  Any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; 
(h)  Any ordinance relating to the salaries of the city officers or employees; 
(i)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city; 
(j)  Any ordinance naming, renaming, opening, accepting or vacating streets or alleys in the city; 
(k)  Any ordinance amending any Official Zoning Map. 
All such ordinances may be omitted from this Code and, if omitted from this Code, are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this section. 
(Code 1972, § 3; Code 1993, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-9. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend or in any other way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated herein, so reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _______ of the Code of the City of Washington, North Carolina, is hereby amended to read as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of the City of Washington, North Carolina, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _______, which reads as follows: ...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  Provisions to be repealed may be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number in the following language: "That (section, chapter or article) _______ of the Code of the City of Washington, North Carolina, is hereby repealed." 
(Code 1993, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the Council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive parts of permanent and general ordinances passed by the Council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be or to "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1993, § 1-10) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Incorporation, corporate boundaries, and powers, art. I; governing body, art. II; elections, art. III; organization and administration, art. IV; purchasing and contracts, art. X; claims against the city, art. XI. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; Chief of Fire-Rescue-EMS-Inspections, § 6-3; housing, § 6-109; cemeteries, ch. 8; supervision of cemeteries, § 8-1; electric utility, ch. 10; Fire-Rescue-EMS Services, fire prevention, ch. 14; Chief of Fire Department, § 14-2; parks and recreation, ch. 22; Department of Parks and Recreation; Director of Parks and Recreation, § 22-2; Recreation Advisory Committee, § 22-33 et seq.; personnel, ch. 24; police, ch. 26; Chief of Police, § 26-3; solid waste, ch. 28; streets and sidewalks, ch. 32; water and wastewater, ch. 38. 
State Law reference- Local development, G.S. ch. 158; local government finance, G.S. ch. 159; cities and towns, G.S. 160A; elections and election laws, G.S. 163; The budget ordinance; form, adoption, limitations, tax levy, filing [budget must be adopted by July 1], G.S. 159-13(a); power to impose taxes, G.S. 160A-206; remedies for collecting taxes, G.S. 160A-207; property taxes, G.S. 160A-209; state and local taxation, N.C. Const. art. V, § 2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Plan of government. 
    The government, management and control of the city shall be as prescribed in the following sections and shall be in basic conformity with the form of government set forth in G.S. 160A-147-160A-152, and as authorized by the Charter. 
(Code 1972, § 2-1; Code 1993, § 2-1) 
Charter reference- Governing body, art. II. 
Secs. 2-2-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Mayor and Council, G.S. 160A-66 et seq.; organization and procedures of Council, G.S. 160A-68 et seq.; Council to organize city government, G.S. 160A-146; general powers of Mayor and Council, G.S. 160A-67. 

Sec. 2-21. - Governing body. 
    The government of the city and the general management and control of all its affairs shall be vested in a City Council. 
(Code 1972, § 2-2; Code 1993, § 2-21) 
State Law reference- General powers of Mayor and Council, G.S. 160A-67; council to organize city government, G.S. 160A-146. 
Sec. 2-22. - Members. 
(a)  Composition. The City Council shall consist of five (5) members. 
(b)  Election. The members of the City Council shall be elected at large by and from the qualified voters of the city. Such members shall be elected for a term of two (2) years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(c)  Resignation. Resignation of any members of the City Council shall be in writing, and such resignation shall be on the table until the next regular meeting unless considered by unanimous consent. 
(Code 1972, § 2-3; Code 1993, § 2-22) 
Charter reference- City Council, composition, terms of office, § 2.2. 
Sec. 2-23. - Salary of members. 
    Councilmembers may fix their own compensation by adoption of the annual budget ordinance. Councilmembers are entitled to reimbursement for actual expenses incurred in the course of performing their official duties at rates not in excess of those allowed to other city officers and employees, or to a fixed allowance, the amount of which shall be established by the Council, for travel and other personal expenses of office; provided any fixed allowance so established during a term of office shall not be increased during such term of office. 
(Code 1972, § 2-4; Code 1993, § 2-23; Ord. No. 98-10, 6-22-1998) 
Charter reference- Qualifications for office; compensation; vacancies, § 2.7. 
Cross reference- Mayor, § 2-67 et seq. 
Sec. 2-24. - Filling of vacancies. 
    Vacancies in the City Council shall be filled by the Council for the remainder of the unexpired terms by a majority vote. 
(Code 1972, § 2-5; Code 1993, § 2-24) 
Sec. 2-25. - Powers and duties-City legislative powers vested; exceptions. 
    All the legislative powers of the city shall be vested in the City Council, except the City Manager shall have the authority hereinafter specified. 
(Code 1972, § 2-6; Code 1993, § 2-25) 
Charter reference- Powers, § 1.2. 
Sec. 2-26. - Powers and duties-Management of city property. 
    The City Council is legally authorized and empowered to operate and conduct all departments and manage all properties of the city, including water and sewage systems, power plants, power transmission lines and any and all other utilities owned, leased or used by the city, whether in or outside the city. The powers herein specified are general powers, but the day-to-day operation, custody and control shall be within the jurisdiction of the City Manager. 
(Code 1972, § 2-7; Code 1993, § 2-26) 
Cross reference- Cemeteries, ch. 8; electric utility, ch. 10; water and wastewater, ch. 38. 
Sec. 2-27. - Powers and duties-Elections of city officials. 
    The City Council shall have power to elect the city officials specified in this Code. All such elections by the City Council shall be by ballot, if required by any member, and a majority of the votes of all the members present shall be sufficient for an election or appointment. 
(Code 1972, § 2-8; Code 1993, § 2-27) 
Sec. 2-28. - Meetings-Organizational. 
    The City Council shall meet and take office on the second Monday in December next succeeding their election. The members of the City Council whose terms of office then begin shall severally make oath to perform faithfully the duties of their respective offices. The organization of the City Council shall take place as aforesaid, notwithstanding the absence, death or refusal to serve or nonelection of one (1) or more of the members; provided that at least three (3) of the persons entitled to be members of the City Council are present and make oath. Any member entitled to make such oath, who was not present at the time fixed therefor, may make oath at any time thereafter. 
(Code 1972, § 2-9; Code 1993, § 2-28) 
State Law reference- Organizational meeting of Council, G.S. 160A-68. 
Sec. 2-29. - Meetings-Regular. 
    The regular meeting place of the Mayor and City Council shall be in the Council chambers on the second Monday of each month at a time established by Council during Council's organizational meeting. The date of any regularly scheduled meeting may be changed only by an affirmative vote equal to or greater than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of all the actual membership of the Council, excluding vacant seats, and not including the Mayor. 
(Code 1972, § 2-10; Code 1993, § 2-29; Ord. No. 87-3, § 1, 1-12-1987; Ord. No. 10-3, § 1, 2-8-2010) 
Charter reference- Meetings [of Council], § 2.5. 
Sec. 2-30. - Meetings-To be public. 
    All meetings of the City Council shall be open to the public. 
(Code 1972, § 2-11; Code 1993, § 2-30) 
Sec. 2-31. - Meetings-Special. 
    The Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem or any two members of the City Council may at any time call a special council meeting by signing a written notice stating the time and place of the meeting as well as the subjects to be considered. Said written notice shall be delivered in hand to each member or left at each member's usual dwelling place at least forty-eight (48) hours before the time of such special meeting called in this manner. Only the items of business specified in said notice may be transacted at a special meeting called in this manner. In addition to the procedures set forth herein, a person or persons calling a special meeting in this manner shall cause the notice requirements of G.S. 143.318.9 et seq. to be complied with. 
(Code 1972, § 2-12; Code 1993, § 2-31) 
Charter reference- Meetings of Council, § 2.5. 
Sec. 2-32. - Meetings-Adjourned. 
    If a quorum shall fail to attend any regular or special meeting of the City Council or if for any reason such meeting shall fail to complete transaction of the business before the meeting, such meeting may be adjourned to any date prior to the next regular meeting agreed upon by a majority of the members present. 
(Code 1972, § 2-13; Code 1993, § 2-32) 
Charter reference- Quorum, voting requirements, § 2.6. 
Sec. 2-33. - Order of business. 
    Items shall be placed on the City Council Agenda according to the order of business, which order shall be established at the organizational meeting of Council and shall include but not be limited to the following: 
Opening of meeting 
Pledge of Allegiance 
Invocation 
Roll call 
Approval of minutes 
Approval/amendments to agenda 
Consent agenda 
Comments from the public 
Public hearings on zoning 
Public hearings on other 
Scheduled public appearances 
Correspondence and special reports from members of City Council 
Reports from Boards, Commissions and Committees 
Appointments 
Old business 
New business 
Any other business from the City Manager 
Any other business from the Mayor or other members of City Council 
Adjournment 
(Code 1972, § 2-14; Code 1993, § 2-33; Ord. No. 96-2(a), 3-13-1996; Ord. No. 00-2, 2-14-2000; Ord. No. 10-2, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. No. 18-3, § 1, 5-14-2018) 
Sec. 2-34. - Quorum and method of voting. 
(a)  A majority of the members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(b)  Any Presiding Officer, other than the Mayor, shall have the same power as other members of the Council to vote upon all measures coming before it, but shall have no power of veto. 
(Code 1972, § 2-15; Code 1993, § 2-34) 
Charter reference- Quorum, voting requirements, § 2.6. 
State Law reference- Mayor to preside over Council, G.S. 160A-69. 
Sec. 2-35. - Consideration of motions. 
(a)  When a question is under consideration, no motion shall be received except as follows: 
(1)  To lay on the table. 
(2)  To postpone to a time certain. 
(3)  To postpone indefinitely. 
(4)  To refer to a committee. 
(5)  To amend. 
(6)  To divide. 
(b)  Motions for any of these purposes shall have precedence in the order named; except, a motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be decided by the Presiding Officer without debate. 
(Code 1972, § 2-16; Code 1993, § 2-35) 
Sec. 2-36. - Rules of procedure for City Council. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Code, the parliamentary procedural rules governing the meeting of the City Council shall be the Suggested Rules of Procedure for a City Council, 2000 edition, by A. Fleming Bell, II, published by the Institute of Government, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, excluding Rule No. 6, Order of Business, page 12, and modifying Rule No. 11, Second not Required, page 16 to state, "All motions shall require a second." 
(Code 1972, § 2-17; Code 1993, § 2-36; Ord. No. 96-2(b), 3-11-1996; Ord. No. 02-4, 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 2-37. - Presiding Officer. 
(a)  The Mayor, when present, shall preside at all meetings of the City Council. In case of the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall preside when present. In the absence of both the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem, a chairman pro tempore shall be chosen. 
(b)  The Presiding Officer shall preserve order and decorum and shall decide all questions of order. Decisions on questions of order may be appealed to the full City Council. 
(Code 1972, § 2-18; Code 1993, § 2-37) 
Sec. 2-38. - City Clerk. 
    The City Clerk shall be ex officio clerk of the City Council and shall keep records of its proceedings. In cases of his temporary absence or in case of vacancy in the office of the City Clerk, the City Council may elect by ballot a temporary clerk who shall be sworn to the faithful discharge of his or her duties and may act as clerk of the City Council until a City Clerk is chosen and qualified. 
(Code 1972, § 2-19; Code 1993, § 2-38) 
Sec. 2-39. - Appeals. 
(a)  Rights. In any case where a person shall be aggrieved by the action of the City Manager, the City Tax Collector or other officer or agent of the city, by denying, revoking or suspending any license or permit herein provided for in this Code or by denying any person a refund of any tax, fee or other charge imposed in this Code, shall have a right of appeal to the City Council for a review of the action taken by such representative of the city in all cases not otherwise provided for. This right of appeal to the City Council shall not apply to any appeal pertaining to chapter 30. 
(b)  Basis for filing. A written appeal shall be filed with the City Council within fourteen (14) days after final action has been taken on the matter by the city official whose action is subject of the appeal. A formal notice of denial, revocation, suspension or refusal of refund, as the case may be, mailed to the last known address for such aggrieved person, shall constitute a final action giving a right of appeal. A failure or refusal to issue a formal written notice shall constitute a final action as soon as such fact is known, or with the exercise of due diligence should have been known, to such aggrieved person. 
(c)  Hearing. The City Council may prescribe such rules as it deems necessary for the conduct of hearing. All hearings shall be conducted only after due notice has been given to the parties, which shall permit adequate time to prepare for the hearing, permit the parties to be present and present evidence on their own behalf, and to be represented by counsel of their own choosing. 
(Code 1972, § 2-20; Code 1993, § 2-39) 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, ch. 16. 
Secs. 2-40-2-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MAYOR; MAYOR PRO TEM 

Sec. 2-67. - Mayor. 
(a)  Compensation. The compensation of the Mayor shall be fixed by adoption of the annual budget ordinance. The Mayor is entitled to reimbursement for actual expenses incurred in the course of performing his official duties at rates not in excess of those allowed to other city officers and employees, or to a fixed allowance, the amount of which shall be established by the Council, for travel and other personal expenses of office; provided any fixed allowance so established during a term of office shall not be increased during such term of office. 
(b)  Duties. It shall be the duty of the Mayor to: 
(1)  Act as official head of the city. 
(2)  Keep himself informed as to all matters affecting the government of the city. 
(3)  Preside over the meetings of the City Council. 
(4)  Vote only in case of a tie. 
(5)  Make such recommendations as he deems necessary or expedient to the Council. 
(c)  Vacancy. In case of a vacancy in the office of Mayor, the remaining members of the Council shall choose, from among their own number, his successor for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1972, §§ 2-22-2-24; Code 1993, § 2-56; Ord. No. 98-10, 6-22-1998; Ord. No. 00-21, 12-11-2000) 
Charter reference- Mayor, § 2.3. 
Cross reference- Duties, §§ 2-25-2-27, salary, § 2-23, terms of office, § 2-22. 
State Law reference- Compensation of Mayor and Council, G.S. 160A-64; general powers of Mayor and Council, G.S. 160A-67; Mayor to preside over Council, G.S. 160A-69. 
Sec. 2-68. - Mayor Pro Tem. 
(a)  Elected. A Mayor Pro Tem shall be elected by the City Council from among its own members at the organizational meeting next succeeding City Council election, and he shall hold office during the pleasure of the City Council and until the expiration of the term for which he was elected to the Council. 
(b)  Duties. In the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall preside and shall perform the duties of Mayor. 
(c)  Vacancy. In case of a vacancy in the office of Mayor Pro Tem, the remaining members of the Council shall choose from among their own number his successor for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1972, §§ 2-25-2-27; Code 1993, § 2-57) 
Charter reference- Mayor Pro Tempore, § 2.4. 
State Law reference- Mayor Pro Tempore, disability of Mayor, G.S. 160A-70. 
Secs. 2-69-2-94. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY MANAGER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Organization and administration, art. IV. 
Cross reference- Residency requirements, § 24-21 et seq. 
State Law reference- City Manager, G.S. 160A-147 et seq. 

Sec. 2-95. - Appointment, qualifications and term. 
    The City Council shall appoint a City Manager who shall be the administrative head of the city government and who shall be responsible for the administration of all departments except those hereinafter specified. He shall be appointed with regard to merit only and he need not be a resident of the city when appointed. He shall hold office during the pleasure of the City Council. 
(Code 1972, § 2-28; Code 1993, § 2-76) 
Sec. 2-96. - Salary. 
    The City Manager shall receive such compensation as the City Council shall fix by motion. 
(Code 1972, § 2-29; Code 1993, § 2-77) 
Sec. 2-97. - Powers and duties. 
    The City Manager shall: 
(a)  Be the administrative head of the city government. 
(b)  See that, within the city, the laws of the state and the ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the Council are faithfully executed. 
(c)  Attend all meetings of the Council and recommend for adoption such measures as he shall deem expedient. 
(d)  Make reports to the Council from time to time upon the affairs of the city and keep the Council fully advised of the city's financial condition and its future financial needs. 
(e)  Appoint and remove all heads of departments, Superintendents and other employees which the City Council shall determine are necessary for the proper administration of the city; except the City Manager shall not have the authority to appoint the City Treasurer, City Clerk, City Tax Collector and City Attorney. 
(f)  The City Manager shall report every appointment and removal of department and division heads by him to the City Council at the next meeting thereof following any such appointment or removal. 
(g)  Prescribe the duties of the officers and employees of the city subject to general regulations of the City Council. 
(h)  Implement and administer the fees and charges established by Council in accordance with section 1-7. 
(i)  Set or delegate the authority to set fees and charges other than those set by Council, for services rendered, up to $2,500.00. 
(Code 1972, § 2-30; Code 1993, § 2-78; Ord. No. 97-17, 10-13-1997) 
Cross reference- Residency requirements, § 24-21 et seq. 
Secs. 2-98-2-122. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CITY CLERK[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- City Clerk, § 4.5. 
State Law reference- City Clerk, G.S. 160A-171. 

Sec. 2-123. - Appointment. 
    The City Clerk shall be appointed by the City Council. 
(Code 1972, § 2-31; Code 1993, § 2-96) 
Sec. 2-124. - Powers and duties. 
    The City Clerk shall: 
(a)  Be ex officio clerk of the City Council. He shall attend all meetings of the City Council. 
(b)  Keep an accurate and complete record of all the proceedings of the City Council and file them in a well bound book. 
(c)  Keep the original of all ordinances in a book especially provided for that purpose by the Council. 
(d)  Sell all property, real or personal, to satisfy any tax lien, penalties or forfeitures as provided under the state law. 
(e)  Deliver to purchasers of cemetery plots a certificate of interment to the lot or square after the full purchase price has been paid. 
(f)  Perform such other and further duties as may be assigned by the City Council or City Manager. 
(Code 1972, § 2-32; Code 1993, § 2-97) 
Cross reference- Housing, § 6-109 et seq.; cemeteries, ch. 8. 
Sec. 2-125. - Assistant City Clerk. 
    An Assistant City Clerk shall be appointed at the discretion of the City Council. 
(Code 1972, § 2-32.1; Code 1993, § 2-98) 
State Law reference- Deputy Clerk, G.S. 160A-172. 
Secs. 2-126-2-148. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE DIRECTOR[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, ch. 16. 
State Law reference- Finance officer, G.S. 159-24; duties of finance officer; dual signatures on checks; internal control procedures subject to commission regulation, G.S. 159-25. 

Sec. 2-149. - Appointment. 
    The Finance Director shall be appointed by the City Manager. 
(Code 1972, § 2-33; Code 1993, § 2-116) 
Sec. 2-150. - Duties. 
    The Finance Director shall perform the duties designated in G.S. 159-25 and such other duties as may be prescribed by law or assigned by the City Manager. 
(Code 1972, § 2-34; Code 1993, § 2-117) 
Secs. 2-151-2-168. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CITY TAX COLLECTOR[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 4; licenses and business regulations, ch. 16. 

Sec. 2-169. - Appointment. 
    The City Tax Collector shall be appointed at the discretion of the City Council. 
(Code 1972, § 2-35; Code 1993, § 2-136) 
Sec. 2-170. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the City Tax Collector to: 
(a)  Collect all real and personal property taxes. 
(b)  Collect all privilege licenses, all dog taxes and all other taxes and licenses lawfully due the city. 
(c)  Collect and deposit all other revenues due the city. 
(d)  Maintain official cemetery records of the city. 
(e)  Maintain official assessment rolls of the city. 
(f)  Perform such other and further duties as shall be assigned him. 
(Code 1972, § 2-36; Code 1993, § 2-137) 
Secs. 2-171-2-193. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CITY ATTORNEY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference- City Attorney, § 4.4. 
State Law reference- City Attorney, appointment, duties, G.S. 160A-173. 

Sec. 2-194. - Appointment. 
    The City Attorney shall be appointed by the City Council. 
(Code 1972, § 2-37; Code 1993, § 2-156) 
Sec. 2-195. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to: 
(a)  Prosecute suits for and defend suits against the city. 
(b)  Advise the Mayor and the City Council and the other officers and department heads of the city in regard to matters related to the city's business. 
(c)  Attend all meetings of the City Council. 
(d)  Draw such deeds, contracts, bonds and other legal papers as may be required. 
(e)  Draft all proposed ordinances granting franchises, and in the event he shall not approve any such proposed ordinances, he shall file with the City Council his objections in writing. 
(f)  Inspect and pass upon all papers, contracts and other instruments in which the city may be interested. 
(g)  Be the legal advisor of the Mayor, the City Council, the City Manager, and any committee thereof, and all other officers or employees with respect to any legal question involving an official duty or any other matters pertaining to the affairs of the city. 
(h)  Perform such other duties as the City Council may direct. 
(Code 1972, § 2-38; Code 1993, § 2-157) 
Secs. 2-196-2-213. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PLANNING BOARD[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Subdivisions, ch. 34; zoning, ch. 40. 
State Law reference- Planning and regulation of development, G.S. 160A-360 et seq. 

Sec. 2-214. - Created. 
    A City Planning Board is hereby created under the authority of G.S. 160A-361. 
(Code 1972, § 2-39; Code 1993, § 2-176) 
Sec. 2-215. - Members. 
(a)  Composition; appointment. The Planning Board shall consist of five (5) regular members and two (2) county members. Five (5) of the regular city members shall reside within the corporate limits at the time of their appointment. These five (5) members shall be appointed by the City Council. Two (2) of the regular county members shall reside outside the city limits, but within the territorial jurisdiction of the city at the time of their appointment. The members who live inside the territorial jurisdiction of the city shall be appointed by the Board of County Commissioners. 
(b)  Qualifications. All members shall be appointed for three (3) year terms in accordance with the provisions of section 2-531(a), have recognized experience and qualifications, and shall hold no other official position on another appointed Board or commission by the city. 
(c)  Territorial representatives. The territorial representatives have equal rights, privileges, and duties with the city members, and are required to vote on each question regardless of whether the matters at issue arise within the city or within the territorial area. 
(d)  Compensation. All appointed members of the Planning Board shall serve without compensation. City member vacancies occurring through the expiration of a term and unexpired terms shall be filled by the City Council. County member vacancies occurring through the expiration of a term and unexpired terms shall be filled by the county commissioners or in compliance with enabling legislation established under article 19 of the North Carolina General Statutes (G.S. 160A-361). 
(e)  Unexcused absences. Unexcused absences are subject to the provisions of section 2-531(b). 
(f)  Term. Planning Board members shall serve overlapping terms of three (3) years. 
(Code 1972, § 2-40; Code 1993, § 2-177; Ord. No. 04-02, §§ 1, 2, 2-9-2004) 
Cross reference- Removal of members, § 2-531(b). 
State Law reference- Extraterritorial representation, G.S. 160A-362. 
Sec. 2-216. - Organization and rules of procedure. 
    Within thirty (30) days after appointment, the Planning Board shall elect its chairman from the appointed members and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of the chairman shall be one (1) year with eligibility for reelection. The Planning Board shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting in each month which shall be open to the public. It shall adopt rules for transaction of business in accordance with section 2-532 and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(Code 1972, § 2-41; Code 1993, § 2-178) 
State Law reference- Meetings of public bodies, G.S. 143-318.9 et seq. 
Sec. 2-217. - Staff and finances. 
    The Planning Board may appoint such employees as it may deem necessary for its work. The Planning Board may also contract with city planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the Planning Board, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for that purpose by the City Council; and no indebtedness for which the city shall be liable shall be contracted by the Planning Board unless an appropriation is made by the City Council for such purpose and authorized by G.S. 160A-363, and then only to the extent of the appropriation. The Planning Board shall have the right to accept gifts and donations for the exercise of its functions and for giving publicity to its work and may expend the money received from such donations and gifts as in its judgment may appear best. 
(Code 1972, § 2-42; Code 1993, § 2-179) 
Sec. 2-218. - Boundary of extraterritorial area. 
    The area for extraterritorial zoning and planning by the city shall be in accordance with a map kept in the office of the director of planning and zoning. 
(Code 1993, § 2-180; Ord. No. 88-7, § 1, 4-11-1988) 
Sec. 2-219. - Master plan-Authority of Planning Board; contents. 
    It shall be the function and duty of the Planning Board to make recommendations to City Council to a master plan for the physical development of the city. Such plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive matter, shall show the Planning Board's recommendations for the development of such territory including, among other things, the general location, character and extent of streets, viaducts, bridges, waterways, water fronts, boulevards, parkways, playgrounds, squares, parks, aviation fields and other public ways, grounds and open spaces, the general location of public buildings and other public property and the general location and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned or operated, for water, light, sanitation, transportation, communication, power and other purposes; also the removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use or extension of any of the foregoing ways, grounds, open spaces, buildings, property, utilities or terminals as well as a zoning plan for the control of the height, area, bulk, location and use of buildings and premises. The Planning Board may from time to time make recommendations to City Council to amend, extend or add to the plan. 
(Code 1972, § 2-44; Code 1993, § 2-181; Ord. No. 03-10, §§ 1, 2, 4-14-2003) 
Cross reference- Cemeteries, ch. 8; electric utility, ch. 10; parks and recreation, ch. 22; streets and sidewalks, ch. 32; subdivisions, ch. 34; water and wastewater, ch. 38; zoning, ch. 40. 
Sec. 2-220. - Master plan-Purposes. 
    In the preparation of a master plan, the Planning Board shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present conditions and future growth of the city with due regard to its relation to neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city and its environs which will in accordance with present and future needs best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development including, among other things, adequate provision for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provision for light and air, the promotion of the healthful and convenient distribution of population, the promotion of good civic design and arrangement, wise and efficient expenditure of public funds and the adequate provision of public utilities and other public requirements. 
(Code 1972, § 2-45; Code 1993, § 2-182) 
Cross reference- Fire-rescue-EMS, fire prevention, ch. 14; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 18. 
Sec. 2-221. - Miscellaneous powers and duties. 
    Before the adoption of a master plan or any part thereof, amendment, extension or addition thereof, the Planning Board shall hold at least one (1) public hearing thereon. The Planning Board shall have the power to promote public interest in and understanding of the plan and, to that end, may publish and distribute copies of the plan or of any report and may employ such other means of publicity and education as it may determine. The members of the Planning Board, when duly authorized by the Planning Board, may attend city planning conferences or meetings of city planning institutes or hearings upon pending city planning legislation, and the Planning Board may, by resolution spread upon its minutes, pay the reasonable traveling expenses incident to such attendance. All officers and employees of the city shall render such reasonable assistance and any such information to the Planning Board as may be requested by the Planning Board for its work. The Planning Board shall, from time to time and at least annually, submit reports in writing to the City Council, giving information regarding the condition of the city and any plans or proposals for the development of the city and estimates of the cost thereof. These reports shall contain other recommendations by the Planning Board for immediate attention and the City Council shall take action with reference to the same. 
(Code 1972, § 2-46; Code 1993, § 2-183) 
Secs. 2-222-2-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - HOUSING AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-251. - Created; composition; appointment; terms of office; removal. 
    (a) Pursuant to G.S. 157-5, on October 9, 1961, there was established a Housing Authority for the city. The Housing Authority is composed of seven (7) commissioners appointed by the Mayor in accordance with the provisions of G.S. 157-5. Commissioners are appointed for five-year terms of office, such respective terms to expire on June 30. 
    (b) Commissioners of the Housing Authority may be removed by the Mayor for the reasons, and following the procedures, provided for in G.S. 157-8. 
    (c) Unexcused absences shall be handled in accordance with section 2-531(b), except the Mayor shall appoint the replacement for any commissioner that is removed pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1972, § 2-47; Code 1993, § 2-201; Ord. No. 12-3, § 1, 4-9-2012) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-3, § 1, adopted April 9, 2012, amended § 2-251 title to read as herein set out. Former § 2-251 title pertained to created; composition; appointment; terms of office. 
Cross reference- Removal of members, § 2-531(b). 
Sec. 2-252. - Organization and rules of procedure. 
    The Housing Authority shall elect its chairman at the annual meeting of the Housing Authority from among the appointed commissioners of the Housing Authority and create and fill such other offices as it may determine. The term of the chairman shall be one (1) year with eligibility for re-election. Rules of procedure shall be established in accordance with section 2-532. 
(Code 1993, § 2-202; Ord. No. 90-12, § 1, 7-9-1990; Ord. No. 12-3, § 2, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 2-253. - Duties as redevelopment commission. 
    The Housing Authority of the city is hereby designated to exercise the powers, duties and responsibilities of a redevelopment commission. 
(Code 1972, § 2-48.1; Code 1993, § 2-203) 
State Law reference- Short title [Urban Development Law], G.S. 160A-500 et seq.; Alternative organization [Housing authority serving as redevelopment commission], G.S. 160A-505. Housing Authorities Law, G.S. 157-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-254-2-284. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - HUMAN RELATIONS COUNCIL[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- North Carolina Human Relations Commission-Creation, powers and duties, G.S. 143B-391, 143B-392. 

Sec. 2-285. - Created; members. 
(a)  Composition, appointment, term. The City Council may, at its discretion, create a Human Relations Council. The Council shall be composed of no less than seven (7) and no more than twelve (12) members appointed by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of section 2-531(a). The City Manager shall serve as ex officio member of the Council. The ex officio member shall not be a voting member of the Council. Members of the Council shall be appointed to reflect various groups which are present in the community. Members shall reflect different ages, races, occupations, sexes and income levels. Members shall be appointed for a term of office of three (3) years. Terms shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30. 
(b)  Unexcused absences. Unexcused absences shall be handled in accordance with section 2-531(b). 
(Code 1972, § 2-52; Code 1993, § 2-221; Ord. No. 92-10, §§ 1, 2, 7-13-1992; Ord. No. 04-18, 9-13-2004) 
Cross reference- Removal of members, § 2-531(b). 
Sec. 2-286. - Organization. 
    Within thirty (30) days after appointment, the Human Relations Council shall elect its chairman from among the appointed members and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of chairman shall be one (1) year with eligibility for reelection. 
(Code 1972, § 2-53; Code 1993, § 2-222; Ord. No. 90-12, § 1, 7-9-1990) 
Sec. 2-287. - Meetings; vacancies; rules of procedure; annual report; purpose. 
(a)  The Human Relations Council shall meet at such times as they shall determine necessary. The Council may organize advisory committees and appoint additional ex officio members of such committees in order to carry out its purpose. Should a vacancy occur on the Council, it shall be the responsibility of the chairperson to notify the City Council of such vacancy. The City Council shall then appoint a person to serve the unexpired term of the person who caused the vacancy. The Council shall establish its own rules of procedure in accordance with section 2-532. 
(b)  The Human Relations Council shall report to the City Council at its regular October meeting on activities pursued in the past year and activities the Human Relations Council intends to pursue for the coming year. 
(c)  The purpose of the Human Relations Council shall be to better the understanding between the citizens of the city. It is recognized there may be concerns between individual citizens, groups of citizens or areas of concerns existing which affect the community. While understanding between individuals is important, the prevailing purpose of the Human Relations Council is to address human conditions which involve groups of people. The Council should also assist individual citizens when it finds it pertinent to the overall concerns of the community. 
(d)  The Council shall better the understanding by seeking suggestions, hearing complaints and opinions of citizens and identifying areas where understanding of situations, conditions or personal feelings may be bettered. With this information the Human Relations Council shall report to the City Council its findings and also take actions necessary to better understanding between citizens. 
(e)  Areas which affect the human condition may be, but are not limited to, suffering, disease, living conditions, personal esteem and well being, community attitudes, individual attitudes, community environment, and working environment and group/individual perceptions of other groups/individuals. 
(Code 1972, § 2-53; Code 1993, § 2-223) 
Sec. 2-288. - Fostering community relations. 
    The purpose of the Human Relations Council is to encourage and foster good community relations and to provide an effective means of identifying community needs through citizen participation. 
(Code 1972, § 2-54; Code 1993, § 2-224) 
Sec. 2-289. - Powers. 
    The Human Relations Council may undertake public meetings or forums or otherwise spread information and communicate with the public to help better human understanding. 
(Code 1972, § 2-55; Code 1993, § 2-225) 
Sec. 2-290. - Expenditures. 
    The Human Relations Council may not incur any expenditures without the written consent of the City Manager. 
(Code 1972, § 2-56; Code 1993, § 2-226) 
Secs. 2-291-2-331. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 40; historic district and commission, § 40-386. 

Secs. 2-332-2-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 40, art. XIX. 

Secs. 2-351-2-370. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, ch. 22, art. II. 

Secs. 2-371-2-390. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - WASHINGTON ELECTRIC UTILITIES ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-391. - Purpose; establishment. 
    For proper management of the electric utilities of the city, both within the corporate limits of the city and outside its corporate limits, an advisory board to the City Council designated and known as the Washington Electric Utilities Advisory Board ("Board") is hereby created and established. 
(Ord. No. 07-9, § 1(2-331), 11-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-392. - Membership. 
(a)  The Board shall consist of seven regular members who shall be customers of Washington Electric Utilities. Membership shall be composed of and represent the following service areas: 
(1)  Four members shall be residents of the city at the time of his appointment, 
(2)  One member shall be appointed from and be a resident of the Town of Bath at the time of his appointment, 
(3)  One member shall be appointed from and be a resident of the Town of Washington Park at the time of his appointment, 
(4)  One member shall be appointed at large and may be a resident of any location within the Washington Electric Utilities service area, including the city. 
(5)  In addition to the seven regular members, the Board shall include the following ex officio members: 
a.  One member of the City Council, 
b.  The City Manager or his designee. 
The members of the Board shall be citizens of recognized ability and good business judgment and standing, who, in the opinion of the City Council, can and will perform their official duties to the best interest of the City, Washington Electric Utilities, and the customers of Washington Electric Utilities. 
(b)  Members shall be eligible for appointment, be appointed, serve, attend meetings of the Board, and be subject to removal in accordance with the provisions of section 2-531 of this Code. 
(c)  The City Council shall fill vacancies on the Board occurring otherwise than by expiration of term by appointment for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 07-9, § 1(2-332), 11-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-393. - Length and limits of terms. 
(a)  Regular members shall be appointed to terms of three years and may be reappointed to a single additional term of two years. Terms will expire on June 30 at the end of the designated term. 
(b)  Ex officio members. 
(1)  The City Council liaison shall be appointed to and serve a term of one year unless his office term as a Council member shall expire in less than a year, in which event, his term as City Council liaison shall expire with his office term, and his replacement shall be appointed by the City Council consistent herewith. 
(2)  The City Manager shall serve as long as he remains employed as the City Manager of the City. 
(Ord. No. 07-9, § 1(2-333), 11-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-394. - Organization and meeting schedule. 
(a)  Regular members of the Board shall elect one of their members Chairman. The Chairman will serve for one year unless his term as a Board member shall expire in less than a year; in which event, his term as Chairman shall expire with his term and his replacement shall be elected by the Board consistent herewith. A former Chairman may be eligible for reelection as Chairman in the discretion of the Board. 
(b)  Regular members of the Board shall elect one of their members Vice Chairman. The Vice Chairman will serve for one year unless his term as a Board member shall expire in less than a year, in which event, his term as Vice Chairman shall expire with his term, and his replacement shall be elected by the Board consistent herewith. A former Vice Chairman may be eligible for reelection as Vice Chairman in the discretion of the Board. 
(c)  The Board shall establish a schedule of regular meetings that shall occur at least quarterly and cause a current copy of that schedule, showing the designated time and place of regular meetings, to be kept on file with the City Clerk. Any other meeting of the Board may be scheduled in conformity with the legal requirements applicable to meetings of public bodies. 
(d)  Board meetings shall be open to the public and may include a period for general public comment in the discretion of the Board. 
(e)  The Board shall keep full and accurate minutes of all official meetings, including minutes and a general account of any closed sessions, and shall otherwise conform with the legal requirements applicable to meetings of public bodies. 
(Ord. No. 07-9, § 1(2-334), 11-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-395. - Powers, duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  Regular members. 
(1)  In order to assure a useful understanding of the operation of an electric utility and its relationship with associated power agencies and interagency agreements, each member before being seated shall: 
a.  Attend a basic system introduction course, such as Introduction to Public Power as provided by Electric Utilities of North Carolina; and 
b.  Participate in a tour of all Washington Electric Utilities facilities, including but not limited to the warehouse, daily assembly point, meter service area, and other facilities. 
(2)  The Board shall advise the City Council on public concerns and perspectives regarding electric utility policy issues. 
(3)  Members will participate in discussions concerning capital improvements including service area extensions, rate-making, communications with customers, and customer service principles with the objective of developing consensus recommendations and assisting the City Council and the city in its related communications with the public. 
(4)  When reviewing policy options, the Board shall consider community values and concerns. 
(5)  Members of the Board shall not hold voting positions nor adopt recommendations under majority rule requirements. The Board shall strive to reach a consensus concerning issues and matters it takes under consideration; however, in the event that consensus cannot be achieved on specific issues, both majority and minority opinions will be considered and reported to the City Council. 
(6)  Board recommendations are nonbinding on either the Electric Department Staff or the City Council. However, all Board recommendations shall be documented and forwarded to the City Council for its review and consideration. 
(7)  Members shall not be considered officers or agents of the city. 
(8)  Members shall not have access to individual customer accounts. 
(9)  Board membership is voluntary and is not to be compensated by the utility except for reimbursement of training and other official expenses as may be approved by the City Manager. 
(b)  Ex officio members. 
(1)  The City Council representative shall attend meetings of the Board and serve as liaison between the Board and Council. 
(2)  The City Manager or his designee shall be an ex officio member of the Board at all times, attend meetings of the Board, and provide relevant information to the Board concerning issues under its consideration. 
(Ord. No. 07-9, § 1(2-335), 11-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-396. - Role of Electric Department and staff. 
    The Electric Department staff will provide objective information concerning policy and issue options to the Board and solicit Board recommendations. The Electric Department staff shall balance Board recommendations with its fiduciary and management responsibilities in selecting from available options. Electric Department staff support of Board activities shall be limited to providing information available from utility accounting records, which may be collected and distributed without extensive expenditures of staff time or budget resources. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Electric Department staff shall provide a copy of the current electric utilities budget, as may be amended from time to time, to the Board and its members. 
(Ord. No. 07-9, § 1(2-336), 11-13-2007) 
Secs. 2-397-2-420. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - FIREMAN'S SUPPLEMENTAL RETIREMENT FUND BOARD OF TRUSTEES[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Charter reference- Firemen's Supplemental Retirement Fund, article XIII, section 13.1. 

Secs. 2-421-2-440. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - LIBRARY BOARD[14] 
Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference- Libraries, G.S. ch. 125. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-441-2-454. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BROWN LIBRARY 

Sec. 2-455. - Board created. 
(a)  Membership composition; appointment; term. There shall be and hereby is created the Library Board of Trustees for the George H. and Laura E. Brown Library, consisting of seven (7) members. The trustees shall be appointed by the City Council in accordance with section 2-531(a) and shall serve three-year staggered terms. The terms of two (2) members expire on June 30 of each odd-numbered year. 
(b)  Unexcused absences. Unexcused absences are subject to the provisions of section 2-531(b). 
(Code 1993, § 2-311; Ord. No. 89-11, § 1, 8-14-1989; Ord. No. 17-2, § 1, 3-13-2017) 
Cross reference- Removal of members, § 2-531(b). 
Sec. 2-456. - Organization and rules of procedure. 
    Within thirty (30) days after appointment, the Library Board of Trustees shall elect its chairman from among the appointed members and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of chairman shall be one (1) year with eligibility for reelection. 
(Code 1993, § 2-312; Ord. No. 89-11, § 1, 8-14-1989; Ord. No. 90-12, § 1, 7-9-1990) 
Sec. 2-457. - Proceedings. 
    The Library Board of Trustees shall appoint a secretary and such other subordinates as may be authorized by the City Council. The Chairman of the Board shall be a citizen of the city. The Board of Trustees shall meet on a schedule which shall be adopted each December and at such other times as the Board of Trustees may determine. The Board shall adopt such rules or bylaws as it deems appropriate in accordance with section 2-532. All meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be open to the public. The Board of Trustees shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its other official action. 
(Code 1993, § 2-313; Ord. No. 89-11, § 1, 8-14-1989; Ord. No. 17-2, § 2, 3-13-2017) 
Sec. 2-458. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The Board of Trustees shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To formulate and adopt programs, policies, and regulations for the government of the library. 
(2)  To make recommendations to the City Council concerning the construction and improvement of buildings and other structures for the library. 
(3)  To supervise the care of the facilities of the library. 
(4)  To make recommendations to the City Manager concerning the appointment of the Director of library services and other employees of the library. 
(5)  To establish a schedule of fines and charges for late return, damage to, and loss of library materials subject to the consent and approval of the City Council. 
(6)  To participate in preparing the annual budget of the library. 
(7)  To extend the privileges and use of the library to nonresidents of the city on such terms or conditions as the Board may prescribe. 
(8)  To otherwise advise the City Council on library matters. 
(b)  The Board of Trustees shall make an annual report on the operations of the library to the City Council and shall make an annual report to the department of cultural resources as required by G.S. 125-5. 
(Code 1993, § 2-314; Ord. No. 89-11, § 1, 8-14-1989) 
Secs. 2-459-2-480. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - TOURISM DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-481. - Findings of fact; authority created. 
    The City Council has adopted an ordinance levying a room occupancy tax. Therefore, there is hereby created the city Tourism Development Authority, which shall be a public authority under the Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act. 
(Code 1993, § 2-351; Ord. No. 91-14, § 1(2-74), 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 2-482. - Membership. 
(a)  Composition. The Tourism Development Authority shall be composed of seven (7) members to be appointed by the Council in accordance with section 2-531(a). 
(1)  One (1) member shall be a Councilmember. 
(2)  Six (6) members shall be persons with a keen interest in tourism in the city. 
(b)  Compensation. All members of the authority shall serve without compensation. 
(c)  Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments. Members appointed to fill vacancies shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(d)  Officers. Within thirty (30) days after appointment, the authority shall elect its chair from among the members and create and fill other offices as it wishes. The term of chair shall be one (1) year with eligibility for reelection. No member may serve as chairman more than two (2) one-year terms in succession. The authority shall meet at the call of the chair or of any three (3) members and shall adopt rules of procedure to govern its meetings in accordance with section 2-532. The finance officer of the city shall be the ex officio finance officer of the authority. 
(e)  Terms of office. Members of the authority shall serve three-year terms. 
(f)  Unexcused absences. Unexcused absences are subject to the provisions of section 2-531(b). 
(Code 1993, § 2-352; Ord. No. 91-14, § 1(2-74), 9-9-1991; Ord. No. 97-1, 3-10-1997) 
Cross reference- Removal of members, § 2-531(b). 
Sec. 2-483. - Power and duties. 
    The authority may contract with any person, firm or agency to assist in carrying out the purposes for which the tax proceeds levied by the act referred to in section 2-481 may be expended. The City Council may from time to time determine an appropriate percentage of net proceeds that may be expended by the authority for administrative services. 
(Code 1993, § 2-353; Ord. No. 91-14, § 1(2-75), 9-9-1991) 
Sec. 2-484. - Reports. 
    The authority shall report quarterly and at the close of the fiscal year to the City Council on its receipts and expenditures for the preceding quarter and for the year in such detail as the Council may require. 
(Code 1993, § 2-354; Ord. No. 91-14, § 1(2-76), 9-9-1991) 
Secs. 2-485-2-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - ANIMAL CONTROL APPEALS BOARD 

Sec. 2-501. - Established; composition, appointment, and term. 
    There shall be and hereby is created an Animal Control Appeals Board, hereinafter called the Board, consisting of five (5) members appointed by the City Council in accordance with section 2-531(a) for three-year staggered terms. Membership on the Board shall include, but not be limited to, persons with knowledge and experience in the matter of dog behavior, such as, law enforcement officers, veterinarian technicians, private breeders, dog trainers, or private dog owners. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1(2-375), 3-15-2005) 
Sec. 2-502. - Vacancies and compensation. 
    Vacancies occurring for other than expiration of term shall be filled as they occur for the remainder of the unexpired term and such vacancy shall be filled by the City Council. Members shall serve without pay but may be reimbursed for any expenses incurred while representing the Board. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1(2-376), 3-15-2005) 
Sec. 2-503. - Attendance. 
    Absences are subject to the provisions of section 2-531(b). 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1(2-377), 3-15-2005) 
Sec. 2-504. - Organization. 
(a)  The Animal Control Appeals Board shall adopt the rules and procedures in accordance with section 2-532. 
(b)  At the first meeting after the membership of the Board has been changed through the expiration of one or more terms, the Board shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman from within its membership. The chairman, or the vice-chairman, in the absence of the chairman, shall preside at all meetings of the Board. The chairman of the Board or the vice-chairman is authorized, in his official capacity, to administer oaths to witnesses in any matter coming before the Board. 
(c)  The Board shall appoint a secretary and such other officers as may be authorized by the City Council. Said secretary may be an employee of the city upon approval of the City Manager of the city. 
(d)  The Chief of Police, or his designee, shall serve as staff advisor to the Board. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1(2-378), 3-15-2005) 
Sec. 2-505. - Minutes, written orders. 
    The Animal Control Appeals Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings in a book maintained for the purpose of showing the vote of each member upon each question, and, if absent or failing to vote, an indication of such fact. The final disposition of all cases shall be by written order with the findings of fact stated, and the reasons thereof, all of which shall be a matter of public record. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1(2-379), 3-15-2005) 
Sec. 2-506. - Quorum. 
    No final action shall be taken unless a quorum be present. The quorum shall consist of a majority of the membership of the Animal Control Appeals Board. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1(2-380), 3-15-2005) 
Sec. 2-507. - Conduct of meetings. 
(a)  All evidence and testimony shall be presented publicly, and the Animal Control Appeals Board may consider all relevant facts within the personal knowledge of any member of the Board; but such facts should be stated publicly in the hearing. 
(b)  All meetings of the Board shall be held at a regular time and place, and at such other times and places as the Board may determine. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. Due notice shall be given to all parties in interest. The staff advisor to the Board shall begin each appeal by offering staff comments regarding the appeal and answering any questions regarding the appeal or the procedure. After staff comments, persons speaking on behalf of the appeal and persons speaking against the appeal shall have the opportunity to speak and answer the questions of the Board. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1(2-381), 3-15-2005) 
Sec. 2-508. - Appeals to the Board. 
(a)  An appeal to the Animal Control Appeals Board may be taken by any person aggrieved from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the animal control officer which is based in whole or in part upon the provisions of the city's animal control chapter; or from any other decision for which the Board is authorized by law to hear appeals. 
(b)  Such appeals shall be taken within ten (10) days of the officer's ruling. The Police Department shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken within five (5) days of filing of the appeal. 
(c)  The Board shall refuse to consider an appeal or application previously denied, if it finds that there has been no substantial changes in conditions or circumstances bearing on the appeal or application. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1(2-382), 3-15-2005) 
Sec. 2-509. - Stay of proceedings. 
    An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Police Department certifies to the Animal Control Appeals Board, after the notice of the appeal shall have been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in its opinion, cause immediate peril to life or property; or that because the violation charged is transitory in nature, a stay would seriously interfere with enforcement of this article. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Board or by a court of record on application, on notice to whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1(2-383), 3-15-2005) 
Sec. 2-510. - Powers and duties of Board. 
    The Animal Control Appeals Board shall have the following powers and duties: hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the animal control officer in the enforcement of the city's animal control chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1(2-384), 3-15-2005) 
Sec. 2-511. - Decisions. 
    In exercising the power listed in section 2-510, the Animal Control Appeals Board may, as long as such action is in conformity with the city's animal control chapter, reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify the order, requirement, division, or determination as ought to be made, and, to that end, shall have powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1(2-385), 3-15-2005) 
Sec. 2-512. - Voting. 
(a)  The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Animal Control Appeals Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any administrative official charged with the enforcement of the city's animal control ordinance. 
(b)  The chairman, or the vice-chairman in his absence, shall vote in all matters coming before the Board. 
(c)  No member shall be excused from voting except upon matters involving the consideration of his own personal or financial interests which preclude impartial consideration of the issue in question. In all other cases, a failure to vote by a member who is physically present or who has withdrawn without being excused by a majority vote of the remaining members present, shall be recorded as an affirmative vote. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1(2-386), 3-15-2005) 
Sec. 2-513. - Appeals from decision of Board. 
    Any person jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Animal Control Appeals Board, or any citizens or any officer, department, or Board of the city, within thirty (30) days after filing of the decision rendered by the Board in the Police Department or after a written copy thereof is delivered to every aggrieved party who has filed a written request for such copy with the secretary or the chairman of the Board at the time of its hearing of the case, whichever is later, may present to Superior Court a petition for a writ of certiorari, duly certified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of illegality, whereupon such decision of the Board shall be subject to review as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1(2-387), 3-15-2005) 
Secs. 2-514-2-530. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES 

Sec. 2-531. - Members. 
(a)  With the exception of commissioners of the Housing Authority, all members appointed to boards, commissions and committees shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. No city employee shall serve on any board, commission or committee other than as a liaison or ex officio. 
(b)  Any member who has three (3) unexcused absences in a twelve-month period shall lose his status as a member of the board, commission or committee and may be replaced, with the exception of commissioners of the Housing Authority, at the discretion of the City Council. 
(c)  Commissioners of the Housing Authority are appointed by the Mayor and may be removed as well as replaced by the Mayor in accordance with section 2-251. 
(Code 1993, § 2-375; Ord. No. 01-10, 9-10-2001; Ord. No. 05-04, § 1, 3-15-2005; Ord. No. 12-3, § 3, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 2-532. - Rules of procedure. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Code, all boards and commissions of the city shall adopt the Second Edition (1998) of Suggested Rules of Procedure for Small Local Government Boards, by Fleming Bell, II, published by the School of Government, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, with modifications included in the document to be its board/commission's parliamentary procedural rules governing its meetings. 
(Code 1972, § 2-17; Code 1993, § 2-36; Ord. No. 96-2(b), 3-11-1996; Ord. No. 02-4, 5-13-2002) 
Secs. 2-533-2-550. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - PURCHASING[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Charter reference- Purchasing and contracts, art. X. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; licenses and business regulations, ch. 16; streets and sidewalks, ch. 32. 
State Law reference- Procedure for letting of public contracts, G.S. 143-129; when counties, cities, towns and other subdivisions may let contracts or informal bids, G.S. 143-131; sale and disposition of property, G.S. 160A-265 et seq. 

Sec. 2-551. - Policies and procedures. 
    All purchasing, contracting, property disposal and related matters shall comply with the General Statutes and the city manual of purchasing procedures. 
(Code 1993, § 14-1) 
Secs. 2-552-2-570. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXII. - WASHINGTON-WARREN AIRPORT[16] 
Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-2, § 1, 2, adopted July 1, 2013, effective Sept. 1, 2013, repealed the former Art. XXII, § 2-571, and enacted a new Art. XXII, §§ 2-571-2-590, as set out herein. The former Art. XXII pertained to rules and regulations of the Warren Field Airport and derived from Ord. No. 05-18, § 2, adopted Nov. 14, 2005. Subsequently, Ord. No. 15-1, § 1 adopted March 23, 2015, amended Art. XXII in its entirety by replacing "Warren Field Airport," "Warren Airport," any combination of the foregoing or similar words with other words like "Advisory Board" or "Commission," and any other designation of, or reference to, the airport owned and operated by the City of Washington with "Washington-Warren Airport." 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-571. - Rules and regulations. 
    The rules and regulations of the Washington-Warren Airport, as adopted and amended from time to time by the City Council, are adopted and incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth. 
(Ord. No. 13-2, § 2, 7-1-2013; Ord. No. 15-1, §§ 1, 2, 3-23-2015) 
Secs. 2-572-2-585. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-586. - Purpose, establishment. 
    For proper management of the Washington-Warren Airport, an advisory board to the Washington City Council designated and known as the Washington-Warren Airport Advisory Board ("Board") is hereby created and established. 
(Ord. No. 13-2, § 2, 7-1-2013; Ord. No. 15-1, §§ 1, 3, 3-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-587. - Composition. 
(a)  Membership, appointment, qualifications and term. The Board shall be composed of five (5) members appointed by the City Council. At least one (1) member shall be a resident of the city. Members shall be appointed by the City Council to serve for three-year staggered terms. Members shall be eligible for appointment, be appointed, serve, attend meetings of the Board, and be subject to removal in accordance with the provisions of section 2-531. Members of the Board shall be citizens of recognized ability and good judgment as well as standing, who, in the opinion of the City Council, can and will perform their official duties to the best interest of the city, the Washington-Warren Airport, and the users thereof. In addition, members should be actively engaged in an aeronautical business or aeronautical activities or have recognized aeronautical experience and qualifications or have demonstrated a desire to see the airport developed. 
(b)  Attendance, vacancies, and compensation . In accordance with section 2-531, any member who has three (3) unexcused absences in a twelve-month period may be replaced at the discretion of the City Council. Vacancies occurring for other than expiration of term shall be filled as they occur through appointment by the City Council for the remainder of the unexpired term. Members shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 13-2, § 2, 7-1-2013; Ord. No. 15-1, § 1, 3-23-2015; Ord. No. 17-3, § 1, 6-26-2017) 
Sec. 2-588. - Organization, meetings, rules and procedure, and records. 
(a)  Organization . Within thirty (30) days of its initial appointment, the Board shall meet and elect one (1) of its members Chairman and create as well as fill such other offices as the Board may determine are desirable. The Chairman shall serve for one (1) year unless his term as a Board member shall expire in less than a year; in which event, his term as Chairman shall expire with his term and his replacement shall be elected by the Board consistent herewith. A former Chairman may be eligible for re-election as Chairman in the discretion of the Board. The City Manager or his designee shall be an ex officio member of the Board at all times, attend all meetings of the Board, and provide information to the Board that is necessary and pertinent to the Board's performance of its functions. 
(b)  Meetings . The Board shall establish a schedule of regular meetings that shall occur at least quarterly and cause a current copy of that schedule, showing the designated time and place of regular meetings, to be kept on file with the City Clerk. Any other meeting of the Board may be scheduled in conformity with the legal requirements applicable to meetings of public bodies. Board meetings shall be open to the public and may include a period for general public comment in the discretion of the Board. 
(c)  Procedure . In accordance with section 2-532, the Board shall adopt the Second Edition (1998) of Suggested Rules of Procedure for Small Local Government Boards, by Fleming Bell, II, published by the School of Government, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, with modifications included in the document to be its parliamentary procedural rules governing its meetings. 
(d)  Records . The Board shall keep full and accurate minutes of all official meetings, including minutes and a general account of any closed sessions, and shall otherwise conform with the legal requirements applicable to meetings of public bodies. 
(Ord. No. 13-2, § 2, 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 2-589. - Functions. 
(a)  The Board shall act as an advisory board to the City Council as well as City Manager or his designee and perform the following functions: 
(1)  Review and make recommendations to the City Council concerning the Washington-Warren Airport Rules and Regulations as well as any proposed amendments thereto. 
(2)  Review and recommend to the City Council programs and policies for the Washington-Warren Airport. 
(3)  Make recommendations to the City Council concerning the facilities of the Washington-Warren Airport, including possible improvements thereto. 
(4)  Review and make recommendations to the City Manager concerning the annual budget of the Washington-Warren Airport. 
(5)  Review and make recommendations to the City Council concerning the airport layout plan. 
(6)  Generally advise the City Council concerning Washington-Warren Airport matters, including public concerns and perspectives regarding Washington-Warren Airport matters. 
(7)  Perform such projects and duties as may be requested by the City Council. 
(b)  All Board recommendations shall be documented and forwarded to the City Council for its review and consideration. The Board shall strive to reach a consensus concerning issues and matters it takes under consideration; however, in the event a consensus cannot be achieved on a specific issue, both the majority and minority opinions will be considered and reported to the City Council. Board recommendations are nonbinding on either the City Council or city staff. 
(Ord. No. 13-2, § 2, 7-1-2013; Ord. No. 15-1, § 1, 3-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-590. - Liability. 
    Neither the Board nor any member of the Board shall incur any financial liability in the name of the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-2, § 2, 7-1-2013) 
Secs. 2-591-2-619. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIII. - WATERFRONT DOCKS ADVISORY COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-620. - Created. 
    A Waterfront Docks Advisory Committee ("Committee") is hereby created under the authority of G.S. 160A-361 and by Resolution of the Washington City Council. 
(Ord. No. 13-7, § 1, 12-9-2013) 
Sec. 2-621. - Composition. 
(a)  Membership, appointment, and term . The Committee shall consist of five (5) members, all of whom shall be appointed by City Council. Three (3) members shall be residents of the city at the time of their appointment. Two (2) members shall be recommended by the Washington Harbor District Alliance's Maritime Committee. Of the initial appointments, two (2) shall expire on June 30, 2015 and three (3) shall expire on June 30, 2016. Thereafter, members shall be appointed by the City Council to serve for three (3) year staggered terms. The Dock Master will serve as an ex officio member of the Committee. There shall also be a member from the Recreation Advisory Committee appointed to serve as an ex officio member of the Committee. Members shall be eligible for appointment, be appointed, serve, attend meetings of the Committee, and be subject to removal in accordance with the provisions of section 2-531. 
(b)  Attendance, vacancies, and compensation . In accordance with section 2-531, any member who has three (3) unexcused absences in a twelve-month period may be replaced at the discretion of the City Council. Vacancies occurring for other than expiration of a term shall be filled as they occur through appointment by the City Council for the remainder of the unexpired term. Members shall serve without compensation. 
(c)  Qualifications . Members shall represent and have a variety of knowledge of, as well as background in, waterfront docks and/or water-based activities. Members shall be citizens of recognized ability and good judgment as well as standing, who, in the opinion of City Council, can and will perform their official duties in the best interest of the City of Washington, the waterfront docks, and the users thereof. 
(Ord. No. 13-7, § 1, 12-9-2013) 
Sec. 2-622. - Organization, meetings, rules and procedure, and records. 
(a)  Organization . Within thirty (30) days of its initial appointment, the Committee shall meet and elect one (1) of its members Chairman and create as well as fill such other offices as the Committee may determine are desirable. The Chairman shall serve for one (1) year unless his term as a Committee member shall expire in less than a year; in which event, his term as Chairman shall expire with his term and his replacement shall be elected by the Committee consistent herewith. A former Chairman may be eligible for re-election as Chairman in the discretion of the Committee. Staff assistance will be provided to the Committee by the Department of Community and Cultural Services along with the Dock Master. 
(b)  Meetings . The Committee shall establish a schedule of regular meetings that shall occur at least monthly and cause a current copy of that schedule, showing the designated time and place of regular meetings, to be kept on file with the City Clerk. Any other meeting of the Committee may be scheduled in conformity with the legal requirements applicable to meetings of public bodies. Committee meetings shall be open to the public and may include a period for general public comment in the discretion of the Committee. 
(c)  Procedure . In accordance with section 2-532, the Committee shall adopt the Second Edition (1998) of Suggested Rules of Procedure for Small Local Government Boards, by Fleming Bell, II, published by the School of Government, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, with modifications included in the document, to be its parliamentary procedural rules governing its meetings. 
(d)  Records . The Committee shall keep full and accurate minutes of all official meetings, including minutes and a general account of any closed sessions, and shall otherwise conform with the legal requirements applicable to meetings of public bodies. 
(Ord. No. 13-7, § 1, 12-9-2013) 
Sec. 2-623. - Duties. 
    The Committee shall act as an advisory board to the City Council, City Manager and Director of Community and Cultural Services and provide recommendations regarding the management of the waterfront docks. Committee members shall assist in clarifying positions on waterfront dock issues, identifying opportunities for development and helping achieve goals and objectives concerning the Washington waterfront docks. The Committee is formed for specific activities with the expectation that the Committee will report to City Council on a monthly basis or as determined to be needed. The Committee shall also perform other duties as the City Council may direct. 
(Ord. No. 13-7, § 1, 12-9-2013) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Tax Collector, § 2-136 et seq.; licenses and business regulations, ch. 16; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 18; animal riders or drivers, § 18-2; animals restricted in cemeteries, § 8-18. 
Federal law reference- "Service animal" defined for purposes of Americans with Disabilities Act, 28 CFR 36.104. 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, G.S. 14-360 et seq.; protection of livestock running at large, G.S. 14-366 et seq.; protection of animals, G.S. ch. 19A; dogs, G.S. ch. 67; fences and stock law, G.S. ch. 68; owners of stock to register brands or marks, G.S. 80-45; agriculture, G.S. ch. 106; rabies, G.S. 130A-184 et seq.; time of rabies vaccination, 10A NC Admin. Code 41G.0101; abuse of animals, G.S. 160A-182; regulation of domestic animals, G.S. 160A-186; animal taxes, G.S. 160A-212; animal shelters, G.S. 160A-493; control of livestock diseases, G.S. 106-400 et seq.; animal diseases, G.S. ch. 106, art. 34; public health, G.S. ch. 130A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Domesticated means any animal kept, cared for, sheltered, fed or harbored for use as a pet, work or as a source of food, including, but not limited to, cats, cows, dogs, fowl, horses, sheep and domesticated wild animals. 
    Farm animal means any domestic species of cattle, sheep, swine, goats, llamas, or horses, which are normally and have historically, been kept and raised on farms in the U.S. 
    Fowl shall include chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, and any other domesticated birds. 
    Stockyard means any place or building where as many as ten (10) farm animals are confined or penned up while awaiting sale or slaughter. 
(Code 1972, § 3-6; Code 1993, § 3-1; Ord. No. 18-1, § 1, 2-12-2018) 
Sec. 4-2. - Stockyards declared nuisance. 
    The construction, operation or maintenance of a stockyard in the city or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction is hereby declared to be a nuisance to adjacent property and to the general public, and the same is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1972, §§ 3-6, 3-7; Code 1993, § 3-2) 
State Law reference- Municipal abatement of public health nuisances, G.S. 160A-193. 
Sec. 4-3. - Keeping farm animals, fowl. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep at any time any type of farm animal or fowl within the city except subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Chickens. 
(1)  Housing and enclosures. The chickens will not be permitted to run at large, and must be maintained in a chicken house, coop or run of suitable construction and size for the number of fowl maintained in it. Each coop or house shall have two and one-half (2.5) to three and one-half (3.5) square feet per chicken and each run shall have four (4) to five (5) square feet per chicken. The owner or occupant of any premises where such houses or coops are maintained shall thoroughly clean the same of all manure and other wastes at least twice each week. All waste material removed from houses or coops shall be hauled off of the site or disposed of on-site in such a way that it does not cause odor or attract flies. 
(2)  Location. No chicken house or coop may be located any nearer than fifty (50) feet from any residence, hospital, business establishment or school. All pens, coops, and runs must be located in the rear yard. 
(3)  Maximum number. No more than six (6) domestic female chickens shall be maintained on one (1) lot. No roosters are allowed. 
(4)  No residential sale or commercial activity of chickens is allowed. 
(b)  Permit required; inspections required; violations. 
(1)  Persons keeping chickens within the city shall first secure a permit from the code enforcement officer for the city, and shall renew such permit each year thereafter, on or before the anniversary of such permit. The code enforcement officer may enforce the stated conditions as are necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. Permits may be revoked by the code enforcement officer at any time upon violation of the terms of the permit or any provision of this section. 
(Code 1972, § 3-2; Code 1993, § 3-3; Ord. No. 18-1, § 2, 2-12-2018) 
Sec. 4-4. - Running at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to allow animals, livestock or fowl to run at large within the city, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 3-1; Code 1993, § 3-4) 
Sec. 4-5. - Hog lots or pens prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain a hog lot or pen within the city. 
(Code 1972, § 3-10; Code 1993, § 3-5) 
Sec. 4-6. - Construction and maintenance of stables, barns, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any public or private stall, shed or barn for any domestic animal within the city at a distance closer than one hundred (100) feet to the nearest point of any residence or other building used for the purpose of human habitation. Each animal pen constructed under this section must be cleaned of all waste once per day. Such waste shall be placed in a flyproof container and disposed of biweekly. 
(Code 1972, § 3-9; Code 1993, § 3-6) 
Sec. 4-7. - Maintenance of stalls, barns, etc. 
    Any person owning or using any public or private stall, shed or barn within the city where animals are kept shall maintain such place in a clean and sanitary condition in order to protect the adjacent property and the general public. All stables, barns and sheds shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements of the city's Enforcement Officer. 
(Code 1972, § 3-8; Code 1993, § 3-7) 
Sec. 4-8. - Bird sanctuary. 
(a)  The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot, or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner, any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests; provided that if starlings, pigeons or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of the authorities of the city, then in such event such birds may be destroyed by or under the supervision of the Chief of Police. 
(Code 1972, § 3-5; Code 1993, § 3-8; Ord. No. 18-1, § 2, 2-12-2018) 
State Law reference- Bird sanctuaries, G.S. 160A-188. 
Secs. 4-9-4-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dogs, G.S. ch. 67. 

Sec. 4-35. - Public nuisance animals. 
    The presence of stray animals, nuisance animals, and diseased animals within the corporate limits of the city is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Such animals are a threat to the health of the community and to the safety of persons and property alike. In order to abate and control this nuisance, there is hereby created within the Police Department of the city, an Animal Control Division, to be constituted and composed of such municipal enforcement personnel of the Police Department as the City Council may determine. 
(Code 1993, § 3-26; Ord. No. 97-10, 6-23-1997; Ord. No. 05-3, § 1(3-26), 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 4-36. - Responsibilities of the Animal Control Division. 
(a)  The Animal Control Division shall be charged with the responsibility of: 
(1)  Cooperating with the county Health Department and the county animal control officers with regard to the control of animals. 
(2)  Investigating original complaints and following up complaints handled by sworn officers with regard to animals covered by this article. 
(3)  Enforcing within the city all of the city ordinances for the care, control and custody of animals covered by this article, except the animal control officer has no power to make summary arrests, unless the officer is a sworn police officer with the city. 
(4)  Wearing the prescribed uniform with a badge of a size and design to be determined by the Chief of Police while performing his duties. 
(b)  The animal control officer shall be authorized to carry and utilize equipment deemed necessary to enforce sections of this article or other applicable law for the control of wild, vicious, nuisance, diseased or potentially dangerous animals. 
(Code 1993, § 3-27; Ord. No. 97-10, 6-23-1997; Ord. No. 98-18, 11-9-1998; Ord. No. 05-3, § 1(3-27), 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 4-37. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandon means to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or negligently leave an animal at a location for more than forty-eight (48) consecutive hours without providing for the animal's continued care. 
    Animal control shelter means any holding or other facility designated by the City Council for the detention of animals. 
    Dangerous dog means, pursuant to G.S. 67-4.1, a dog that: 
(a)  Without provocation, has killed or inflicted severe injury on a person; 
(b)  Is determined by the animal control officer to be potentially dangerous because the dog has engaged in one (1) or more of the behaviors listed under the term "potentially dangerous dog;" as defined in this section; or 
(c)  Is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dogfighting, or a dog trained for dogfighting. 
    Owner means any person, group of persons or any entity owning, possessing, keeping, having charge of, sheltering, feeding, harboring or taking care of any dog or cat. 
    Owner's real property means any real property owned or leased by the owner of the dog or cat, but does not include any public right-of-way or a common area of a condominium, apartment complex, or townhouse development. 
    Potentially dangerous dog means, pursuant to G.S. 67-4.1, a dog that the animal control officer determines to have: 
(a)  Inflicted a bite on a person that resulted in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations or required cosmetic surgery or hospitalization; 
(b)  Killed or inflicted severe injury upon a domestic animal when not on the owner's real property; or 
(c)  Approached a person when not on the owner's property in a vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of attack. 
    Public nuisance means any dog or cat which: 
(a)  Habitually or repeatedly chases, snaps at or barks at pedestrians, cyclists or vehicles or other animals, or frightens individuals; 
(b)  Spreads garbage or trash container contents; 
(c)  Sits on other people's vehicles; 
(d)  Damages grass, gardens or shrubbery or other real or personal property of others; 
(e)  Causes an unsanitary condition or smell emanating from enclosures or surroundings; 
(f)  Bites anyone without provocation; 
(g)  Is diseased or dangerous to public health. 
    Restraint. A dog shall be considered under restraint, within the meaning of this article, if it is: 
(a)  Controlled by a leash; 
(b)  At heel beside a competent person and obedient to that person's commands; 
(c)  Within a vehicle being driven or parked on the city streets and unable to bite a person outside of the vehicle; 
(d)  Within the property limits of the owner or its keeper; 
A person providing restraint should be of proper age and size to effectively cause restraint (i.e., eight (8) year old child with eighty (80) pound animal does not meet proper restrain"). 
    Run at large means: 
(a)  Any animal found off of the property of its owner and not under restraint; 
(b)  Any animal previously determined to be potentially dangerous or dangerous that is not under restraint when off the property of its owner or is not confined to a secure enclosure while on the property of its owner. 
    Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations or required cosmetic surgery or hospitalization. 
    Shelter means a moistureproof and windproof structure with at least three (3) sides and a roof or a barrel, chocked so it will not roll, large enough for the animal to stand up, turn around and lie down in a normal manner for said animal. Automobiles shall not be used as animal shelters. 
    Vicious dog means a dog that has been declared a potentially dangerous dog or a dangerous dog, as defined in this section, that: 
(a)  After having once committed an act making it a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog commits a subsequent attack on a person or domestic animal; or 
(b)  Is determined by the animal control officer upon the first offense to have committed an act so severe to be designated a vicious dog. 
(Code 1993, § 3-28; Ord. No. 93-5, § 1, 4-12-1993; Ord. No. 97-10, 6-23-1997; Ord. No. 98-16, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 05-3, § 1(3-28), 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 4-38. - Negligent care of animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to fail to provide his animal with proper shelter and protection from the weather, sufficient and wholesome food and water to keep his animal in good health and comfort, the opportunity for vigorous daily exercise, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and humane care and treatment. 
(b)  When sunlight is likely to cause overheating or discomfort of any animal, shade shall be provided by natural or artificial means to allow protection from direct rays of the sun, but still allow air to pass to keep the animal cool. 
(c)  Dogs and cats kept outdoors for more than one hour at a time shall be provided with moistureproof and windproof shelter. Whenever the outdoor temperature is below forty (40) degrees Fahrenheit, clean, dry bedding material shall be provided in such shelters for insulation and to retain the body heat of the animal. 
(d)  The size of a pen holding an animal shall be large enough for the shelter and for the animal to move about in a normal manner. 
(e)  The size of any chain used to restrain an animal shall be no larger than needed to restrain said animal without putting undo stress on said animal to freely move about. 
(f)  The length of any chain used to restrain an animal shall be, at a minimum, the length of the animal from tip of nose to tip of tail plus two (2) feet. 
(g)  The area shall be kept clear of debris and feces to help maintain the health of the animal. 
(h)  It shall be a violation for any owner of a dog or cat to allow such animal to be off the owner's premises, unless such animal is wearing a collar with the owner's name and address stamped on it or otherwise firmly attached to it. 
(Ord. No. 05-3, § 1(3-29), 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 4-39. - Keeping stray animals. 
    Stray animals can be a source of rabies or other diseases since their history is not known. For the protection of the citizens, it shall be unlawful for any person in the city knowingly and intentionally to harbor, feed, keep in possession by confinement, or otherwise allow to remain on his property any dog or cat which does not belong to him, unless he has, within seventy-two (72) hours from the time such dog or cat came into his possession, done one of the following: 
(a)  Notified the animal's owner, animal control, or person duly authorized by animal control. Upon receiving such notice, animal control shall take such dog or cat to the county animal shelter. If the animal is unclaimed by it's owner after being held for five (5) days, ownership of the animal is surrendered to county animal shelter to be disposed of according to current county ordinance. 
(b)  Become the owner or keeper of the dog or cat by taking it to a veterinarian for rabies inoculation and check for disease and notify animal control. 
(Ord. No. 05-3, § 1(3-30), 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 4-40. - Public nuisance. 
(a)  It shall be a violation for any owner of a dog or cat to allow such dog or cat to create a public nuisance, to run at large or for said owner or keeper to not keep his dog under restraint at all times when off the owner's property. 
(b)  It shall be a violation for any owner of a dog or cat to fail to remove feces deposited by such animal on any public street, highway, sidewalk or other public property or any private property without the permission of the owner of the property. 
(c)  It shall be a violation for any owner of a dog or cat to allow such dog, by prolonged or habitual barking, howling or whining, or for any owner of a cat to allow such cat, by prolonged yowling, to cause serious annoyance to neighboring residents and interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of the premises occupied by such residents. 
(Code 1993, § 3-31; Ord. No. 93-5, § 1, 4-12-1993; Ord. No. 97-10, 6-23-1997; Ord. No. 05-3, § 1(3-31), 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 4-41. - Animals in motor vehicles. 
(a)  Persons having charge or custody of animals. No person having charge or custody of an animal, as owner or otherwise, shall place or confine such animal or allow such animal to be placed or confined or to remain in a motor vehicle under such conditions or for such period of time as may endanger the health or well-being of such animal due to heat, cold, lack of food or drink, or such other circumstances as may reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability or death. 
(b)  Persons having dominion over motor vehicles. No person having dominion or control over a motor vehicle, as owner or otherwise, shall place or confine an animal or allow an animal to be placed or confined or to remain in a motor vehicle under such conditions or for such period of time as may endanger the health or well-being of such animal due to heat, cold, lack of food or drink, or such other circumstances as may reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability or death. 
(c)  Transport of livestock excepted. This section does not prohibit the transportation of horses, cattle, sheep, poultry or other agricultural livestock in trailers or other vehicles designed and constructed for such purpose. 
(d)  Police or animal control officers finding violations of section provisions. A police officer or animal control officer who finds an animal in a motor vehicle in violation of this section, where the animal is showing signs of heat-related or extreme cold-related stress, may break and enter the motor vehicle if necessary to remove the animal. The officer removing the animal shall take the animal to a local animal hospital or veterinary clinic. In the event the person having custody cannot be otherwise contacted, the officer shall leave in a prominent place in the motor vehicle a written notice bearing his name and office and the address and phone number of the veterinarian where the animal may be claimed by the owner thereof. The animal will be surrendered to the owner if the owner claims the animal within three (3) business days from the time the animal was removed from the motor vehicle and pays all reasonable charges that have accrued for the maintenance of the animal. 
(e)  Owners failing to claim animals. If the owner fails to claim the animal within three (3) business days after its removal from the vehicle or the owner cannot be contacted by the officer responsible for removing the animal, or the owner expresses no interest in reclaiming the animal, the veterinarian may dispose of the animal in any reasonable humane manner. 
(f)  Carrying animals on outside of vehicles. No person driving a motor vehicle shall transport any animal in the back of the vehicle in a space intended for any load on the vehicle on a street, unless the space is enclosed or has side and tail walls to a height of at least forty-six (46) inches extending vertically from the floor, or the animal is cross-tethered to the vehicle, or is protected by a secured container or cage in a manner which will prevent the animal from being thrown, falling or jumping from the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 05-3, § 1(3-32), 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 4-42. - Dogs and cats prohibited in certain places. 
(a)  It shall be a violation for any owner of a dog or cat to allow such animal onto any city-owned or city-leased athletic center, public park (dogs are allowed on the west side of Jack's Creek at Haven's Gardens) or city-owned cemeteries, except during official city-sponsored or city-approved animal shows or events. 
(b)  It shall also be a violation for any owner of a dog or cat to allow such animal onto any public area being used for special events such as the Summer Festival, July 4 Celebration, or similar public events. 
(Code 1993, § 3-33; Ord. No. 97-10, 6-23-1997; Ord. No. 98-16, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 05-3, § 1(3-33), 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 4-43. - Vicious dogs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep a vicious dog within the city limits. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1993, § 3-34; Ord. No. 93-5, § 1, 4-12-1993; Ord. No. 97-10, 6-23-1997; Ord. No. 05-3, § 1(3-34), 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 4-44. - Luring, enticing, seizing, molesting or testing an animal. 
    It shall be a violation for any person to entire or lure any animal out of an enclosure of the property of its owner, or to seize, molest or tease an animal while the animal is held or controlled by its owner or while the animal is on the property of its owner. 
(Code 1993, § 3-35; Ord. No. 97-10, 6-23-1997; Ord. No. 05-3, § 1(3-35), 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 4-45. - Impoundment. 
    Any vicious dog or any dog or cat creating a public nuisance or not wearing an identifying collar in violation of this article may be impounded by the animal control officer at the animal control shelter and either reclaimed or disposed of by the county animal control officer pursuant to the procedures outlined by the county animal control ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 3-36; Ord. No. 93-5, § 1, 4-12-1993; Ord. No. 97-10, 6-23-1997; Ord. No. 05-3, § 1(3-36), 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 4-46. - Jurisdiction. 
    The city and the county animal control officers are authorized to enforce the provisions pertaining to impoundment as set forth in the county ordinance pertaining to dogs adopted by the County Commissioners on September 11, 1995, and any amendments thereto. 
(Code 1993, § 3-37; Ord. No. 93-5, § 1, 4-12-1993; Ord. No. 97-10, 6-23-1997; Ord. No. 05-3, § 1(3-37), 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 4-47. - Animal removal. 
    Animal control may confiscate and remove animals from the owner's premises for violation of any part of this article. The owner of the animals removed shall be notified by the removing officer. The animals are to be taken to the county animal shelter and may be reclaimed by the owner within five (5) days of removal, provided the violations present at the time of removal are corrected to the satisfaction of the removing animal control officer. If the owner does not reclaim the animals or shows no interest in the animals by the fifth (5th) day, the animals become the property of the county animal shelter to be disposed of in accordance to current county ordinance. Probable cause that such a violation exists is sufficient reason to confiscate such animal. Conviction is not required. 
(Ord. No. 05-3, § 1(3-38), 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 4-48. - Confinement of female dogs and cats in heat. 
    Every female dog and cat, while in heat, shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner that such animal will not be in contact with another dog or cat, as the case may be, nor create a nuisance by attracting other animal; provided this section shall not be construed to prohibit the intentional breeding of animals within an enclosed area on the premises of the owner of an animal being bred. 
(Ord. No. 05-3, § 1(3-39), 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 4-49. - Abandoned animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, possessing or harboring an animal to abandon that animal. 
(b)  If the animal control officer finds that an animal has been abandoned, the animal may be impounded. If the animal has been abandoned in a house or within a fenced area, the officer must make reasonable effort to locate the owner or manager of the property. If the property owner or manager is not the animal owner, then the officer shall secure permission to remove the animal from the person who occupies the property. If the person who occupies the property is the animal owner and cannot be located or refuses to give permission to remove the animal, the officer shall secure an appropriate warrant to seize the animal. 
(c)  An animal seized pursuant to this section shall be impounded and taken to the county animal shelter. If the owner contacts either the city animal control officer or the county animal control department to reclaim the animal, an explanation for the animal's abandonment must be provided to the satisfaction of the city animal control officer before the animal is returned to the owner and the owner must pay any fines and reasonable charges that have accrued for the maintenance of the animal. If the animal is unclaimed by its owner after being held for five (5) days, ownership of the animal is surrendered to the county animal shelter to be disposed of according to the current county ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 05-3, § 1(3-40), 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 4-50. - Interference with animal control officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder, or molest the animal control officer, or other authorized officer or person, in the performance of any duty authorized by this article, or to seek to release any animal in the custody of such person. 
(Ord. No. 05-3, § 1(3-41), 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 4-51. - Dangerous animals. 
(a)  Upon a complaint or when he has reasonable suspicion that a dog is potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious, the animal control officer shall make a determination whether or not such a dog is potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious, pursuant to G.S. 67-4.1. The animal control officer shall issue a written declaration of dangerousness within ten (10) working days of the incident necessitating a determination of whether the dog is potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious. 
(b)  The owner of an animal, subject to a declaration notice, shall have the right to a hearing to determine whether or not the animal shall be declared dangerous as defined by G.S. 67-4.1. The owner shall request a hearing by submitting a written request during normal working hours to the Police Department within three (3) working days after the delivery of the written declaration. 
(c)  The Animal Control Appeals Board, as appointed by the City Council, shall schedule a hearing within ten (10) days of the filing of the objections. Any appeal from the final decision of the Appeals Board shall be taken to the Superior Court by filing a notice of appeal and a petition for review within ten (10) days of the final decision of the Appeals Board. 
(d)  The owner of a dog that has been declared potentially dangerous or dangerous shall confine the dog pursuant to G.S. 67-4.2 and shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Such dog shall be kept, secured and restrained while on the real property of the person owning, keeping or harboring it only in the following ways: 
a.  In a building with doors, windows, and other exits securely fastened shut under the supervision and control of a responsible adult person capable of such supervision and control. 
b.  Securely kept in a locked enclosure which has secure sides, top and bottom and is constructed out of materials and in a manner which will preclude escape by the dog and prevent entry by small children. 
c.  While outside a building or enclosure described in this section, securely leashed with at least no longer than four (4) feet in length in the hands of and under the control of a responsible, competent person capable of such control and muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent such dog from biting persons or other animals. 
No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog that has been declared potentially dangerous or dangerous shall remove such a dog from the real property of such person except to bring such dog to a veterinarian or to the animal shelter, to remove such dog permanently from the territorial jurisdiction of this article, or to provide bona fide exercise necessary for the dogs continued good health. In the event of such removal, such dog shall be securely restrained or enclosed as set forth in this section. Any owner of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog shall erect a sign two (2) feet by two (2) feet on the enclosure housing the dog which shall read: 
"BEWARE OF DOG 
THIS DOG IS DANGEROUS 
STAY AWAY!" 
(2)  The animal control officer will inspect the pens of all animals deemed potentially dangerous or dangerous at least twice annually to ensure that the standards are maintained. 
(3)  An animal which has been declared potentially dangerous or dangerous may be impounded by the animal control officer for being out-of-doors, out of a secure enclosure and not controlled by means of a leash and muzzle, or for being in a location other than described in subsection (1) of this section. 
(e)  If the owner of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog transfers ownership or possession or the dog to another person, the owner shall provide written notice to: 
(1)  The authority that made the determination under this article, stating the name and address of the new owner or possessor of the dog; and 
(2)  The person taking ownership or possession of the dog, specifying the dog's dangerous behavior and the authority's determination. 
(f)  If the owner of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog is unwilling or unable to comply with the regulations set forth in this section for keeping such an animal, he must have the animal immediately, humanely euthanized by animal control or by a licensed veterinarian. 
(g)  Violation of this section is a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(h)  These rules and regulations shall not apply to: 
(1)  A dog used by a public law enforcement agency for law enforcement purposes. 
(2)  A dog that attacked, injured, or threatened a person who at the time: 
a.  Was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the dog's owner. 
b.  Was testing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or has in the past been observed doing so. 
c.  Was committing or attempting to commit a crime upon the dog's owner or upon the dog owner's property. 
d.  A dog where the injury or damage inflicted by the dog was sustained by a domestic animal while the dog was working as a predator control dog on the property of, or under the control of, its owner or keeper, and the damage or injury was to a species or type of domestic animal appropriate to the work of the dog. 
(Ord. No. 05-3, § 1(3-42), 2-14-2005) 
State Law reference- Definitions and procedures, G.S. 67-4.1(c); precautions against attacks by dangerous dogs, G.S. 67-4.2. 
Sec. 4-52. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any violation of this article shall subject the owner to a civil penalty in the amount of $50.00. Violators shall be issued a written citation which must be paid to the office of the Collector of Revenue within five (5) days. 
(b)  For the purpose of enforcement, each and every day that the violation continues may be considered a new violation. 
(c)  Any violation of this article may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor in accordance with G.S. 160A-175. 
(Code 1993, § 3-38; Ord. No. 93-5, § 1(3-43), 4-12-1993; Ord. No. 97-10, 6-23-1997; Ord. No. 05-3, § 1(3-43), 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 4-53. - Dogs on boardwalk and promenade. 
    It shall be unlawful to have a dog on a leash or not on a leash on the boardwalk, excluding seeing-eye dogs. Dogs are allowed on the promenade on a leash. Failure to remove feces is a violation of section 4-40(b) and subjects the violator to a penalty as more specifically provided for in section 4-52. 
(Code 1993, § 3-39; Ord. No. 05-3, § 1(3-44), 2-14-2005) 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Pursuant to Ord. No. 06-04, adopted 3-13-2006, all references within this chapter to the Director of Inspections and Zoning were deleted, and in their place were substituted references to the Chief of Fire-Rescue-EMS-Inspections. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; purchasing, § 2-551 et seq.; electric utility, ch. 10; Fire-Rescue-EMS Services, fire prevention, ch. 14; licenses and business regulations, ch. 16; massage business operators, § 16-109; junked motor vehicles, § 18-246; solid waste, ch. 28; streets and sidewalks, ch. 32; subdivisions, ch. 34; water and wastewater, ch. 38; zoning, ch. 40. 
Federal law reference- Compliance of federal buildings with local building codes and zoning laws, consideration of local laws and cooperation with local officials required, 40 USC 3312. 
State Law reference- Building inspection, G.S. 160A-411 et seq.; building code council and building code created; membership; G.S. 143-136 et seq.; warrants to conduct inspections authorized by law, G.S. 15-27.2; establishment of fire limits, G.S. 160A-435 et seq.; minimum housing standards, G.S. 160A-441 et seq.; contractors, G.S. ch. 87; public [building] contracts, G.S. 143-128 et seq.; North Carolina Manufactured Housing board-manufactured home warranties, G.S. 143-143.8 et seq.; North Carolina Code Officials Qualification Board, G.S. 143-151.8 et seq.; franchises; technical ordinances, G.S. 160A-76; inspection of buildings for fire hazards, G.S. 58-79.1 et seq.; regulating and licensing businesses, trades, etc., G.S. 160A-194; enforcement, G.S. 160A-432. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Adoption of state building code. 
    The current edition of all codes, however titled, including, but not limited to Building Code, as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council and as from time to time amended, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth in this article as the same similarly titled codes, including, but not limited to, Building Code of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 4-1; Code 1993, § 4-1) 
State Law reference- State building code and building code council, G.S. 143-136 et seq. 
Sec. 6-2. - Heating, air conditioning, refrigeration and ventilation code adopted. 
    The current edition of the North Carolina State Mechanical Code and all appendices, as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council and as from time to time amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth in this section as the heating, air conditioning, refrigeration and ventilation code of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 4-2) 
Sec. 6-3. - Chief Building Official. 
    Such officer or employee as the City Manager may appoint shall be the Chief Building Official of the city, and he shall possess all the powers conferred and perform all the duties prescribed by G.S. 160A-412 and other statutes applicable thereto. He shall possess such further power and perform such further duties as may be prescribed by this chapter. He shall receive the fees allowed by statute. The Chief Building Official or his designee, shall have the right to enter, at all reasonable times, any building, structure or premises within the city for the purpose of inspecting or in the performance of his duties. He shall make or cause to be made such inspection of all chimneys, flues, steam and fire openings within the city. He may, when occasion requires, appoint a deputy to perform any part of his duties. 
(Code 1972, § 4-2; Code 1993, § 4-3; Ord. No. 12-5, § 1, 10-8-2012) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-5, § 1, adopted Oct. 8, 2012, amended § 6-3 title to read as herein set out. Former § 6-3 pertained to Chief of Fire Rescue EMS Inspections. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; residency requirements, § 24-21 et seq. 
State Law reference- Building inspection, G.S. 160A-411 et seq.; financial support, G.S. 160A-414. 
Sec. 6-4. - Mechanical Inspector. 
    Such officer or employee as the City Manager may appoint shall be the Mechanical Inspector of the city, and he shall possess all the powers conferred and perform all the duties prescribed by G.S. 160A-412 and other statutes applicable thereto. He shall possess such further power and perform such further duties as may be prescribed by this chapter. He shall receive the fees allowed by statute. The Inspector or his deputy shall have the right to enter, at all reasonable times, any building, structure or premises within the city for the purpose of inspecting or in the performance of his duties. He shall make or cause to be made such inspection of all chimneys, flues, steam and fire openings within the city. He may, when occasion requires, appoint a deputy to perform any part of his duties. 
(Code 1993, § 4-4) 
Sec. 6-5. - Fire districts-Primary. 
    A primary fire district is hereby established as follows: Beginning at the Pamlico River on Stewart Parkway extending northward along the eastward side of Gladden Street to the southward side of West Third Street, thence eastward down Third Street to the westward side of Bonner Street, thence southward down Bonner Street to the Pamlico River. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1(4-5), 1-9-2006) 
State Law reference- Establishment of fire limits, G.S. 160A-435 et seq.; restrictions within primary fire limits, G.S. 160A-436. 
Sec. 6-6. - Fire districts-Secondary. 
    Secondary fire districts are hereby established as follows: 
(a)  Beginning at the intersection of Fifth Street and Telfair Street, and running with Telfair Street northwardly to Sixth Street; thence with Sixth Street eastwardly to McNair Street; thence with McNair Street northwardly to Seventh Street; thence with Seventh Street westwardly to John Small Avenue; thence with John Small Avenue westwardly to Fifth Street; thence with Fifth Street southwardly to the point of beginning. 
(b)  Beginning at the intersection of Thirteenth Street and Washington Street, and running thence westwardly with Thirteenth Street to Trade Street; thence with Trade Street, first northwardly and then westwardly, to the easterly edge of U.S. Highway No. 17; thence with the easterly edge of U.S. Highway No. 17 northwardly to the Washington city limits; thence with the city limits line in a generally northerly direction to Fifteenth Street; thence with Fifteenth Street eastwardly to Hackney Avenue Extension; thence with Hackney Avenue Extension northwardly six hundred (600) feet; thence due east to the Washington city limits; thence with the city limit line southwardly to Fifteenth Street; thence with Fifteenth Street eastwardly to Washington Street; thence with Washington Street southwardly to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1972, § 7A-20; Code 1993, § 4-6; Ord. No. 95-20, § 1, 11-13-1995) 
State Law reference- Restrictions within secondary fire limits, G.S. 160A-437. 
Sec. 6-7. - Permit fees. 
    Permit and inspection fees, and criteria associated with them, shall be as established from time to time by ordinance. Fees and criteria in existence at the time this Code was adopted remain in effect until later revised or repealed. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 1, 6-19-2006) 
State Law reference- Financial support, G.S. 160A-414. 
Sec. 6-8. - Handicapped parking signs. 
(a)  Each parking space identified for use by a disabled/handicapped person shall have a freestanding (pole) metal sign erected directly in front of the space. Any other placement of a disabled/handicapped sign is not acceptable within the city and its extraterritorial planning and zoning jurisdiction. 
(b)  The disabled/handicapped freestanding (pole) sign shall be constructed in conformity with the state building code, volume 1-C, pertaining to making buildings and facilities accessible to and used by the physically handicapped. 
(c)  Buildings that have received a Certificate of Occupancy, prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, are not required to meet the requirements listed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. However, in the event that any existing building requires a building permit for an addition, renovation, or expansion, the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be required. 
(d)  Enforcement of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) is the sole responsibility of the federal government. The city shall have responsibility for enforcing compliance with ADA requirements only for buildings owned or operated by the city. 
(Code 1993, § 4-8; Ord. No. 97-6, 5-19-1997) 
Secs. 6-9-6-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLUMBING 

Sec. 6-35. - Application of article provision; adoption of code. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to existing installations, except in those cases herein specified, but shall apply to all new installations and to any building outside of the corporate limits which is connected to the city water or sewer system. Failure to comply with any part of this article shall be grounds to refuse water or sewer service to buildings outside the city. 
(b)  The current edition of the North Carolina Plumbing Code and appendices, as adopted and published by the North Carolina Building Code Council and as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth in this section as the plumbing code of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 17-26; Code 1993, § 4-1) 
Sec. 6-36. - Plumbing Inspector. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of Plumbing Inspector of the city. Such Plumbing Inspector shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall serve at his pleasure. He shall not engage in the occupation of plumbing either directly or indirectly while holding office. 
(b)  The Plumbing Inspector or his assistant shall have general charge and supervision over all plumbing done in the city and shall require all persons to conform with the provisions of this article. He shall issue the permits and make the inspections hereinafter provided for and shall keep a daily record thereof. He shall make monthly reports to the City Manager. 
(Code 1972, §§ 17-2, 17-3; Code 1993, § 4-27) 
Secs. 6-37-6-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICITY 

Sec. 6-61. - Code adopted. 
    The current edition of the North Carolina Electrical Code and appendices, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth in this section as the electrical code of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 6-1; Code 1993, § 4-46) 
Sec. 6-62. - Electrical Inspector-Appointment and duties. 
    There is hereby created the office of Electrical Inspector, whose duty shall be to enforce all state and local laws governing electrical installations and materials, to issue permits for and to make inspections of all new electrical installations and such other inspections as may be prescribed by the City Council. He shall make a monthly report to the City Manager of all inspections made and fees collected and shall keep a permanent record thereof and such other records as may be prescribed by the City Manager. The salary or fees to be paid to the Electrical Inspector shall be determined by the City Council. The Electrical Inspector shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. 
(Code 1972, § 6-2; Code 1993, § 4-47) 
Sec. 6-63. - Electrical Inspector-Authority. 
    The Electrical Inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building in the discharge of his official duties or for the purpose of making any inspection, reinspection or test of the installation of electric wiring, devices, appliances and equipment contained therein, and shall have the authority to cut or disconnect any wire in cases of emergency where necessary for safety to life and property. The Electrical Inspector is hereby authorized to disconnect or order the discontinuation of electrical service to any electric wiring, devices, appliances or equipment found to be dangerous to life or property because it is defective or defectively installed until such wiring, devices, appliances and equipment and their installation have been made safe and approved by the Electrical Inspector. 
(Code 1972, § 6-3; Code 1993, § 4-48) 
Sec. 6-64. - Electrical permit fees. 
    A schedule of electrical permit fees shall be in accordance with section 6-7. 
(Code 1972, § 6-5; Code 1993, § 4-49) 
Secs. 6-65-6-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 6-87. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Private means not open to the public, not publicly owned or not otherwise regulated by the state either by statute or by rules or regulations of one (1) of its administrative agencies. 
    Swimming pool means any artificially constructed, nonportable pool capable of being used for swimming or bathing having a depth of two (2) feet or more at any point. 
(Code 1972, § 23-1; Code 1993, § 4-66) 
Sec. 6-88. - Permit required for construction. 
(a)  A permit shall be applied for and issued by the Building Inspector before construction shall begin on any swimming pool. The application for the permit shall be accompanied by a complete and detailed set of plans and specifications of the swimming pool. Before any permit shall be issued such plans and specifications shall be approved by the Chief Building Official and the county Health Department, and before any swimming pool shall be used, a final inspection and approval shall be required from both the Chief Building Official and the county Health Department. 
(b)  All applications for a permit shall be accompanied by the fee required under section 6-7. 
(Code 1972, § 23-2; Code 1993, § 4-67; Ord. No. 12-5, § 1, 10-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-89. - Construction and use requirements. 
(a)  Pool construction shall conform to the building and plumbing codes of the city, and any accessory building which houses pumping and filtering equipment must conform to the provisions of chapter 40, pertaining to zoning. 
(b)  Illuminating lights shall be so erected, installed and shielded so as to eliminate direct rays and minimize reflected rays upon adjoining premises. 
(c)  The department of public works may regulate the hours for filling of pools and no pool shall be drained during periods of rainfall. 
(d)  Owners of pools shall regulate their use in such manner as not to create undue noise or disturbance. 
(e)  A swimming pool and any accessory building which houses pumping or filtering equipment shall be considered as accessory structures to the main building and as such shall comply with all requirements of chapter 40, pertaining to zoning; except no swimming pool or swimming pool accessory structure shall be located nearer than six (6) feet from the side or rear lot lines or from any house and an uncovered ground-level pool shall not be included in computing the percentage of a lot which is built on. 
(f)  No exposed electric wires shall be nearer than five (5) feet from the water's edge, nor shall any exposed and permanently installed electric wire within twenty-five (25) feet from the water's edge of the pool be less than ten (10) feet above the ground, nor shall wires of any kind cross or be over the water surface unless otherwise approved by the Electrical Inspector. 
(g)  There shall be no cross connection of the city water supply with any other source of water supply for the pool. The line from the city water supply to the pool shall be protected against the backflow of water by means of an air gap and shall discharge at least six (6) inches above the maximum high-water level of the make-up tank or the pool. 
(h)  The drain line for the pool shall be connected to the storm drainage system. 
(i)  The construction of the pool shall be made in such a manner that all scum, splash and deck water shall not return to the pool, except through the filter system. 
(j)  The pool shall be kept free at all times of floating material, sediment and debris either by an automatic surface skimmer, scum gutter or some other means approved by the county Health Department. 
(k)  The size and design of the recirculating system shall be approved by the county Board of Health. 
(l)  All swimming pools to be constructed or which are already constructed shall be enclosed by a fence which shall be at least four (4) feet in height and which shall be of a type not readily climbed by children. The gates shall be of a self-closing and latching type with the latch on the inside of the gate, not readily available for children to open; provided, however, that if the entire premises of the residence is enclosed, then this provision may be waived by the Chief Building Official upon inspection and approval of the residence enclosure. This subsection shall not apply to commercial swimming pools operated under the following conditions: 
(1)  The owner or operator of a commercial swimming pool has at least one (1) employee on duty twenty-four (24) hours a day, whose duty it will be, among other things, to watch the pool. 
(2)  The principal work of this employee shall be located where he can clearly see the entire pool. 
(3)  The pool area shall be sufficiently lighted to enable the employee on duty to see anyone in the immediate area. 
(Code 1972, § 23-3; Code 1993, § 4-68; Ord. No. 12-5, § 1, 10-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-90. - Inspection. 
    The Chief Building Official shall have the right at any reasonable hour to inspect any swimming pool for the purposes of determining that all provisions of this article are fulfilled and complied with. 
(Code 1972, § 23-4; Code 1993, § 4-69; Ord. No. 12-5, § 1, 10-8-2012) 
Secs. 6-91-6-108. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOUSING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, adopted Aug. 13, 2012, repealed former Art. V, §§ 6-109-6-139, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. Former Art. V pertained to Housing City of Washington and derived from Code 1972, §§ 9-1, 9-4-9-14; Code 1993, §§ 4-86-4-97 and Ord. No. 11-3, § 1, adopted Feb. 14, 2011. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 6-109. - General. 
    These regulations shall be known as the City of Washington Minimum Housing Code, hereafter referred to as "this article." 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-110. - Finding; purpose. 
(a)  Pursuant to G.S. 160A-441, it is hereby found and declared that there exist in the City of Washington dwellings which are unfit for human habitation due to dilapidation; defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; lack of ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions rendering such dwellings unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous, or detrimental to the health and safety, or otherwise inimical to the welfare, of the residents of the city. 
(b)  In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city as authorized by G.S. 160A Article 19, Part 6, it is the purpose of this article to establish minimum standards of fitness for the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings used for human habitation, as expressly authorized by G.S. 160A-444. 
(c)  The current edition of the North Carolina State Residential Building Code, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth in this article as the Housing Code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-111. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to any existing dwelling or structure and to all dwellings or structures hereafter constructed, altered, or repaired within the city. Portable, mobile or modular buildings or structures, including trailers, when used or intended for use as a dwelling within the city, shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this article. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall be applicable within the corporate limits of the city and extend one (1) mile into its extraterritorial planning jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-112. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
    Abandoned structure means any structure, whether designed or intended for residential or other uses, which is vacant or not in active use, regardless of purpose or reason, for the previous one-year period and which is determined by the Code Official or City Council, as more specifically provided for herein, to be unfit for human habitation or occupancy based upon the standards as set forth in this article. 
    Basement means a portion of a dwelling which is located partly underground, having direct access to light and air from windows located above the level of the adjoining ground. 
    Cellar means a portion of a dwelling, which is located partly or wholly underground, having inadequate access to light and air from windows located partly or wholly below the level of the adjoining ground. 
    Certificate of occupancy means written certification by an inspector that a dwelling or dwelling unit complies with the requirements of this article and all other applicable provisions of the Washington City Code and North Carolina General Statutes. 
    Code Official means the person duly designated by the City Council to administer and enforce this article. 
    Deteriorated means a dwelling that is unfit for human habitation and can be repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards established by this article at a cost not in excess of fifty (50) percent of its value, which cost and value shall be determined by findings of the Code Official as more specifically provided for hereinafter. 
    Dilapidated means a dwelling that is unfit for human habitation and cannot be repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards established by this article except at a cost in excess of fifty (50) percent of its value, which cost and value shall be determined by findings of the Code Official as more specifically provided for hereinafter. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure, or manufactured or mobile home or part thereof which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living, sleeping or habitation by human occupants, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith. Temporary housing, as defined in this section, shall not be regarded as a dwelling. The term shall include within its meaning the terms "rooming house" and "rooming unit", as defined in this section. 
    Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
    Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination method approved by the Code Official. 
    Family means an individual living alone; two (2) or more persons related by blood, adoption, or marriage living together in a dwelling unit; or a group of not more than four (4) unrelated persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a shared dwelling unit. 
    Garbage means the waste material resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food or trash. 
    Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, heater rooms, foyers or connecting corridors, closets and storage spaces. 
    Habitable structure means any structure used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes for extended periods or on a regular basis or designed for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes for extended periods or on a regular basis. 
    Imminent danger means a condition which would cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time. 
    Infestation means the presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents, bats or other pests in such number as to constitute a menace to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants of the dwelling or the public. 
    Inspections division means the Inspections Division of the Planning and Development Department of the City of Washington. 
    Manufactured or mobile home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which in the traveling mode is eight (8) body feet or more in width, or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet; and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. "Manufactured home" includes any structure that meets all of the requirements of this subsection except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. For manufactured homes built before June 15, 1976, "manufactured home" means a portable manufactured housing unit designed for transportation on its own chassis and placement on a temporary or semi-permanent foundation having a measurement of over thirty-two (32) feet in length and over eight (8) feet in width. "Manufactured home" also means a double-wide manufactured home, which is two (2) or more portable manufactured housing units designed for transportation on their own chassis that connect on site for placement on a temporary or semi-permanent foundation having a measurement of over thirty-two (32) feet in length and over eight (8) feet in width. 
    Multiple (multifamily) dwelling means any dwelling containing more than two (2) dwelling units. 
    Occupant means any person over one (1) year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or eating in or having actual possession of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
    Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
    Owner means any person who alone, jointly or severally with others: 
(a)  Shall have title to any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; 
(b)  Shall be a mortgagee of record for any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit; or 
(c)  Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, as owner or agent of the actual owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the actual owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article, and with the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he or she were the owner. 
    Party or parties in interest means all persons who have interests of record in a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, and any persons who are in possession thereof. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or other legal entity. 
    Plumbing means all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, mechanical garbage disposal units (mechanical sink grinders), sewage disposal pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines. 
    Public authority means any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city, the county or the State relating to health, fire, building regulations or other activities concerning dwellings in the city. 
    Rooming or boarding house means any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling, containing one (1) or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three (3) or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father or brother or sister of the owner or operator. 
    Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
    Rubbish means the term shall include paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass and dust. 
    Supplied means paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of the owner or operator. 
    Temporary housing means any tent, trailer or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure or to any utility system on the same premises for more than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
    Unfit for human habitation means conditions existing in a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or rooming unit which violate or do not comply with one (1) or more of the minimum standards of fitness, or one (1) or more of the requirements, established by this article. 
    Vacant dwelling means any dwelling that has not been occupied or otherwise inhabited for a period of six (6) months. In the case of rental property, "vacant dwelling" shall also refer to any dwelling unit or rooming unit that is currently unoccupied and not being leased or rented to any person. 
    Water closet means a water closet is a room which contains a flush toilet, usually accompanied by a wash bowl or sink. 
    Words having certain meaning means whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit", "rooming house", "rooming unit", or "premises" are used in this article, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
DIVISION 2. - MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS 

Sec. 6-113. - Minimum standards of fitness for dwellings and dwelling units. 
    Every dwelling and dwelling unit used as a human habitation, or held out for use as a human habitation, shall comply with all the minimum standards of fitness for human habitation and all of the applicable requirements of this article. No person shall occupy as owner or occupant, or let to another for occupancy or use as a human habitation, any dwelling or dwelling unit which does not comply with all the minimum standards of fitness for human habitation. Only approved building materials for specific purposes may be used in making necessary repairs to a dwelling or dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-114. - Dwelling unfit for human habitation. 
    The Code Official shall determine that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation if he finds that any one (1) of the following conditions exist in such dwelling: 
(a)  Interior walls or vertical studs which seriously list, lean or buckle to such an extent as to render the dwelling unsafe. 
(b)  Supporting member or members which show thirty-three (33) percent or more damage or deterioration, or nonsupporting, enclosing or outside walls or covering which shows fifty (50) percent or more of damage or deterioration. 
(c)  Floors or roofs which have improperly distributed loads, which are overloaded or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
(d)  Such damage by fire, wind or other causes as to render the dwelling unsafe. 
(e)  Dilapidation, structural defects, decay, unsanitary conditions, uncleanliness, or disrepair which are dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or other people in the city or the city's jurisdiction. 
(f)  Inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic. 
(g)  Defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities. 
(h)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, heating or sanitary facilities to such extent as to endanger the health, safety or general welfare of the occupants or other residents of the city. 
(i)  Lack of proper electrical, heating or plumbing facilities required by this article which constitutes a health or safety hazard. 
(j)  Lack of connection to a potable water supply and/or to the public sewer or other approved sewage disposal system, the lack of either one of which renders a dwelling unfit for human habitation. For the purpose of this standard, a dwelling is not connected to a potable water supply if the water supply has been "cut off" because of non-payment of the water bill or otherwise, or if the system for any reason is not receiving a flow of potable water to the tap. 
(k)  Any other condition that exists in a dwelling or dwelling unit that renders it dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants of the dwelling, the occupants of neighboring dwellings, or other residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-115. - Minimum standards for exterior property areas. 
(a)  All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon. Lots shall also be properly graded to prevent surface water run-off from being directed onto adjoining properties. 
(c)  All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair and maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
(d)  All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation. 
(e)  Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of another tenant. 
(f)  All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained in a structurally sound manner and in good repair. 
(g)  No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-116. - Minimum standards for structural condition. 
(a)  Foundation. 
(1)  A foundation wall system shall support the building at all points and shall be free of holes, cracks, and loose mortar or masonry which would admit rodents, water or dampness to the interior of the building or which lessen the capability of the foundation to support the building. 
(2)  Crawl space shall be graded so as to prevent any standing water. 
(3)  Foundation walls and footings shall be free of defects such as cracks, holes and loose mortar. 
(4)  Piers shall be sound with no loose mortar or masonry. 
(b)  Floors. 
(1)  There shall not be decayed, termite-damaged, fire-damaged, broken, overloaded or sagging sills that adversely affect the structural integrity of the building framing system. 
(2)  Joists shall not be decayed or broken so as to adversely affect the structural integrity of the floor framing system. 
(3)  Flooring shall be weather-tight without holes or cracks which permit excessive air to penetrate rooms. 
(4)  There shall be no loose flooring. 
(5)  Bathroom and kitchen flooring surfaces shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit such flooring to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(6)  All floor coverings shall be constructed and maintained so as not to constitute a trip hazard and kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(7)  There shall be no use of the ground for floors or wood floors on the ground. 
(c)  Exterior walls. 
(1)  There shall be no broken, cracked or fire damaged structural members. 
(2)  All siding shall be weather-tight, with no holes or excessive cracks or decayed boards which permit excessive air or moisture to penetrate rooms. 
(3)  There shall be no loose siding. 
(4)  Exterior surfaces not inherently resistant to deterioration shall be treated with protective, appropriate siding or painted and maintained in good repair to prevent deterioration. 
(d)  Interior walls. 
(1)  The interior finish shall be free of holes and cracks. 
(2)  All interior walls shall be treated, painted and maintained so as to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(3)  No loose plaster, loose boards or other loose wall materials shall be allowed. 
(4)  There shall be no decayed or termite-damaged studs. 
(5)  There shall be no broken or cracked studs or other broken or cracked structure members. 
(e)  Ceilings. 
(1)  There shall be no joists which are decayed or broken, sagging, or improperly supported. 
(2)  There shall be no holes or excessive cracks which permit air to penetrate rooms. 
(3)  There shall be no loose plaster, boards, gypsum wall board, or other ceiling finish. 
(4)  There shall be no evidence of water damage. 
(f)  Roof. 
(1)  There shall be no rafters which are decayed or broken. 
(2)  No rafters shall be damaged by fire. 
(3)  Sheathing shall not be loose. 
(4)  No loose roof covering shall be allowed, nor shall there be any holes or leaks which could cause damage to the structure. 
(5)  There shall be proper flashing at walls and roof penetrations. 
(6)  There shall be no chimneys or part thereof which are defective, deteriorated or in danger of falling, or in such condition to constitute a fire hazard. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-117. - Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities. 
(a)  Plumbing system. 
(1)  Each dwelling unit shall be connected to a potable water supply and to the public sewer or other approved sewer disposal system. 
(2)  Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, water closet and an adequate supply of both cold and hot water. 
(3)  All plumbing fixtures shall meet the standards of the North Carolina Plumbing Code and shall be maintained in a state of good repair and good working order. 
(4)  All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling unit and be accessible to the occupants of same. The water closet and tub or shower shall be located in a room or rooms affording privacy to the user. 
(5)  Water closets shall be functional and free of leaks. 
(6)  Water closets shall not be loose from floor or leaking. 
(7)  Tub and shower stall floors and walls shall be watertight. 
(8)  Fixtures shall not be cracked or broken and shall function as designed. 
(9)  Sewer and water lines shall be properly supported, with no broken or leaking lines. 
(b)  Heating system. 
(1)  Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall provide central heat or other approved permanent source of heating. 
(2)  Central and electric heating system. Every central or electric heating system shall be of sufficient capacity so as to heat at least one (1) habitable room, excluding the kitchen, in every dwelling unit to which it is connected a minimum temperature of sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit measured at a point three (3) feet above the floor during ordinary winter conditions. 
a.  All ducts, pipes and tubes should be free of leaks and functioning properly. 
(3)  Other heating facilities. Where a central or electric heating system is not provided, each dwelling and dwelling unit shall be provided with sufficient fireplaces, chimneys, flues or gas vents whereby heating appliances are connected so as to heat at least one (1) habitable room, excluding the kitchen, with a minimum temperature of sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit measured at a point three (3) feet above the floor during ordinary winter conditions. 
a.  All floor, wall or room heaters must comply with the standards of the North Carolina State Building Code. 
b.  Chimneys shall have no loose bricks or mortar and shall have a flue. 
c.  Flues shall have no holes. 
d.  Open masonry fireplaces shall only be used as supplemental heat and not as a primary source of heating. 
e.  No portable kerosene space heater may be used as a primary source of heat. 
f.  If the fireplace opening is closed, the closure shall be of noncombustible material and airtight. 
g.  No hanging chimneys shall be allowed. 
(c)  Electrical system. 
(1)  Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall be wired for electric lights and convenience receptacles. Every habitable room shall contain at least two (2) floor or wall-type electric convenience receptacles, connected in such manner as determined by the North Carolina Electric Codes. There shall be installed in every bathroom, water closet room, laundry room and furnace room at least one (1) supplied ceiling or wall type electric fixture for lighting. In the event wall or ceiling light fixtures are not provided in any habitable room, then such habitable room shall contain at least three (3) floor or wall type electric convenience receptacles. 
(2)  Every common hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall have adequate lighting by electric lights at all times when natural lighting is not sufficient. 
(3)  All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring shall be maintained in a state of good repair and installed in accordance with the North Carolina Electric Codes and any new provisions correlating with new provisions of the North Carolina Building Code. 
(4)  All receptacles shall have outlet covers installed. 
(5)  All light switches shall have covers installed. 
(6)  Each dwelling unit shall have electric service from a separately metered delivery system provided by a licensed utility company. No drop cords, extension cords or similar wiring mechanism may be utilized in any fashion other than in conformance with the purposes for which it was designed. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-118. - Minimum standards for smoke detectors. 
    Every owner of a dwelling unit shall have UL approved smoke detectors installed, mounted on or near the ceiling on every level, at a point centrally located in the corridor or area giving access to each group of rooms used for sleeping purposes. Where bedrooms are not centrally located, more than one (1) smoke detector may be required. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-119. - Minimum standards for ventilation. 
(a)  All habitable rooms shall be provided with aggregate glazing area of not less than eight (8) percent of the total floor area of such rooms. One-half (1/2) of the required area of glazing shall be openable. For the purpose of determining the light and ventilation requirement, any room may be considered as a portion of an adjoining room when one-half ( 1/2; ) of the area of the common wall is open and unobstructed and provides an opening of not less than one-tenth ( 1/10; ) of the floor area of the interior room or twenty-five (25) square feet, whichever is greater. Exceptions to this standard are as follows: 
(1)  The glazed areas need not be openable where the opening is not required by Section 310 of Volume VII of the North Carolina Building Code and an approved mechanical ventilation system is provided capable of producing 0.35 air change per hour in the room or a whole-house mechanical ventilation system is installed capable of supplying outdoor ventilation air of fifteen (15) cubic feet per minute (cfm) (7.08 L/s) per occupant computed on the basis of two (2) occupants for the first bedroom and one (1) occupant for each additional bedroom. 
(2)  The glazed areas may be omitted in rooms where the opening is not required by Section 310 of Volume VII of the North Carolina Building Code and an approved mechanical ventilation system is provided capable of producing 0.35 air change per hour in the room or a whole-house mechanical ventilation system is installed capable of supplying outdoor ventilation air of fifteen (15) cubic feet per minute (cfm) (7.08 L/s) per occupant computed on the basis of two (2) occupants for the first bedroom and one (1) occupant for each additional bedroom, and artificial light is provided capable of producing an average illumination of six (6) foot-candles (6.46 L/s) over the area of the room at a height of thirty (30) inches above the floor level. 
(b)  All exterior windows and doors shall be reasonably weather-tight, shall have no broken glass, and shall have adequate operable locks and hardware. 
(c)  All interior windows and hardware shall be in good repair. 
(d)  Required glazed openings shall open directly onto a street or public alley, or a yard or court located on the same lot as the building. 
(e)  Bathrooms, water closet compartments and other similar rooms shall be provided with aggregate glazing area in windows of not less than three (3) square feet, one-half (1/2) of which must be openable. An exception to this standard is as follows: 
(1)  The glazed areas shall not be required where artificial light and an approved mechanical ventilation system capable of producing a change of air every twelve (12) minutes are provided. Bathroom exhausts shall be vented directly to the outside. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-120. - Minimum standards for space, use and location. 
(a)  Room size. 
(1)  Every dwelling unit shall have at least one (1) habitable room which shall have not less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area. Other habitable rooms shall have an area of not less than seventy (70) square feet. Every kitchen shall have not less than fifty (50) square feet of floor area. Habitable rooms, except kitchens, shall be not less than seven (7) feet in any horizontal dimension. 
(2)  In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one (1) occupant shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one (1) occupant shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each occupant twelve (12) years of age and over and at least thirty-five (35) square feet of floor area for each occupant under twelve (12) years of age. 
(b)  Ceiling height. 
(1)  Habitable rooms, except kitchens, shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven (7) feet six (6) inches for at least fifty (50) percent of their required areas. 
Not more than fifty (50) percent of the required area may have a sloped ceiling less than seven (7) feet six (6) inches in height with no portion of required areas less than five (5) feet in height. If any room has a furred ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height is required for at least fifty (50) percent of the area thereof, but in no case shall the height of the furred ceiling be less than seven (7) feet. A portion of a room with a sloping ceiling measuring less than five (5) feet zero (0) inches or a furred ceiling measuring less than seven (7) feet zero (0) inches from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall not be considered as contributing to the minimum required habitable area for that room. Exceptions to this standard are as follows: 
a.  Beams and girders spaced not less than four (4) feet on center may project not more than six (6) inches below the required ceiling height. 
b.  All other rooms including kitchens, baths and hallways may have a ceiling height of not less than seven (7) feet measured to the lowest projection from the ceiling. 
c.  Ceiling height in basements without habitable spaces may not be less than six (6) feet eight (8) inches clear except for under beams, girders, ducts or other obstructions where the clear height shall be six (6) feet four (4) inches. 
(c)  Cellar. 
(1)  No cellar shall be used for living purposes. 
(d)  Basements. 
(1)  No basement shall be used for living purposes unless: 
a.  The floor and walls are substantially water-tight; 
b.  The total window area, total openable window area, and ceiling height are equal to those required for habitable rooms; and 
c.  The required minimum window area of every habitable room is entirely above the grade adjoining such window area, except where the window or windows face a stairwell, window well, or access way. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-121. - Minimum standards for means of egress. 
(a)  Every dwelling shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress with a minimum ceiling height of seven (7) feet leading to a safe and open space at ground level. 
(b)  Every exterior, cellar and basement door or hatchway shall be substantially weathertight and rodent proof, and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. 
(c)  Every exterior door shall be provided with properly installed hardware that is maintained to ensure reasonable ease of operation to open, close and secure as intended by the manufacturer of the door and attached hardware. 
(d)  Exterior door frames shall be properly maintained and shall be affixed with weatherstripping and thresholds as required to be substantially weather-tight, watertight and rodent and insect resistant when the door is in a closed position. 
(e)  Exterior door jams, stops, headers and molding shall be securely attached to the structure, maintained in good condition without splitting or deterioration that would minimize the strength and security of the door in a closed position. 
(f)  All exterior doors shall have manufactured locks specifically designed for use with exterior doors requiring a key to be unlocked from the outside. 
(g)  Every sleeping room shall have at least one (1) openable window or exterior door approved for emergency egress or rescue. The units must be operable from the inside to a full clear opening without the use of a key or tool. Where windows are provided as a means of egress or rescue they shall have a sill height of not more than forty-four (44) inches above the floor. 
(h)  All egress or rescue windows from sleeping rooms must have a net clear opening of four (4.0) square feet. The minimum net clear opening height shall be twenty-two (22) inches. The minimum net clear opening width shall be twenty (20) inches. Each egress window from sleeping rooms must have a minimum total glass area of not less than five (5.0) square feet in the case of a second story window. 
(i)  Bars, grills, screens or other obstructions placed over emergency escape windows shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key or tool. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-122. - Minimum standards for porches or raised platforms. 
(a)  Foundation floorings, ceilings and roofings for porches and raised platforms shall be equal to the standards set forth in section 6-116, except sills and joists need not be level if providing drainage for a floor and floors need not be weather-tight. 
(b)  Roof posts and attached railings shall be structurally sound. 
(c)  Every porch terrace or raised platform located at least thirty (30) inches above the adjacent finished grade shall be equipped with guardrails not less than thirty-six (36) inches high. Open guardrails shall have intermediate rails such that a six (6) inch sphere cannot pass through any opening. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-123. - Minimum standards for stairs and steps. 
(a)  Stairs and steps shall not be decayed and shall be in good repair. 
(b)  Every rail shall be firmly fastened and maintained in good condition. 
(c)  No flight of stairs more than one (1) inch out of its intended position or pulled away from supporting or adjacent structures shall be allowed. 
(d)  Supports shall be structurally sound. 
(e)  Steps and stairs requiring replacement due to deterioration shall be constructed in compliance with North Carolina State Building Code standards. 
(f)  Stairways having four (4) or more risers above a floor or finished ground level shall be equipped with handrails located not less than thirty (30) inches nor more than thirty-eight (38) inches above the leading edge of a tread. An exception from this standard is that handrails that form part of a guardrail may be forty-two (42) inches high. 
(g)  Gripping surfaces shall be continuous without interruption. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-124. - Minimum standards for control of insects, rodents and infestations. 
(a)  Screens. In every dwelling unit for which an air conditioner is not provided, every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor space shall have supplied and installed screens and a self-closing device for protection against mosquitoes, flies, and other insects. Every window or other device with openings to outdoor space shall be supplied with screens, in every dwelling unit for which an air conditioner is not provided. 
(b)  Rodent control. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation and every other opening to a basement which might provide an entry for rodents shall be supplied with screens installed or such other approved device as will effectively prevent their entrance. 
(c)  Infestation. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination or removal of any insects, rodents, bats or other pests therein or on the premises, and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one (1) dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination or removal whenever his or her dwelling unit is the only one infested. Whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a rodent proof or reasonable insect proof condition, extermination or removal shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two (2) or more of the dwelling units in any structure or in the shared or public parts of any structure containing two (2) or more dwelling units, extermination or removal shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(d)  Garbage storage and disposal. Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage containers as required by the Washington City Code and the owner, operator or agent in control of such dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for the removal of garbage. At least one (1) ninety-five (95) gallon outside garbage can shall be required for single-family residences. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-125. - Minimum standards applicable to rooming houses; exceptions. 
    All of the provisions, minimum standards, and requirements of this article shall be applicable to rooming houses and to every person who operates a rooming house or who occupies or lets to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except as provided in the following subsections: 
(a)  Water closets, hand lavatories and bathing facilities. At least one (1) water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower, properly connected to an approved water system and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each four (4) rooms within a rooming house wherever said facilities are shared. All such facilities shall be located within the residence building served and shall be directly accessible from a common hall or passageway and shall be not more than one (1) story removed from any of the persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all times. Such required facilities shall not be located in a cellar. 
(b)  Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one (1) occupant shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one (1) occupant shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each occupant twelve (12) years of age or older and at least thirty-five (35) square feet of floor area for each occupant under twelve (12) years of age. 
(c)  Sanitary facilities. Every water closet, flush urinal, lavatory basin, bathtub, or shower required by subsection (a) of this section shall be located within the rooming house and within a room or rooms which afford privacy, are separate from habitable rooms, and are accessible from a common hall without going outside the rooming house or through any other room therein. 
(d)  Sanitary conditions. The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings; every other part of the rooming house; and the entire premises where the entire structure or building within which the rooming house is contained is leased or occupied by the operator. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-126. - Responsibilities of owners and occupants. 
(a)  Every owner of a dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining the shared or public areas of the dwelling and the premises thereof in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep that part of the dwelling or dwelling unit and the premises thereof which he occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(c)  No owner or owner's agent shall lease or rent to any other person any vacant dwelling unit unless it complies with the provisions of this article and is reasonably clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-127. - Special historic buildings and districts. 
    All exterior alterations or repairs required by the provisions of this article to structures that are identified and classified by the City Council as a designated landmark or being within a local historic district must meet the requirements of the City of Washington as administered by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 6-128. - Duties of the code official. 
    The Director of Planning and Development (or his designee) is hereby designated as the Code Official to administer and enforce the provisions of this article and to exercise the duties and powers herein prescribed. It shall be the duty of the Code Official: 
(a)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city and to inspect dwellings as well as dwelling units located in the city in order to determine which dwellings and dwelling units are unfit for human habitation and for the purpose of carrying out the objectives of this article with respect to such dwellings and dwelling units; 
(b)  To take such action, together with other appropriate departments and agencies, public and private, as may be necessary to effectuate the rehabilitation of housing which is deteriorated; 
(c)  To keep a record of the results of inspections made under this article and an inventory of those dwellings that do not meet the minimum standards of fitness herein prescribed; and 
(d)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-129. - Powers of the code official. 
    The Code Official is authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article, including the following powers in addition to others granted herein: 
(a)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation; 
(b)  To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence; 
(c)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations and inspections; provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; and 
(d)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-130. - Inspections: Right of entry. 
    For the purpose of making inspections, the Code Official is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises. The owner or occupant of every dwelling unit or rooming unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Code Official free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, and its premises at all reasonable times for the purposes of such inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit, and its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to affect compliance with the provisions of this article or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-131. - Housing appeals board. 
    The Board of Adjustment, provided for under chapter 40, shall serve as the Housing Appeals Board, to which appeals may be taken from any decision or order of the Code Official, as more specifically provided for by section 40-510. Such Housing Appeals Board shall perform the duties prescribed by section 40-512, shall have the power to adopt rules of procedure relative to its duties under this article and shall keep an accurate record of all its proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-132. - Procedure for enforcement. 
(a)  Preliminary investigation; notice; hearing. Whenever a petition is filed with the Code Official by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of the city charging that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the Code Official (on his own motion) that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, he shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such dwelling or dwelling unit a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the Code Official (or his designated agent) at a place within the city, therein fixed, not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the serving of such complaint. The owner or any party in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. Notice of such hearing shall also be given to at least one (1) of the persons signing a petition relating to such dwelling. Any person desiring to do so may attend such hearing and give evidence relevant to the matter being heard. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Code Official. 
(1)  During said hearing, the Code Official shall, among other things, determine and establish the estimated cost to repair, alter, or improve the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation and the estimated value of the dwelling using available information, including but not limited to tax valuations and any relevant evidence presented. 
(b)  Procedure after hearing. If, after such notice and hearing, the Code Official determines that the dwelling or dwelling unit in question is unfit for human habitation, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination, including his conclusion as to whether the dwelling or dwelling unit is deteriorated or dilapidated, and issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof one (1) of the following orders that includes his findings and conclusion: 
(1)  Deteriorated dwelling. If the Code Official determines that the dwelling or dwelling unit is deteriorated, he shall issue an order requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation. The order may also require the owner to vacate and close the dwelling or dwelling unit until the repairs, alterations and improvements have been made if continued occupancy during the time allowed for repair, alteration, or improvement will present a significant threat of bodily harm, taking into account the nature of the necessary repairs, alterations, or improvements; the current state of the property; and any additional risks due to the presence and capacity of minors under the age of eighteen (18) or occupants with physical and mental disabilities. The order shall also state that the failure to make timely repairs, alterations or improvements as directed in the order shall make the dwelling subject to the issuance of an unfit order under subsection (d)(1) of this section. 
(2)  Dilapidated dwelling. If the Code Official determines that the dwelling or dwelling unit is dilapidated, he shall issue an order requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling. If the dwelling is located in the historic district of the city and the Historic Preservation Commission determines, after a public hearing as provided by the City Code, that the dwelling is of particular significance or value toward maintaining the character of the historic district, and the dwelling has not been condemned as unsafe, the order may require that the dwelling be vacated and closed consistent with G.S. 160A-400.14(a). 
(c)  Whenever the Code Official issues an order under this section that a dwelling must be vacated and closed or removed or demolished, notice of the order shall be given by first class mail to any organization involved in providing or restoring dwellings for affordable housing that has filed a written request for such notices. A minimum period of forty-five (45) days from the mailing of such notice shall be given before removal or demolition by action of the Code Official, to allow the opportunity for any organization to negotiate with the owner to make repairs, lease, or purchase the property for the purpose of providing affordable housing. The Code Official or clerk shall certify the mailing of the notices and the certification shall be conclusive in the absence of fraud. Only an organization that has filed a written request for such notices may raise the issue of failure to mail such notices, and the sole remedy shall be an order requiring the Code Official to wait forty-five (45) days before causing removal or demolition. 
(d)  Failure to comply with order. The following remedies are available upon the failure of an owner to comply with any order issued under this section: 
(1)  If the owner of any deteriorated dwelling or dwelling unit shall fail to comply with an order of the Code Official to repair, alter or improve or vacate and close the dwelling, the Code Official may submit an ordinance to the City Council, which ordinance, if adopted by City Council, may authorize the Code Official to cause the dwelling to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed, and shall authorize the Code Official to post on the main entrance of any dwelling so closed, a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful." Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. Any such ordinance adopted pursuant hereto by City Council shall be recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Beaufort County and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index. 
(2)  If the owner of any dilapidated dwelling or dwelling unit shall fail to comply with an order of the Code Official to remove or demolish the dwelling, the Code Official may submit an ordinance to the City Council, which ordinance, if adopted by City Council, may authorize the Code Official to cause the dwelling to be removed or demolished, or vacated and closed. Any such ordinance adopted pursuant hereto by City Council shall be recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Beaufort County and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index. 
(3)  If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a dwelling or dwelling unit, the Code Official may file a civil action in the name of the city to remove such occupant utilizing the procedures prescribed by G.S. 160A-443(7). 
(e)  Appeals from orders of the Code Official. An appeal from any decision or order of the Code Official may be taken by any person aggrieved thereby or by any public officer, board or commission of the city. Any appeal from the Code Official shall be taken within ten (10) days from the rendering of the decision or service of the order, and shall be taken by filing with the Code Official and with the Housing Appeals Board a notice of appeal which shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the Code Official shall forthwith transmit to the Housing Appeals Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was made. When an appeal is from a decision of the Code Official refusing to allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any act, his decision shall remain in force until modified or reversed. When any appeal is from a decision of the Code Official requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing by the Housing Appeals Board, unless the Code Official certifies to the Housing Appeals Board, after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished the appellant), a suspension of the requirement would cause imminent peril to life or property; in which case, the requirement shall not be suspended except by a restraining order, which may be granted for due cause shown upon not less than one (1) day written notice to the Code Official, by the Housing Appeals Board or by a court of record upon petition made pursuant to G.S. 160A-446(f) and subsection (f) of this section. 
(1)  The Housing Appeals Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of all appeals, shall give due notice to all the parties, and shall render its decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney before the Housing Appeals Board. The Housing Appeals Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision or order appealed from, and may make any decision and order that in its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have all the powers of the Code Official, but the concurring vote of four (4) members of the Housing Appeals Board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the Code Official. The Housing Appeals Board also shall have the authority in passing upon appeals, when practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships would result from carrying out the strict letter of this article, to adapt the application of this article to the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of this article shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
(2)  Every decision of the Housing Appeals Board shall be subject to review by proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted within fifteen (15) days of the decision of the Housing Appeals Board, but not otherwise. 
(f)  Petition to Superior Court by owner. Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Code Official or a decision rendered by the Housing Appeals Board may, within thirty (30) days after issuance of the order or the rendering of the decision, petition the Superior Court for an injunction restraining the Code Official from carrying out the order or decision and the Court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the Code Official, pending a final disposition of the cause, as more specifically provided for by G.S. 160A-446(f). 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-133. - Methods for service of complaints and orders. 
(a)  Complaints or orders issued by the Code Official pursuant to this article shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered or certified mail. When service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy of the complaint or order may also be sent by regular mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the registered or certified mail is unclaimed or refused, but the regular mail is not returned by the Post Office within ten (10) days after the mailing. If regular mail is used, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected. 
(b)  If the identities of any owners or the whereabouts of persons are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the Code Official in the exercise of reasonable diligence, or, if the owners are known but have refused to accept service by registered or certified mail, and the Code Official makes an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of the complaint or order upon the owners or other persons may be made by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the city at least once no later than the time at which personal service would be required under the provisions of this article. When service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises thereby affected. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-134. - Abandonment of property. 
(a)  If the Code Official has issued an order pursuant to section 6-132(b)(1) of this article or if the City Council has adopted an ordinance pursuant to section 6-132(d)(1) or section 6-132(d)(2) of this article, ordering a dwelling or dwelling unit to be repaired, altered, or improved, or vacated and closed, and if the dwelling or dwelling unit has been vacated and closed for a period of one (1) year pursuant to the order or ordinance, then if the City Council shall find that: 
(1)  The owner has abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter or improve the dwelling or dwelling unit in order to render it fit for human habitation; and that, 
(2)  The continuation of the dwelling in its vacated and closed state (i) would be inimical to the health, safety, and welfare of the municipality in that the dwelling would continue to deteriorate; would create a fire and safety hazard; would be a threat to children and vagrants; would attract persons intent on criminal activities; or would cause or contribute to blight and the deterioration of property values in the area; and (ii) would render unavailable property and a dwelling which might otherwise have been made available to ease the persistent shortage of decent and affordable housing in this State; then in such circumstances, the City Council may, after the expiration of such one (1) year period, enact an ordinance and serve such ordinance on the owner, containing the following: 
a.  If the repair of the dwelling to render it fit for human habitation can be made at a cost not in excess of fifty (50) percent of its value, an order requiring the owner to repair or demolish and remove the dwelling with ninety (90) days; or 
b.  If the repair of the dwelling to render it fit for human habitation cannot be made except at a cost in excess of fifty (50) percent of its value, an order requiring the owner to demolish and remove the dwelling within ninety (90) days. 
(b)  Any such ordinance adopted pursuant to section 6-134(a) by City Council shall be recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Beaufort County and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index. If the owner fails to comply with such an ordinance, the Code Official shall effectuate the purpose of the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-135. - Liens for costs of repairs, alterations, etc. 
(a)  As provided by G.S. 160A-443(6), the amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements; vacating and closing; or removal or demolition caused to be made or done by the Code Official pursuant to this article, shall be a lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred, which lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be collected as the lien for special assessment provided in G.S. 160A, Art. 10 (G.S. 160A-216 et seq.). 
(b)  If the real property upon which the cost was incurred is located in the city, then the amount of the cost is also a lien on any other real property of the owner located within the city limits or within one (1) mile thereof except for the owner's primary residence. The additional lien provided in this subsection is inferior to all prior liens and shall be collected as a money judgment. 
(c)  If the dwelling is removed or demolished by the Code Official, he shall sell the materials of the dwelling, and any personal property, fixtures or appurtenances found in or attached to the dwelling, and shall credit the proceeds of the sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the Code Official, shall be secured in a manner directed by the Court, and shall be disbursed by the Court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the Court. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause a removal or abatement by summary proceedings, or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-136. - Alternative remedies. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the Courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of its charter or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-137. - Conflict with other provisions. 
    In the event any provision, standard or requirement of this article is found to be in conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or Code of the city, the provision which establishes the higher standard or more stringent requirement for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the residents of the city shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 6-138. - Penalties and violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit to fail, neglect or refuse to repair, alter, or improve the same; vacate or close the same; or remove or demolish the same, upon order of the Code Official or ordinance of the City Council duly made and served as herein provided, within the time specified in such order or ordinance, and each day that any such failure, neglect or refusal to comply with such order or ordinance continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit with respect to which an order or ordinance has been issued pursuant to this article, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after the time prescribed in such order or ordinance for its repair, alteration or improvement; vacating or closing; or removal or demolition and each day that such occupancy continues after such prescribed time shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)  The violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor, as provided by G.S. 14-4. 
(Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Secs. 6-139-6-150. - Reserved. 
Chapter 8 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, adopted Oct. 7, 2013, repealed the former Ch. 8, §§ 8-1-8-22, and enacted a new Chapter 8, §§ 8-1-8-23, as set out herein. The former chapter pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1972, §§ 5-1-5-27; Code 1993, §§ 5-1-5-22; Ord. No. 90-6, §§ 1, 2, adopted March 12, 1990; Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, adopted June 30, 1994; Ord No. 97-9, adopted June 23, 1997; Ord. No. 00-7, adopted June 26, 2000; Ord. No. 05-11, § 1, adopted June 20, 2005; Ord No. 06-13, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 19, 2006; and Ord. No. 10-6, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 26, 2010. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; powers and duties of City Clerk, § 2-124; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 18; zoning, ch. 40. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to establish and operate cemeteries, G.S. 160A-341 et seq.; regulation of city cemeteries, G.S. 160A-348; inscription on gravestone or monument charging commission of crime, G.S. 14-401.3; cemeteries, G.S. ch. 65; state maintenance of cemetery entrances and exits, G.S. 136-18(20). 

Sec. 8-1. - Supervision. 
    The cemeteries shall be under the supervision of the General Services Superintendent overseeing the day to day operation of the cemeteries or such person as he/she may designate, and shall be and is hereby vested with police authority within the limits of the cemeteries. The General Services Superintendent shall be under the direction of the Director of Public Works. 
(Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2 
State Law reference- Regulation of city cemeteries, G.S. 160A-348 
Sec. 8-2. - Powers and duties of General Services Superintendent. 
    The duties and powers of the General Services Superintendent shall be as follows: 
(a)  To enforce all laws and regulations governing the use of the cemeteries contained in these and any other rules which may be adopted with respect to the cemeteries. 
(b)  To have charge of the maintenance of all lots, drives and walks. 
(c)  To have overall supervision of all funerals and to act as agent for the city in all matters pertaining to the use of the cemeteries. 
(d)  To sell all plots and lots within the cemeteries. 
(e)  To keep a map of the cemeteries showing thereon all burial plots. 
(Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-3. - Opening and closing graves; burial limit per grave lot. 
(a)  All graves shall be opened and closed by permission of and under supervision of the General Services Superintendent. Only one (1) human body shall be buried in each cemetery grave lot or two (2) cremations per full size grave plot. 
(b)  The burial or placement of cremated remains shall be performed by city cemetery employees, contractors employed by the city, funeral homes approved by the city, or by family members with cemetery staff present. 
(c)  All vaults used for full burials must be concrete, metal or a type of material approved by the General Services Superintendent. No plastic or similar type material for grave vaults will be allowed in any city-owned cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-4. - Permit for disinterment. 
    No body may be disinterred from any lot in either cemetery without first obtaining written consent from the owner or heirs of such owner of the lot, and fully complying with applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
State Law reference- Removal of graves; who may disinter, move, and reinter; notice; certificate filed; reinternment expenses; due care required, G.S. 65-13. 
Sec. 8-5. - Lots. 
(a)  The city shall not sell more than one (1) lot to any one (1) person unless such person can show the need for the same. No certificate of interment to a cemetery lot may be delivered to the purchaser until the full purchase price has been paid. 
(b)  All certificates of interment for cemetery lots executed by the city shall contain a reference to existing rules and regulations, and all of such certificates shall contain an appropriate restriction making the ownership of any cemetery lot subject to all valid rules and regulations described in this chapter. 
(c)  No cemetery lot may be sold or transferred by its owner to any other party. If the owner finds that he has no use for a lot, the city will buy it back at the same price originally paid for same; provided no interments have been made thereon. Perpetual care paid to the city for said lot will not be returned. 
(d)  In the event the city sold a cemetery lot fifty (50) years or more ago and no interments have been made therein and the city cannot now determine, after reasonable inquiry, the present owner or claimant of such lot, then the city shall have the right to resell such lot. 
(e)  The General Services Superintendent shall perform all maintenance of graves, turf and streets. Lot owners desiring to maintain their lots shall do so only with the permission and under the supervision of the General Services Superintendent. The city shall not provide maintenance on markers, monuments or mausoleums. 
(f)  The city shall provide perpetual care for all lots located within the city cemeteries. 
(Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-6. - Fees. 
    Lot prices, interment fees, monument permit fees, disinterment fees, and all criteria associated with such prices and fees, shall be as established from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-7. - Obstructions prohibited; exception for grave markers. 
(a)  No obstruction of any kind other than grave monuments, grave markers and mausoleums may be placed upon any cemetery lot. 
(b)  The installation of grave ledgers or vault lids used to mark a grave site must be set flush with the ground and only after the grave site has had time to properly settle. The General Services Superintendent will have to approve the setting of such grave markers. 
(c)  Vault lids are not allowed as grave markers or monuments in Oakdale Cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-8. - Planting trees and shrubbery. 
    All landscaping, tree planting, shrubbery planting, and flower planting will be designed and planted by city personnel. Individuals may not plant on any lot. 
(Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-9. - Limits on flowers, wreaths or decoration remaining on graves. 
    No flowers, wreaths or decorations, whether natural or artificial, shall be permitted to remain on graves for more than thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-10. - Removal and disposal of flowers, designs and frames. 
    Cemetery staff shall remove and dispose of all flowers, designs and frames from graves within thirty (30) days, or earlier if natural flowers deteriorate. The immediate family and/or cemetery staff are the only persons allowed to remove flowers, designs and frames from a grave. 
    Immediate family and/or owner of grave must request written permission from the General Services Superintendent or designee to allow other persons, for example florists or friends, etc., to remove and dispose of flowers, designs or frames from grave site. Removal of any items without approved permission of the General Services Superintendent or designee will be considered desecration of a grave and punishable by law. 
    The City of Washington is not responsible for loss, theft or damage to flowers, designs or frames. Any such loss or theft should be reported to the General Services Superintendent or designee for future observations of area. 
(Ord. No. 14-6, §§ 1, 2, 9-8-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 14-6, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 8, 2014, repealed and reenacted § 8-10 as set out herein. Former § 8-10 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, adopted Oct. 7, 2013. 
Sec. 8-11. - Brickwork on graves. 
    Where a grave is bricked up, no brickwork shall extend above the surface of the ground. 
(Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-12. - Approval required for installation and removal of monuments and markers. 
(a)  Construction plans for monuments and markers must be approved by the General Services Superintendent. Written permission shall be obtained from the General Services Superintendent before any monument or marker is installed or removed on any cemetery lot. 
(b)  Monuments and markers shall be installed only during cemetery hours, Monday through Friday. No monuments or markers shall be set on city observed holidays or weekends. 
(c)  The cemetery staff is responsible for collecting the marker or monument permit fee. The city accepts no responsibilities for the quality of work by contractors hired by lot/plot owners to install the marker or monument. 
(Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-13. - Base to be placed under new monument. 
    A base of concrete or granite, not less than four (4) inches thick and extending six (6) inches outside and installed flush with the ground level, must be placed under all monuments which are not installed flush with the ground. 
(Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-14. - Permission required for entering after sunset. 
    No person shall enter the limits of the cemeteries between sunset and sunrise, except with permission of the General Services Superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-15. - Restrictions on children visiting cemeteries. 
    No children may visit the cemeteries except when accompanied by adults or by permission of the General Services Superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-16. - Traffic regulations. 
    No person shall operate any vehicle within the limits of the cemeteries at a greater rate of speed than fifteen (15) miles per hour. No person shall use the drives or walks of the cemeteries as a public thoroughfare. 
(Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 18. 
Sec. 8-17. - Riding bicycles. 
    No bicycles may be ridden in the cemeteries except by permission of the General Services Superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-18. - Animals restricted. 
    No person shall permit any animal onto city-owned cemetery property whether restrained or at large. 
(Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-19. - Installation of monuments and grave markers. 
(a)  A monument is a stone marker which when installed protrudes above the ground level. A grave marker is installed flush with the ground. A monument may be installed only in areas designated as monument areas. A monument may be installed on no less than four (4) graves, in sections K, L, M & N unless approved by the General Services Superintendent. 
(b)  Monuments may be installed in any location of the cemeteries, except the following single-grave and no-monument areas: 
(1)  Oakdale Cemetery, section O, section P and section R. 
(2)  Cedar Hill Cemetery, section B, section C, section D, section E, one section of F, and section G. 
(c)  Should a monument or marker in the city-owned cemeteries at any time become unsafe or in need of repair or resetting, the cemetery staff shall notify the owner that such condition exists. The General Services Superintendent shall make necessary improvements to eliminate unsafe conditions until owner has conditions corrected. If cemetery staff cannot contact owner, the staff will make necessary repairs at their discretion to eliminate the unsafe conditions. 
(Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-20. - Responsibility of parents and guardians. 
    Parents and guardians shall be responsible for minors violating the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-21. - Hours of operation. 
    Normal hours of operation are 7:00 a.m. until 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. Requests for interment on Saturday must be received by 12:00 p.m. the preceding Friday. Requests for interment on Sunday must be received by 10:00 a.m. the preceding Saturday. Holidays granted to city employees that fall on Monday shall be considered as a Sunday, and requests for interment on that holiday must be received by 10:00 a.m. the preceding Saturday. Requests for interment on a holiday that occurs Tuesday through Friday shall be received by 12:00 p.m. the preceding day. 
(Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-22. - Mausoleums. 
    A mausoleum is any interment structure constructed above ground level. A mausoleum may be constructed only in a monument section of a cemetery. A mausoleum interring a single body shall occupy no less than two (2) and not more than four (4) grave plots. A mausoleum constructed to inter more than one (1) body shall occupy a minimum of four (4) plots plus two (2) plots for each interment space. A mausoleum may not be constructed closer than one (1) foot to the plot boundary. Plans for construction of a mausoleum must be approved by the Director of Public Works before any construction begins. Plans presented must be detailed showing dimensions, construction methods and materials to be used. 
(Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-23. - Metal detectors. 
    The use of metal detectors in the city-owned cemeteries shall be prohibited. Only city cemetery staff will be allowed to use detectors to locate grave plots. 
(Ord. No. 13-4, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Chapter 10 - ELECTRIC UTILITY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; management of city property, § 2-26; master plan, § 2-219 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; Fire-Rescue-EMS Services, fire prevention, ch. 14; licenses and business regulations, ch. 16; subdivisions, ch. 34. 
State Law reference- Criminal acts relating to electric utility, G.S. 14-154 et seq.; powers of Department of Transportation, G.S. 136-18(10); public enterprises, G.S. 160A-311 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Authority of City Council. 
    All electric utilities, or portions thereof, owned, leased or operated by the city, whether inside or outside of the corporate limits, shall be under the full control of the City Council, pursuant to authorization in Session Laws of 1953, chapter 300 and G.S. 160A-311 et seq. The duty of enacting and enforcing rules and regulations governing the management and control of city properties shall be vested in the City Council, and the duty of enforcing such rules and regulations may be delegated. 
(Code 1972, § 25-1; Code 1993, § 6-1) 
State Law reference- Authority to operate public enterprises, G.S. 160A-312. 
Sec. 10-2. - Visiting utility stations. 
    No visitors shall be permitted to enter any electric utility facility unless accompanied by the person in charge. Under no circumstances shall anyone be allowed to handle or in any way come in contact with any portion of the equipment contained therein. 
(Code 1972, § 25-2; Code 1993, § 6-2) 
Sec. 10-3. - Tampering with equipment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, remove or otherwise interfere with the electric wires, poles, meters or any other electric equipment, apparatus or materials belonging to the electric system of the city, with the exception of those licensed electrical contractors so designated to do so by the city, and then only in the event of necessary repairs or emergency service to the property of the electric consumers of the city, and with proper notification to the city by such licensed electrical contractor. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or damage property of any kind belonging to the city. 
(b)  A reward of up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be offered to any person furnishing information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person violating this section. 
(c)  A fee in an amount as established from time to time shall be charged for the city's cost in investigating customers who energize their electric service without permission of the city. Service may be discontinued if this fee is not paid. 
(d)  For customers who tamper with the electric meters, fees in amount as established from time to time shall be charged, as itemized as follows, to cover the additional costs to the city. Service may be discontinued if these fees are not paid: 
(1)  A fee for verification of the accuracy of the meter after tampering has been established. 
(2)  A one-hundred-and-fifty-dollar-fee for investigation. 
(3)  The amount of estimated lost revenue. 
(4)  Meter repair charges, if the meter is damaged. 
(e)  Electric utility customers shall protect electric meters and related equipment on their premises from vandalism or being tampered with in any way, and shall promptly report to the city's electric department any such vandalism or tampering. If any such vandalism or tampering is not so reported, the same shall constitute prima facie evidence that such vandalism or tampering was by the customer. 
(Code 1972, § 25-3; Code 1993, § 6-3; Ord. No. 01-5, 6-11-2001) 
Sec. 10-4. - Connections and meters to remain property of city. 
    All electric meters and other equipment furnished and used by the city in installing any electric connection shall be and remain the property of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 25-4; Code 1993, § 6-4) 
Sec. 10-5. - Maintenance of meters. 
    All electric meters shall be kept in good repair and working order by and at the expense of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 25-5; Code 1993, § 6-5) 
Sec. 10-6. - Right of city to disconnect services. 
    The city reserves the right at any time to disconnect the electric service in case of accident or for the purpose of making connections or repairs. 
(Code 1972, § 25-6; Code 1993, § 6-6) 
Sec. 10-7. - Extensions to electric system. 
    Extensions for the purpose of furnishing electric utility service shall be subject to the discretion of the City Manager in accordance with the city's established policy covering extension of such service. 
(Code 1972, § 25-7; Code 1993, § 6-7) 
Sec. 10-8. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to extend electric wires or electric service of the city in or outside of any structure or dwelling by attaching thereto additional facility, appliance or equipment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or arrange any electric wire in such a manner as to supply electricity to any electrical facility, appliance or equipment where such electricity is used or can be used without passing through the meter provided or to be provided for registering the quantity of electricity consumed. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to permit the existence or continuance upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him of any connection, arrangement or service of wires by means of which electricity is used or can be used without passing through the meter provided for measuring the amount of electricity consumed. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to break the seal on any electric meter or to do any other act to obstruct, alter, injure or prevent the action of a meter used to measure the quantity of electricity consumed while such meter is in use for such purpose. 
(Code 1972, § 25-16; Code 1993, § 6-8) 
Sec. 10-9. - Service policies. 
    Policies of providing all electric service shall be adopted by the City Council and shall be made a part of the minutes in which the action was taken. Certified copies of the official service policies shall be on file with the City Clerk and the business office manager, and copies shall be available for the customers of the electric system. Specific individual variation from adopted service policies may be made only by the City Manager. 
(Code 1972, § 25-17; Code 1993, § 6-9) 
Sec. 10-10. - Inspections. 
    The Electrical Inspector of the city is hereby specifically authorized to inspect any premises where it is known or suspected that electricity is being consumed without being properly metered. Such inspection may be made during any reasonable hours. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to permit such examination or to obstruct the Electrical Inspector in the performance of his duty. In any case in which the Electrical Inspector shall discover that the wires on any premises are so arranged that electricity is or can be used without being properly metered, the supply of electricity shall be cut off, and no additional electricity shall be supplied to the premises until an outside meter has been installed at the expense of the owner of the premises. 
(Code 1972, § 25-18; Code 1993, § 6-10) 
Sec. 10-11. - Meter regulations. 
(a)  All electric meters may be read in units of ten (10) kilowatt-hours and bills rendered accordingly to the nearest ten (10) kilowatt-hours. 
(b)  Electric meters shall be located on the outside of buildings. The location and mounting height of such a meter is subject to the approval of the Director of electric utilities. 
(Code 1972, § 25-19; Code 1993, § 6-11) 
Sec. 10-12. - Attachments to electric facilities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to attach nonutility articles or items to city-owned or city-leased utility structures, poles, or facilities without prior approval of the City Manager. 
(Code 1993, § 6-12) 
Secs. 10-13-10-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 10-43. - Service fees-New customers. 
(a)  New customers to the electric system will be charged a service fee in an amount as established from time to time and any deposit which is required of all customers. 
(b)  New residential customer structures connected to the electric system will be charged a service fee in an amount as established from time to time for the purpose of offsetting the incurred metering costs of new structures. 
(c)  New nonresidential customer structures connected to the electric system will be charged a service fee in an amount as established from time to time for the purpose of offsetting the incurred metering costs of new structures. 
(Code 1972, § 25-8; Code 1993, § 6-31; Ord. No. 90-7, § 1, 3-12-1990; Ord. No. 93-2, § 1, 3-8-1993; Ord. No. 04-11, § 1, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 10-44. - Service fees-Transfers. 
(a)  Customers moving from one location to another within the electric system shall be charged a service fee in an amount as established from time to time and any deposit which is required of all customers. 
(b)  Customers requesting a change in existing service which requires electric utility personnel to disconnect the electrical service shall be charged a service fee in an amount as established from time to time. 
(Code 1972, § 25-9; Code 1993, § 6-32; Ord. No. 90-7, § 1, 3-12-1990; Ord. No. 93-2, § 1, 3-8-1993; Ord. No. 04-11, § 2, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 10-45. - Deposits. 
(a)  Residential . 
(1)  Any person or entity applying for electric services to be furnished to residential premises shall make a deposit in accordance with a schedule as adopted from time to time and maintained in the City of Washington Fee Manual or, at the city's discretion, in an amount equal to two-twelfths ( 2/12; ) of the average annual charges based on utility billing history at the specific location of the service request. Such deposit requirements may be satisfied as follows: 
a.  A cash deposit or a billed deposit over a period not to exceed three (3) months, which deposit shall be refunded by a credit to the customer's account at the end of the first six (6) month period during which the customer has paid at least six (6) bills on time and service has not been disconnected for failure to pay and has not had any returned checks or drafts on the account; 
b.  Proof that the deposit refund requirements of subsection (a)(1)a. of this section have been met at another location within the city's system for which the customer is responsible; or 
c.  A personal, written guarantee of payment by a current city customer who has satisfied the deposit refund requirements of subsection (a)(1)a. of this section. 
(2)  Increases . A deposit may be increased or a new deposit may be required, at the city's discretion, after the customer fails to pay a bill in a timely manner three (3) times during any three (3) year period, has service terminated for nonpayment, or has a check or draft returned because of insufficient funds or a closed account. The amount of deposit resulting from any such increase or from the requirement of a new deposit shall be in accordance with the provisions in this section (a). 
(b)  Commercial . 
(1)  Any person or entity applying for electric services to be furnished to commercial premises may be required to make a deposit in an amount, if any, to be determined based on that person or entity's credit information along with the history of usage at the service address. Generally, a deposit shall be in an amount equal to two-twelfths ( 2/12; ) of the estimated annual charges at the service address. The initial deposit shall be based upon the city's estimate of the customer's anticipated, annual usage. After six (6) billing periods following the initial deposit, the customer's actual usage will be reviewed, and the deposit adjusted, to reflect such actual usage. If the amount of the deposit is decreased, the difference shall be credited to the customer's account. If the amount of the deposit is increased, the difference shall be billed to the customer. At any time after the first six (6) billing periods, the city reserves the right to adjust the then current deposit based upon the customer's actual usage during the preceding six (6) billing periods. Such deposit requirements may be satisfied as follows: 
a.  A cash deposit or billed deposit, which deposit shall be refunded by a credit to the customer's account at the end of the first twenty-six (26) month period during which the customer has paid at least twenty-four (24) bills on time and service has not been disconnected for failure to pay and has not had any returned checks or drafts on the account; 
b.  Proof that the deposit refund requirements of subsection (b)(1)a. of this section have been met at another location within the city's system for which the customer is responsible; or 
c.  A surety bond or letter of credit that is issued by an entity satisfactory to the city, is in an amount equal to the amount of the required deposit, and is irrevocable for a period of at least twenty-four (24) months from the date of the application. 
(2)  If the customer chooses to use its credit history at another location(s) to satisfy a deposit requirement, the customer shall designate such location(s). If service is disconnected at any such location for nonpayment, the city may disconnect service to any or all such locations where the customer is served until the customer pays its account(s) in full and otherwise meets the deposit requirements of this section. 
(3)  Increases . A deposit may be increased or a new deposit may be required, at the city's discretion, after the customer fails to pay a bill in a timely manner three (3) times during any three (3) year period, has service terminated for nonpayment, or has a check or draft returned because of insufficient funds or a closed account. The amount of deposit resulting from any such increase or from the requirement of a new deposit shall be established, and be subject to later adjustment, in the same manner as an initial deposit is established, and subject to later adjustment, in accordance with this section (b). 
(c)  Contractors . Building contractors requesting temporary electric services will not be required to provide a deposit. However, each building contractor or his representative will be required to make a written request that includes, among possibly other things, the date, the location of the service and the name in which the service is requested. 
(d)  Credit, refund, transfer . When service is disconnected at the customer's request, any deposit on the account shall be credited to the customer's final bill. If there is any balance remaining in a deposit after such a credit is administered, the city will hold the final bill and mail it, along with a city check for such balance, to the customer at the address given by customer. If the disconnected customer does not provide the city with a valid forwarding address, any such balance will be held for thirty (30) days at City Hall before being placed into an inactive status file. Deposit returns only apply to customers who move off the city's system entirely and not to those customers who transfer service from one (1) location to another location within the city's system; in which case, the deposit shall be transferred with the service. 
(e)  Termination of service . Customers may terminate electric services in person or by phone. 
(Code 1972, § 25-11; Code 1993, § 6-33; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 11-10-1986; Ord. No. 88-15, § 2, 11-14-1988; Ord. No. 93-2, § 2, 3-8-1993; Ord. No. 13-1, § 1, 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 10-46. - Rate schedule. 
(a)  A schedule of rates for the sale of electricity to all customers shall be adopted by the City Council and made a part of the minutes of the meeting in which the action was taken. Certified copies of the electric rate schedule shall be on file with the City Clerk and the Electric Director, and copies shall be available for the customers of the electric system. 
(b)  The electric rate schedule shall be reviewed and adjusted by the City Council, as needed, or upon recommendation of the City Manager. 
(Code 1972, § 25-15; Code 1993, § 6-34) 
Sec. 10-47. - Billing; payment; penalties. 
(a)  All electric meters shall be read on a regular schedule established by the Electric Utility Director and bills shall be mailed on a cycle basis. 
(b)  Every bill shall be due when mailed to the customer at the last address provided by the customer. A bill shall reflect a due date of fifteen (15) days from the billing date shown on the bill. The same notice will serve as a notice of possible disconnect if payment is not received within thirty-two (32) days of the billing date. 
(c)  A late payment penalty in the amount of five (5) percent per month shall be imposed upon any outstanding unpaid balance twenty-five (25) days after the billing date shown on the bill. The late payment penalty will be reflected on the bill rendered the following month. 
(d)  An automated telephone reminder system will attempt to contact all delinquent accounts prior to disconnection as a courtesy if the customer has provided a phone number. 
(e)  If payment has not been received within thirty-two (32) days from the original billing date, services will be disconnected on the thirty-third (33rd) day. After payments in the night deposit are posted and the cutoff person has left the office for the purpose of disconnecting a delinquent customer, a service fee, in an amount as established from time to time, will be charged on that date, whether services are disconnected or not. 
(f)  A customer whose services are disconnected for such delinquency may have services restored during regular working hours by the payment of the bill in full plus the service fee. If a customer requests that services is reconnected after regular working hours, their service fee shall be as established from time to time. Payment must be received by 11:00 a.m., the following day or services will be disconnected. 
(g)  The customer shall pay all billed utility charges before transferring service from one location to another. The final bill shall be mailed to the customer's new billing address. If a customer fails to pay his utility bills for any account where he is listed as the customer and such account becomes delinquent, the city may transfer the amount owed to any other account where the customer is a primary recipient of utilities and cut off utilities to such account for nonpayment. The city may also refuse to transfer an account to a new customer's name or connect services to a new account where the delinquent customer will be a primary recipient of utilities. A customer is a primary recipient of utilities wherever listed as a customer, resides as a head of household, resides as a contributor to the household or conducts a trade or business. The city's determination that a customer is a primary recipient of utilities shall be effective until the customer proves otherwise. 
(h)  Any customer who has a check or draft returned from any financial institution because of insufficient funds or a closed account shall be charged a service charge fee in accordance with G.S. 25-3-506. 
(i)  Customers requesting alternate payment due dates must make such request of the city and utilize the city's bank draft service. The customer may choose one of the following periods of the month for their bill to be drafted: 
(1)  Between the 7th and 16th of the month. 
(2)  Between the 14th and 24th of the month. 
(3)  Between the 22nd and 31st of the month. 
(4)  Between the 28th and 9th of the month. 
(Code 1972, § 25-10; Code 1993, § 6-35; Ord. No. 88-15, § 1, 11-14-1988; Ord. No. 88-19, § 1, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 89-1, §§ 1, 2, 3-13-1989; Ord. No. 89-23, § 1, 11-13-1989; Ord. No. 90-7, § 1, 3-12-1990; Ord. No. 93-2, § 1, 3-8-1993; Ord. No. 95-5, § 1, 2-13-1995; Ord. No. 95-16, § 1, 9-11-1995; Ord. No. 3-15, § 1, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 04-11, § 3, 6-28-2004; Ord. No. 06-08, §§ 1, 2, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 10-48. - City held harmless. 
    It is expressly agreed between the city and users and consumers of electric utilities that no claim for damages shall be made against the city due to any wire connection or any other equipment malfunctioning or for the accidental failure to supply electric service. 
(Code 1972, § 25-12; Code 1993, § 6-36) 
Sec. 10-49. - Meter testing; protested bills. 
    If an electric customer has an excessive bill and feels that it is caused by a faulty meter, the customer may, by making a deposit, in an amount as established from time to time with the city, request that the meter be removed and checked. If the meter is found to be in error, the deposit will be refunded and the bill adjusted for three (3) months. The adjustment will be based on the percentage of error in the meter. 
(Code 1972, § 25-13; Code 1993, § 6-37; Ord. No. 93-2, § 3, 3-8-1993) 
Sec. 10-50. - Adjustment of electric bills. 
(a)  If the city determines that it has overcharged or undercharged a customer on account of its error, the city shall refund or recover the difference, subject to the following: 
(1)  The adjustment period shall be limited to the lesser of the actual period during which the error occurred or thirty-six (36) months; 
(2)  The amount of adjustment shall be determined by the electric utility Director based upon such evidence as deemed appropriate; and 
(3)  Any overcharge may be either refunded or credited to the customer and any undercharge shall be billed to the customer. 
(b)  If the city determines that it has undercharged a customer on account of any unlawful or materially misleading act of such customer, the undercharge shall be determined and collected as set out in subsection (a) of this section, except the adjustment period shall be twelve (12) months if the adjustment period cannot be determined. The city shall, in addition to collecting such undercharge, have the right to take such other action against such customer as is permitted by law. 
(Code 1972, § 25-14; Code 1993, § 6-38; Ord. No. 89-23, § 2, 11-13-1989; Ord. No. 15-3, § 1, 5-11-2015) 
Chapter 12 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire-rescue-EMS services, fire prevention, ch. 14; police, ch. 26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ENHANCED 911 SERVICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Public safety telephone service, G.S. 62A-1 et seq. 

Sec. 12-19. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by providing a telephone number through which citizens can obtain rapid, direct public safety aid with reduced response time, as provided for in G.S. ch. 62A. 
(Code 1993, § 6.5-26; Ord. No. 92-16, § 2, 11-9-1992) 
Sec. 12-20. - Enhanced 911 charge. 
    There is hereby imposed an enhanced 911 charge per month, as established from time to time, on each exchange access facility subscribed to by telephone subscribers whose exchange access lines are in the city limits. 
(Code 1993, § 6.5-27; Ord. No. 92-16, § 3, 11-9-1992) 
Sec. 12-21. - Administration. 
    The city is authorized to contract with the local telephone service supplier for the purpose of providing enhanced 911 service and for billing and collection of the enhanced 911 charges on behalf of the city under the terms and conditions set forth in G.S. ch. 62A. 
(Code 1993, § 6.5-28; Ord. No. 92-16, § 4, 11-9-1992) 
State Law reference- Administration, G.S. 62A-6. 
Sec. 12-22. - Emergency Telephone System Fund. 
    All enhanced 911 service charges collected by the local telephone service supplier, less the administration expenses allowed by G.S. 62A-6, shall be remitted to the city Finance Director and deposited in a separate, restricted fund known as the Emergency Telephone System Fund, which shall be managed in accordance with G.S. 62A-7 and 62A-8. 
(Code 1993, § 6.5-29; Ord. No. 92-16, § 5, 11-9-1992) 
Sec. 12-23. - Construction. 
    This article shall be construed in accordance with G.S. ch. 62A. 
(Code 1993, § 6.5-30; Ord. No. 92-16, § 6, 11-9-1992) 
Chapter 14 - FIRE-RESCUE-EMS SERVICES, FIRE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; purposes of master plan, § 2-182; buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; electric utility, ch. 10; massage business operators, § 16-109; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 18; police and fire signals, § 20-10; parks and recreation, ch. 22; police, ch. 26; solid waste, ch. 28; water and wastewater, ch. 38. 
State Law reference- Setting fires unlawfully, G.S. 14-136 et seq.; fire protection, ch. 69; authority of firemen, G.S. 58-82-1 et seq.; firemen's and rescue squad workers' relief and pension fund, G.S. 58-86-1 et seq.; retirement benefits, G.S. 160A-163; fire protection in municipalities, G.S. 160A-291 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Composition. 
(a)  The Department of Fire-Rescue-EMS-Inspections Services shall consist of the Chief of the department and a sufficient number of personnel, fulltime career and volunteer, to maintain and operate the department. 
(b)  The City Manager shall have general control of the department. 
(Code 1972, § 7A-21; Code 1993, § 7-1) 
State Law reference- Firemen appointed, G.S. 160A-291. 
Sec. 14-2. - Chief of the department. 
    The Chief of the department shall perform the duties required of him by city, state and federal guidelines to ensure the proper administration and operation of the department. 
(Code 1993, § 7-2) 
Cross reference- Residency requirements, § 12-1 et seq. 
State Law reference- Duties of fire chief, G.S. 160A-292. 
Sec. 14-3-14-23. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE-RESCUE-EMS SERVICES 

Sec. 14-24. - Authority of the Chief. 
(a)  The Chief of the department shall have power to make such rules for its government as is deemed necessary not inconsistent with the laws of the federal and state government or the ordinances of the city. 
(b)  The Chief of the department shall command the Department of Fire-Rescue-EMS-Inspections Services and his orders shall be obeyed, and for any willful disobedience of the orders of the officer in command, the offending party may be dismissed from the department. The Chief of the department is hereby vested with all the powers of police officers of the city insofar as to make arrests during the existence of a fire. 
(Code 1972, §§ 7A-22, 7A-23; Code 1993, § 7-27) 
State Law reference- Firemen appointed, G.S. 160A-291; duties of fire chief, G.S. 160A-292. 
Sec. 14-25. - Area of operations. 
    Fire-Rescue-EMS-Inspections apparatus will operate in the designated response areas of the city and county. In addition, those towns and departments inside and outside the response area having mutual aid and/or other contractual agreements with the department shall be served. Under disaster conditions, operations may extend beyond these areas upon the recommendation of the Chief of the department and approval by the City Manager. 
(Code 1993, § 7-28) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch 2. 
Sec. 14-26. - Fire-Rescue-EMS apparatus to have right-of-way. 
(a)  In the event of an alarm, departmental apparatus shall have the right-of-way in and upon the streets, lanes, alleys, squares, malls and crossings when responding to emergencies. No person shall obstruct or neglect to make way for such apparatus. 
(b)  Upon the approach of any emergency vehicle giving a warning signal by appropriate light and warning bell, siren or exhaust whistle, audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than one thousand (1,000) feet, the driver of every other vehicle shall immediately drive the same to a position as near as possible and parallel to the right edge or curb, clear of any intersection of streets or highways, and shall stop and remain in such position until the apparatus has passed the location and it is then safe to proceed, or unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business, to follow any departmental apparatus traveling in response to an emergency call closer than one (1) block, or to drive into or park such vehicle within five hundred (500) feet of where a department vehicle has stopped in answer to the call. 
(Code 1993, § 7-29) 
State Law reference- Approach of law enforcement, fire department or rescue squad vehicles or ambulances; driving over fire hose ir blocking fire-fighting equipment; parking, etc., near law enforcement, fire department, or rescue squad vehicle or ambulance, G.S. 20-157. 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 18. 
Sec. 14-27. - False alarms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to give or cause to be given any false alarm of fire. 
(Code 1972, § 7A-6; Code 1993, § 7-30) 
Cross reference- Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Giving false fire alarms; molesting fire-alarm, fire detection or fire extinguishing equipment, G.S. 14-286. 
Sec. 14-28. - Driving over a fire hose. 
    Without the specific direction of a departmental official, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle over a fire hose or any other equipment belonging to the department. 
(Code 1972, § 7A-2; Code 1993, § 7-31) 
State Law reference- Approach of law enforcement, fire department or rescue squad vehicles or ambulances; driving over fire hose or blocking fire-fighting equipment; parking, etc., near law enforcement, fire department, or rescue squad vehicle or ambulance, G.S. 20-157. 
Sec. 14-29. - Congregating at emergency scenes. 
    It shall be unlawful to congregate on the streets, alleys or blocks next to the scene of an emergency to the extent that it interferes with departmental operations. The extent of interference shall be determined by the Incident Commander. 
(Code 1972, § 7A-3; Code 1993, § 7-32) 
Sec. 14-30. - Interfering with Fire-Rescue-EMS personnel, apparatus or equipment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with departmental personnel in the discharge of their duties, to loiter about any station or meddle with the apparatus or equipment. 
(Code 1972, § 7A-4; Code 1993, § 7-3) 
State Law reference- Molesting fire alarm, fire detection or fire extinguishing system, G.S. 14-286; approach of law enforcement, fire department or rescue squad vehicles or ambulances; driving over fire hose ir blocking fire-fighting equipment; parking, etc., near law enforcement, fire department, or rescue squad vehicle or ambulance, G.S. 20-157; parking near fire hydrant or fire station or in fire lane, G.S. 20-162; interference with firefighters, G.S. 58-82-1. 
Sec. 14-31. - Riding Fire-Rescue-EMS apparatus. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon or ride on departmental apparatus without the consent or invitation of the person in charge of the apparatus. 
(Code 1972, § 7A-5; Code 1993, § 7-34) 
Sec. 14-32-14-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION 

Sec. 14-53. - Purpose. 
    There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain codes known as the current North Carolina Fire Code, its appendices, and related General Statutes of which codes not less than one (1) copy of each will be filed in the office of the City Clerk and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city and the extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(Code 1993, § 7-70; Ord. No. 02-2, 1-14-2002) 
State Law reference- Authorization of the provisions of this article is provided by, G.S. 160A-414, financial support, and G.S. 160A-175, enforcement of ordinances. 
Sec. 14-54. - Conflict with state code. 
    In the event any conflict should arise between the provisions of such fire prevention code and the provisions of this Code, provisions of the state code shall prevail. 
(Code 1993, § 7-71) 
Sec. 14-55. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fire prevention official means any authorized City of Washington Fire Prevention Inspector. 
    Municipality means, when used in the fire prevention code, the City of Washington. 
(Code 1993, § 7-72) 
Sec. 14-56. - Fire prevention official to enforce. 
    The fire prevention official, as authorized by the Chief of the department, shall be charged with the administration and enforcement of the current North Carolina Fire Code, and its appendices. All persons empowered with the administration and enforcement of this code shall possess an appropriate valid certificate issued by the North Carolina Code Officials Qualification Board. 
(Code 1993, § 7-73; Ord. No. 02-2, 1-14-2002) 
Sec. 14-57. - Duties of the fire prevention official. 
(a)  The fire prevention official shall receive applications for permits and certification of inspections, issue or deny permits, make necessary inspections, issue or deny certificates of inspection, issue orders to correct violations, revoke permits or certificates of inspections, levy fines, bring judicial actions against actual or threatened violations, keep adequate records, and take any other actions that may be required in order to enforce the code. 
(b)  The fire prevention official shall keep complete, permanent and accurate records in convenient form of all applications received, permits or certificates of inspection issued, inspections and reinspections made, defects and violation found, and all other actions. 
(Code 1993, § 7-74) 
Sec. 14-58. - Inspection required. 
(a)  Inspection shall be made in accordance with the current North Carolina Fire Code, and its appendices, all technical and standards adopted by reference in this article. 
(b)  All new buildings and structures shall be inspected initially and thereafter in accordance with the minimum fire code inspection schedule outlined in the current North Carolina Fire Code, and its appendices and fees charged as provided for in this article. All existing buildings and structures shall be inspected when there is a change of ownership or occupancy and thereafter as provided for other existing buildings and structures. All existing buildings or structures shall be inspected in accordance with the minimum fire code inspection schedule outlined in the current North Carolina Fire Code, and its appendices and fees charged accordingly. 
(Code 1993, § 7-75; Ord. No. 02-2, 1-14-2002) 
Sec. 14-59. - Permits. 
(a)  No person shall maintain, store, handle materials or conduct processes which produce conditions hazardous to life or property or install equipment used in connection with such activities without a permit as required by the fire prevention official and prescribed in the current North Carolina Fire Code, and its appendices. The fire prevention official shall evaluate all applications and issue, if approved, such permits. Before a permit may be issued, the fire prevention official shall inspect and approve receptacles, vehicles, buildings, structures, storage areas, devices, processes, and conditions related to the permit. 
(b)  Foster homes shall be exempt from permit and inspection fees. 
(Code 1993, § 7-76; Ord. No. 00-9, 6-26-2000; Ord. No. 01-3, 3-12-2001; Ord. No. 01-7, 7-9-2001; Ord. No. 02-2, 1-14-2002) 
Sec. 14-60. - Fees. 
(a)  A fee shall be assessed for required permits/fire prevention inspections conducted in accordance with section 14-58 and/or section 14-59 in amounts and according to criteria as established from time to time. 
(b)  First time fire prevention inspection/permit fees shall be paid along with all other applicable fees at the time of application. Reinspection fees shall be billed upon completion of a final inspection. 
(c)  Required construction permit fees shall be as established from time to time. 
(d)  Other fees shall be as established from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 06-17, § 1, 6-19-2006) 
Sec. 14-61. - Open burning prohibited. 
    No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit open burning of refuse or other combustible material within the corporate limits of the city. This prohibition shall not apply to intentional burning for the purpose of firefighting training, the exhibition bonfire set during the annual Washington High School Homecoming, or ceremonial-type campfires with the approval of the Chief of Fire-Rescue-EMS-Inspections that is part of an approved special event. The approval of these ceremonial-type fires will be contingent upon the event organizers meeting the following fire prevention and safety guidelines. 
(a)  The grass/sod will be removed from the immediate area of the campfire site. 
(b)  The site will be lined with rocks or stones to contain the fire. 
(c)  The materials being burned in the fire will be approved by the Fire-Rescue-EMS-Inspections Department. 
(d)  The hours of burning will be approved by the Fire-Rescue-EMS-Inspections Department. 
(e)  An approved fire extinguisher will be present at all times for immediate extinguishment. 
(f)  The event organizers will remove and properly dispose of all items associated with the campfire site and restore the grass/sod to its original state. 
(g)  The event organizers will be responsible for obtaining any required approval from the North Carolina Division of Air Quality. 
(h)  A permit issued upon approval with an inspection fee as established from time to time. 
(Code 1993, § 7-78; Ord. No. 01-7, 7-9-2001; Ord. No. 04-22, § 1, 10-18-2004) 
Sec. 14-62. - Fire lanes establishment. 
    The establishment of fire lanes shall be determined by the fire prevention official in accordance with the current North Carolina Fire Code, and its appendices. Upon the establishment of the fire lane the building occupant shall mark said fire lane to the following specifications. Areas designated as fire lanes shall have its boundaries, borders, and curbs clearly marked with yellow paint. The words "No Parking, Fire Lane" shall be clearly painted yellow within the fire lane with at least ten-inch high lettering. It is the responsibility of the building occupant to maintain the markings clearly and to keep the fire lane free of obstructions. 
(Code 1993, § 7-79; Ord. No. 02-2, 1-14-2002) 
Sec. 14-63. - Unlawful to block fire lanes. 
    No person shall obstruct a designated fire lane with merchandise, building materials, vehicles, displays or any other obstructions of any kind. This prohibition includes designated fire lanes in shopping center or mall parking lots and all other public vehicular areas. 
(Code 1993, § 7-80) 
Sec. 14-64. - Hazardous materials response recouping cost. 
    The city Department of Fire-Rescue-EMS-Inspections may recoup the cost of manpower, as well as the cost of decontamination and/or replacement cost of equipment and supplies used during a hazardous materials response. When recouping cost, the city will bill the individual deemed responsible for the hazardous materials involved in the incident. The actual cost of the incident billed will be the actual cost and overhead to the city. 
(Code 1993, § 7-81) 
Sec. 14-65. - Lockbox required. 
    In accordance with the current North Carolina Fire Code, and its appendices, the owner or occupant of a structure where a fire prevention official has required the installation of a key box, necessary to gain access or entry to that structure, shall install a specific type key box approved by the fire prevention official. The key box shall be located in an accessible location approved by the fire prevention official. The key box shall contain the key necessary to gain access as required by the fire prevention official. The operator of the building shall immediately notify the fire prevention official and provide the new key at any time a lock is changed or re-keyed and the key to that lock shall be secured in the key box. 
(Code 1993, § 7-82; Ord. No. 02-2, 1-14-2002) 
Sec. 14-66. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person who shall: 
(a)  Violate or fail to comply with any provision of this article or of the current North Carolina Fire Code, and its appendices, as adopted, amended or augmented by this article; or 
(b)  Violate or fail to comply with any order made under this article or the current North Carolina Fire Code, and its appendices; or 
(c)  Build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted under this article or the current North Carolina Fire Code, and its appendices, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder; 
shall be subject to civil penalties as specified in the state fire code. Each day that any violation continues may be considered a separate violation. 
(Code 1993, § 7-83; Ord. No. 96-18, 11-11-1996; Ord. No. 99-11, 9-13-1999; Ord. No. 02-2, 1-14-2002) 
Chapter 16 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Appeals to City Council, § 2-39; Finance Director, § 2-149 et seq.; City Tax Collector, § 2-169 et seq.; purchasing, § 2-551 et seq.; animals, ch. 4; buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; electric utility, ch. 10; entertainment activities, § 20-2; parks and recreation, ch. 22; solid waste, ch. 28; posting signs, § 32-10 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 34; vehicles for hire, ch. 36; zoning, ch. 40. 
State Law reference- Commerce and business, G.S. ch. 66; discrimination in business, G.S. ch. 75B; Occupational Licensing Boards, G.S. ch. 93B; Occupational Safety and Health Act of North Carolina, G.S. 95-126 et seq.; privilege taxes, G.S. 105-33 et seq.; regulating and licensing businesses, trades, etc., G.S. 160A-194; privilege license taxes, G.S. 160A-211; regulation of places of amusement, G.S. 160A-181; limitations on enactment of Sunday-closing ordinances, G.S. 160A-191. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Alcoholic beverages, hours for sale, consumption. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful to sell malt beverages, unfortified wine, fortified wine, or mixed beverages between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., or to consume any of those alcoholic beverages between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. in any place which has been issued a permit under G.S. 18B-1001. 
(b)  From the first Sunday in April until the last Sunday in October, sales of alcoholic beverages may continue until 2:00 a.m. rather than 1:00 a.m., and consumption of alcoholic beverages may continue until 2:30 a.m. rather than 1:30 a.m., on any licensed premises. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to sell or consume alcoholic beverages on any licensed premises from the time at which sale or consumption must cease on Sunday morning until 10:00 a.m. on that day. 
(d)  This section does not prohibit at any time the wholesale delivery and sale of unfortified wine, fortified wine, and malt beverages to retailers issued permits pursuant to G.S. 18B-1001. 
(Code 1993, § 8-1; Ord. No. 88-17, § 1, 11-14-1988; Ord. No. 94-23, § 1, 10-10-1994; Ord. No. 17-4, § 1, 8-14-2017) 
Cross reference- Offenses relating to alcoholic beverages, § 10-1. 
Sec. 16-2. - Poolrooms-Hours of operation. 
    All poolrooms within the city shall close at 12:00 midnight and shall remain closed until 8:00 a.m. The hours of operation for owners who have obtained a special use permit, with a recommendation from the Police Chief, may be extended past 12:00 midnight. In granting the special use permit, the Board of Adjustment shall take into consideration the health, safety, and welfare of all citizens. The hours of operation for a poolroom in close proximity to a residential district shall be a consideration in issuing permits. The Board of Adjustment may revoke the special use permit, after a public hearing has been held, if the owner is found to be in violation of any condition established by the Board of Adjustment. 
(Code 1993, § 8-2; Ord. No. 88-17, § 1, 11-14-1988; Ord. No. 94-16, § 1, 8-8-1994) 
State Law reference- Regulation of places of amusement, G.S. 160A-181. 
Sec. 16-3. - Poolrooms-Minors prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any parent of any child under seventeen (17) years of age to permit such child to enter or remain in any poolroom in the city, unless such child is accompanied by his parent. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or proprietor of any poolroom in the city to permit any child under seventeen (17) years of age to enter or remain in such poolroom unless such child is accompanied by his parents. 
(Code 1972, § 13-17; Code 1993, § 8-3) 
State Law reference- Permitting minors to enter barrooms, billiard room, G.S. 14-317. 
Sec. 16-4. - Police authority regarding criminal history information for applicants for ABC permits. 
    The police department shall be authorized to seek state access to SBI/DCI criminal history record information to obtain criminal history information on all persons applying for ABC permits for proposed locations within the City of Washington. 
(Ord. No. 09-4, § 1, 10-12-2009) 
Secs. 16-5-16-21. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRIVILEGE LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Privilege license taxes, G.S. 160A-211. 

Sec. 16-22. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agent means the person having the agency for the manufacturer, producer or distributor. 
    Business means any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation or business or commercial activity of any kind which is subject to a license tax under the jurisdiction of this article. 
    City Tax Collector includes a person duly appointed as his agent or deputy. 
    Engaged in business means engaged in business, as defined in this section, as owner or operator or otherwise. 
    Fiscal year means the period beginning July 1 and ending June 30 following. 
    Jurisdiction of the article includes the trades and callings and business and commercial activities upon which the city is lawfully authorized to impose the license taxes prescribed in this article, including those located within the city limits and those located within one (1) mile of the city limits where such license tax is a graduated license tax. 
    Licensee means a person subject to imposition of the license tax here imposed, whether or not such person is or is not actually licensed. 
    Quarter means one-fourth of the fiscal year consisting of three (3) consecutive months. 
    State Revenue Act means the State of North Carolina Revenue Act as enacted in 1939 and as amended to date (G.S. ch. 105). 
(Code 1972, § 10-1; Code 1993, § 8-21) 
Sec. 16-23. - Conducting business without license. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or for anyone acting on behalf of such person to do any act or thing amounting to doing business where such business is required to be licensed by this article without first having paid the tax and procured the requisite license. It shall be unlawful for any person or anyone acting on behalf of such person to do or continue to do any act or thing amounting to doing business where such business is required to be licensed by this article, during a period where the license issued to such business has expired and has not been reissued or has been revoked or is suspended. 
(b)  If any person shall commence or continue to exercise any privilege or to promote any business, trade or employment or do any act requiring a license under this article without first having procured a license therefor, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided by law upon conviction of a misdemeanor. Each day that such person shall engage in or carry on such business shall be construed to be a separate offense. 
(c)  If such failure, neglect or refusal to apply for and obtain such license is continued for as much as thirty (30) days beyond the due date of the privilege tax, such person shall pay an additional tax of five (5) percent of the amount of such license tax which was due at the commencement of the business, trade or employment in addition to the city license tax imposed by this article. If such failure, neglect or refusal is continued for as much as sixty (60) days, the additional tax shall be ten (10) percent. If such failure, neglect or refusal is continued for as much as ninety (90) days, the additional tax shall be fifteen (15) percent and if such failure, neglect or refusal is continued for as much as one hundred twenty (120) days, an additional tax shall be twenty (20) percent and an additional five (5) percent per month thereafter. 
(d)  Upon notice and demand made by registered mail by the City Tax Collector for the payment of the tax and additional tax herein provided, and upon failure of the party in active management of such business to pay such taxes and additional taxes within ten (10) days after mailing such registered mail notice, the City Tax Collector or his appointee shall be authorized and empowered to enjoin the further operation and conduct of such business. 
(Code 1972, § 10-2; Code 1993, § 8-22; Ord. No. 94-4, § 1, 4-11-1994) 
State Law reference- Unlawful to operate without license, G.S. 105-103; obtaining license and paying tax, G.S. 105-109. 
Sec. 16-24. - Licensing requirements and procedures. 
(a)  Compliance. No license shall be issued under the provisions of this article until all the requirements herein specified have been complied with. 
(b)  Application. Application for a license shall be made in the form and manner required by the City Tax Collector. Such application shall show the name of the licensee, the location of the place of business and the type of business operated. 
(c)  License issuance. The City Tax Collector shall satisfy himself that the applicant intends to operate a business which is lawful in all respects, that the applicant is of good moral character and that the operation of such business will not be injurious to the health, morals, safety or peace of the citizens of the city. The issuance of a license shall be prima facie evidence that this requirement has been complied with. 
(d)  Appeal upon refusal. Upon filing the application herein provided for and upon tending the fee herein provided for, an applicant may orally request the issuance of the license applied for. Upon the failure or refusal of the City Tax Collector to issue the license applied for, such applicant may file a written request with the City Tax Collector for a statement as to his reasons for refusing to issue the license in question. The City Tax Collector shall thereupon mail written notice to the applicant stating his reasons for refusing to issue the license. Upon receipt of such notice or after the expiration of five (5) days from the filing of the request for such notice the applicant may file an appeal with the City Council for reconsideration of the application for license. 
(e)  Payment of tax. The applicant for a license shall pay the license tax herein provided for upon filing the application for such license or at any time prior to the issuance of such license unless such applicant is exempted therefrom. 
(f)  Contents of license. Upon the meeting of the requirements above prescribed, the City Tax Collector shall issue a license in a form prescribed or approved by the City Council. Such license shall show the name of the business, the name of the licensee, the kind of business and the location of the place of business. A duplicate, like-numbered copy thereof shall be retained by the collector for his records. 
(g)  Revocation. Any license issued under this article may be revoked by the City Council for just cause. A determination shall be made by the Council after giving due notice to the party whose license is subject to revocation and after giving such party an opportunity to be heard. Upon the determination by the City Council that such party is operating his business in an unlawful manner or in a manner that is injurious to the health, morals, safety or peace of the citizens of the city, the City Council may in the exercise of its just discretion revoke the license of such licensee. 
(Code 1972, § 10-3; Code 1993, § 8-23) 
Sec. 16-25. - When additional license required. 
(a)  Separate line of business. Every person who is doing business in more than one (1) line of business is required to secure a license for each separate line of business in which such person is engaged. The determination of whether or not a particular business is a separate line shall be made by reference to the lines of businesses prescribed in the schedule of annual privilege licenses. 
(b)  Separate place of business. Every person who is doing business in more than one (1) place of business is required to secure a separate license for each separate place of business. A business which is operated as a series of contiguous units or departments which are connected by openings into each other and which are operated as a unit are to be considered as a single place of business. 
(c)  When business moves. If the business is moved or if the licensee sells to another, then a new license is necessary; unless special permission to continue business under the original license is obtained from the City Tax Collector. 
(Code 1972, § 10-4; Code 1993, § 8-24; Ord. No. 00-16, 10-14-2000) 
State Law reference- Persons, firms, and corporations engaged in more than one business to pay tax on each, G.S. 105-105. 
Sec. 16-26. - Transfer by sale; lost or destroyed licenses; altering business. 
(a)  Reissue. Upon the transfer, by sale or otherwise as a unit, of a business which is being operated at the place specified therefor on a license which has been duly issued to the licensee of such business and the transferee continues to operate the same business at the same location, the licensee may assign such license to his transferee. Such assignee shall then deliver to the City Tax Collector the license which has been duly assigned to him together with a written statement signed by him to the effect that he intends to carry on the same business at the same location and that he acquired the business as a unit. Upon payment of the prescribed fee for the reissuance of licenses, the City Tax Collector shall thereupon issue an appropriate license to such assignee as a reissue license; provided, that such reissue license shall not be issued unless and until any special approval has been procured where such approval would be required of an original issue license of the same kind. Such approval shall be procured in the same manner and subject to the same conditions that would apply to such an original issue license. 
(b)  Replacement. Upon presentation of satisfactory evidence by a licensee that his license has been lost or destroyed and upon payment of the fee prescribed for such reissuance, the City Tax Collector shall thereupon issue or reissue the license to such party. 
(c)  Change of business. When a license is issued to carry on a certain line of business and after the issuance of such license, the licensee shall so change or alter his business as to bring it under a classification for which a higher license tax is required, he shall, before making such change, deliver his license to the collector together with a written and signed statement as to the nature of the proposed change and shall pay the proper additional license tax. The collector shall thereupon cancel the old license and issue to the licensee a new and appropriate license. 
(Code 1972, § 10-5; Code 1993, § 8-25) 
Sec. 16-27. - Restrictions and nontransferability. 
(a)  Restrictions. The licenses provided for in this article are revenue licenses and the issuance of a license required by this article shall not of itself authorize the practice of any profession, business or trade for which a qualification license is required either by the state or by the provisions of this Code. Licenses granted pursuant to this article shall be subject to the provisions of existing ordinances, to other provisions of this Code and to subsequently enacted ordinances and amendments to this Code. 
(b)  Nontransferability. Licenses granted pursuant to this article shall be deemed a personal privilege to conduct the business named in such license and shall not be transferable to any other person except as herein provided for the reissuance of licenses. 
(Code 1972, § 10-6; Code 1993, § 8-26) 
State Law reference- Taxes under this article, G.S. 105-33. 
Sec. 16-28. - Displaying license at place of business required. 
    Every license must be kept prominently displayed at the place of business of the licensee named therein or, if such licensee has no fixed place for doing business, such licensee must keep the license wherever such business is being operated and in a place where it can be seen at any time by an official desiring to inspect same. 
(Code 1972, § 10-7; Code 1993, § 8-27) 
Sec. 16-29. - Imposition and amendment of taxes. 
(a)  Imposition. Under the power and authority conferred by the laws of the state, there is hereby imposed a license tax on all trades, professions, businesses, operations, circuses and other business and commercial activities subject to the jurisdiction of this article. Such license tax shall be in addition to taxes on property and in addition to other taxes and licenses lawfully imposed by the city and shall be a license tax on the privilege of doing business within the geographical jurisdiction of this article. Except as a different rate may be levied and assessed by this article, there is further hereby levied against all businesses, trades or professions conducted within the city the maximum amount of tax allowable to be assessed against the same under the terms of G.S. ch. 105. 
(b)  Amendment. Nothing herein shall be construed as a limitation or restriction on the power of the City Council: 
(1)  To impose such license taxes on additional business or commercial activities; 
(2)  From removing such license taxes from business and commercial activities; 
(3)  From increasing or decreasing the amount of such license taxes; or otherwise 
(4)  To restrict or limit the power of the City Council in respect to such license taxes. 
(Code 1972, § 10-8; Code 1993, § 8-28) 
Sec. 16-30. - Schedule of taxes. 
    A schedule of annual privilege license taxes for any fiscal year shall be duly enacted by the City Council prior to the beginning of such fiscal year. An official copy of such schedule of annual privilege license taxes shall be kept in the office of the City Tax Collector throughout the current fiscal year. The City Council shall have power to amend such schedule at any time during the fiscal year. 
(Code 1972, § 10-9; Code 1993, § 8-29) 
Sec. 16-31. - Collection, payment and refund of taxes. 
(a)  Collection. The license taxes imposed by this article shall be collected by the City Tax Collector at the time and in the manner herein provided. Payment of such license taxes shall be as follows: 
(1)  Licensees doing business on July 1 of any year shall pay the license taxes imposed by this article prior to such date. 
(2)  Licensees beginning business at any time during the fiscal year shall pay the minimum license taxes provided for herein before beginning the operation of such business. 
(3)  Additional license taxes imposed under the provisions of section 16-32 herein shall be paid within thirty (30) days following the close of the fiscal year. 
(4)  All taxes herein levied and assessed for the manufacture, sale, etc., of beer and wine shall be due and payable on May 1 of each year. 
(b)  Abatement or refund. No abatement or refund shall be made of any license tax for the reason that such licensee discontinues, for any reason, his business before the end of the period for which the license was issued. In other cases the City Council may, in the exercise of its just discretion, abate and authorize refund of license taxes. 
(Code 1972, § 10-10; Code 1993, § 8-30) 
State Law reference- Regulation of alcoholic beverages, G.S. 18B-100 et seq.; city beer and wine retail licenses, G.S. 105-113.77. 
Sec. 16-32. - Proration of taxes. 
    The license taxes provided for in this article shall be based on a twelve-month period but shall be prorated in accordance with the following provisions: 
(a)  When full tax payable. A licensee doing business on July 1 of any year shall be liable for the full amount of the annual license tax set forth in the schedule of annual privilege license taxes. 
(b)  When one-half tax payable. A licensee beginning a business which is subject to the state license tax imposed by G.S. 105, art. 2 (G.S. 105-33 et seq.) and which is begun after the expiration of six (6) months of the current fiscal year shall be liable for one-half the amount of the annual license tax set forth in the schedule of annual privilege licenses. 
(Code 1972, § 10-11; Code 1993, § 8-31) 
Sec. 16-33. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The license taxes imposed by this article on the privilege of doing business shall not be imposed on: 
(1)  Any business operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes where the proceeds therefrom do not enure to the benefit of any individual and such proceeds are used exclusively for the purposes of such organization. 
(2)  Any business operated under the management of and located upon the grounds of any industrial or agricultural fair association during the period such fair is held. 
(b)  Except as herein provided in this article or except as provided in G.S. ch. 105, there shall be no exemptions from the imposition and payment of the license taxes herein provided. 
(c)  Persons or organizations engaged in a business which is exempt from the imposition of a license tax shall, nevertheless, be required to secure a license which shall show upon its face that such licensee is exempt from tax. 
(Code 1972, § 10-12; Code 1993, § 8-32) 
Secs. 16-34-16-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of solicitation campaigns, flea markets and itinerant merchants, G.S. 160A-178; peddlers, itinerant merchants, and specialty markets, G.S. 66-250 et seq. 

Sec. 16-55. - Prohibited peddling areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle any fruits, nuts, farm products or any article of merchandise whatsoever upon the following streets or sidewalks abutting such streets: 
Gladden Street, from Second Street to Main Street. 
Main Street, from the tracks of the Atlantic Coast Line Railroad to Bonner Street. 
Market Street, from Third Street to Water Street. 
Respess Street, from Second Street to the Pamlico River. 
Second Street, from the tracks of the Atlantic Coast Line Railroad to Bonner Street. 
Water Street, from Union Drive to Bonner Street. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the peddling of eggs or farm products raised or produced by the peddler or by some member of his immediate family. 
(c)  This section does not apply to vendors at special events authorized by the city. 
(Code 1972, § 15-1; Code 1993, § 8-126; Ord. No. 04-5, § 1, 3-15-2004) 
Sec. 16-56. - Registration of solicitors-Required. 
    Any person who shall solicit any subscriptions to any magazine, periodical, pamphlet, book, newspaper or other publication of any kind and who shall receive a payment of all or any part of the subscription price at the time of taking such subscription shall be required to register with the Police Department of the city at least ten (10) days before soliciting any such subscription. This article does not apply to persons soliciting charitable contributions. 
(Code 1972, § 15-2; Code 1993, § 8-127) 
Sec. 16-57. - Registration of solicitors-Contents. 
    Registrants shall provide the Police Department with the name, age, permanent address, temporary address, if any, the employers or publishing houses represented by such solicitor and the products for which subscriptions are to be solicited. Registration may be accomplished by any representative of the person involved to comply with the ten-day requirement, but each solicitor shall be personally fingerprinted and photographed before beginning the solicitation of subscriptions. 
(Code 1972, § 15-3; Code 1993, § 8-128) 
Sec. 16-58. - Registration of solicitors-Period of validity. 
    No person shall be required to register but once during any twelve-month period. 
(Code 1972, § 15-4; Code 1993, § 8-129) 
Secs. 16-59-16-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MASSAGE BUSINESSES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Adult establishments, G.S. 14-202.10 et seq.; exemption of massages from physical therapy law, G.S. 90-270.34(b)(2); municipality cannot regulate persons covered under the Massage and Bodywork Therapy Practice Act in manner inconsistent with Act, G.S. 90-636. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-80. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Massage business means any place of business, however designated, wherein manual or mechanical massage or similar treatment takes place for hire. 
    Massage business operator means a person who operates a massage business and/or who provides the services of massagists to the public or any portion thereof. A massage business operator may also be a massagist; however, these two (2) functions are to be considered separate and distinct functions for purposes of licensing under division 2 of this article. 
    Massagist means a person who applies manual or mechanical massage or similar treatment to the human body, trunk or limbs. 
(Code 1972, § 10A-2; Code 1993, § 8-146) 
State Law reference- Adult establishments: definitions, G.S. 14-202.10; adult establishments: violations, penalties, G.S. 14-202.12. 
Sec. 16-81. - Purpose and applicability of article provisions. 
    To protect the general health, safety, welfare and morals, the licensing and regulatory provisions hereinafter specified are ordained for the privilege of carrying on the trade or profession of massagist and for the operation or carrying on of the businesses commonly known as massage parlors, health salons, physical culture studios, clubs or establishments, or similar establishments by whatever name designated, wherein physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy or other physical treatment of the human body is carried on or practiced. The provisions of this article shall not apply to a regularly established and licensed hospital, sanitarium, nursing home or medical clinic, nor to the office or clinic operated by a duly qualified and licensed medical practitioner, osteopath or chiropractor in connection with his practice of medicine, chiropractic or osteopathy; provided, that such office or clinic is regularly used by such medical practitioner, chiropractor or osteopath as his principal location for his practice of medicine, chiropractic or osteopathy. 
(Code 1972, § 10A-1; Code 1993, § 8-147) 
Sec. 16-82. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  No person licensed as a massagist under section 16-110 shall massage or treat any person or engage in the business or profession of massage before 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m., prevailing time. 
(b)  No person licensed under section 16-109 shall admit customers or prospective customers, remain open for business or allow, permit or condone any massage or treatment of any person upon the premises before 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m., prevailing time. 
(c)  No person in charge of managing a massage business upon the premises shall allow, permit or condone any massage or treatment of any person before 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m., prevailing time. 
(Code 1972, § 10A-10; Code 1993, § 8-148) 
Sec. 16-83. - Patronage or employment of minors. 
(a)  No person licensed as a massagist under section 16-110 shall massage or treat any person under the age of eighteen (18) years upon the licensed premises, except upon written order by a licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or registered physical therapist, such order being dated and in the possession of the massagist giving the massage or treatment. A violation of this subsection shall be grounds for revocation of any license issued to such violator, pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No person licensed under section 16-109 shall allow, permit or condone the massage or treatment of any person under the age of eighteen (18) upon the licensed premises, except upon written order by a licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or registered physical therapist, such order being dated and a true copy of such order being in the possession of the licensee before administration of any massage or treatment. A violation of this subsection shall be grounds for revocation of any license issued to such violator, pursuant to this article. 
(c)  No person licensed, pursuant to section 16-109, shall employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years in the operation of a massage business. 
(Code 1972, § 10A-11; Code 1993, § 8-149) 
Sec. 16-84. - Treatment of persons of opposite sex restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person holding a license under this article to treat a person of the opposite sex, except upon the signed order of a licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or registered physical therapist, which order shall be dated and shall specifically state the number of treatments, not to exceed ten (10). The date and hour of each treatment given and the name of the operator shall be entered on such order by the establishment where such treatments are given and shall be subject to inspection by the police at any reasonable time. The requirements of this section shall not apply to treatments given in the residence of a patient, the office of a licensed physician, osteopath, registered physical therapist, chiropractor or in a regularly established and licensed hospital or sanitarium. 
(Code 1972, § 10A-12; Code 1993, § 8-150) 
Sec. 16-85. - Penalties. 
    Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment as provided by G.S. 14-4. 
(Code 1972, § 10A-13; Code 1993, § 8-151) 
Secs. 16-86-16-108. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 16-109. - Massage business operators. 
(a)  Any person desiring to become a massage business operator shall, before operating such business, apply for and receive the privilege license provided for by this section. 
(b)  Every application for the license provided for by this section shall be made in writing and filed with the City Clerk. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  If the applicant is a natural person, the name and residence address of such person. If the applicant is a partnership, corporation or other entity, the name and residence address of all persons having any legal or beneficial interest in such applicant and the registered agent for service of process; 
(2)  The address of the premises where the massage business shall be located; 
(3)  A complete statement of all convictions of any person whose name is required to be given in subsection (b)(1) of this section for any criminal offenses, other than traffic violations; 
(4)  A complete statement of any revocation, by any governmental unit, of any license to operate a massage business or to engage in the business or profession of massage held by any person whose name is required to be given in subsection (b)(1) of this section; 
(5)  A complete statement of any conviction of any person whose name is required to be given in subsection (b)(1) of this section, for violation of any statute, law, ordinance or regulation of any government concerning the operation of a massage business or the business or profession of massage; 
(6)  The name and address of any massage business or other establishment owned or operated by any person whose name is required to be given in subsection (b)(1) of this section wherein the business or profession of massage is carried on; and 
(7)  A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant. 
(c)  The City Clerk shall transmit a copy of the application to the Police Department for an investigative report, to the Building Inspector to determine compliance with all zoning and building regulations and ordinances and to the Fire Department to determine compliance with all laws relating to fire protection. The Police and Fire Departments and Building Inspector shall, within a reasonable time, not to exceed forty-five (45) days, report the results of their examination to the City Clerk. 
(d)  The City Clerk shall submit the application, accompanied by all reports required by this section, to the City Council, which shall approve such application if the City Council determines that: 
(1)  The application contains no misstatement of fact; 
(2)  The applicant, or any person having any legal or beneficial ownership interest in the applicant, has not been convicted of any crime involving sexual misconduct, or violation of any federal statute relating to prostitution, or of any violation of any law or ordinance of any governmental unit concerning or related to the business or profession of massage; 
(3)  The applicant conforms to all requirements of applicable zoning, building and fire prevention codes; and 
(4)  The applicant, or any person having any legal or beneficial ownership interest in the applicant, has not, for the three-year period preceding the application, had a previously issued license for engaging in the business or profession of massage revoked. 
(e)  Upon approval of the application by the City Council and upon receipt of a license fee as established from time to time, the collector of revenue shall issue a privilege license to the applicant. 
(f)  A license issued pursuant to this section shall be revoked by action of the City Council, if the City Council determines: 
(1)  The licensee has violated any provisions of this article; 
(2)  The licensee, or any agent of the licensee, employs or permits to be on the premises of the applicant's massage business any person practicing the business or profession of massage who has not been issued the privilege license required by section 16-110 or whose license under section 16-110 has been revoked; 
(3)  The licensee, or the legal or beneficial owner of any interest in the licensee, is convicted of any crime involving sexual misconduct; 
(4)  Any employee of the licensee is convicted of any felony in connection with his employment or is convicted of any crime involving sexual misconduct; or 
(5)  The licensee violates any zoning, building or fire prevention provisions of this Code or city ordinances. 
(g)  A license issued pursuant to this division is void if the licensee moves or ceases operating a massage business at the location required to be stated in the application for license, pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1972, § 10A-3; Code 1993, § 8-171) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; Fire-Rescue-EMS Services, fire protection, ch. 14; zoning, ch. 40. 
Sec. 16-110. - Massagists. 
(a)  No person shall act as a massagist unless such person has first applied for and received the privilege license provided for by this section. 
(b)  The application for the license required by this section shall be in writing and filed with the City Clerk. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, age and residence address of the applicant; 
(2)  A complete statement of the previous businesses or occupations of the applicant for the two (2) years immediately preceding the date of application, including any massage establishment experience; 
(3)  A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant for any criminal offenses, other than traffic violations; 
(4)  A complete statement of any revocation of any license granted by any governmental unit to the applicant to engage in the business or profession of massage, whether as a massagist or a massage business operator; and 
(5)  The date and place of the applicant's birth, the name of applicant's parents and the residence address of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(c)  The applicant shall submit, as part of the application required in subsection (b) of this section, a medical certificate signed by a physician licensed to practice in the state, within seven (7) days of the date of application. The certificate shall state the applicant was examined by the certifying physician and the applicant is free from communicable disease. The additional information required by this subsection shall be provided at the applicant's expense. 
(d)  The City Clerk shall transmit a copy of the application to the Police Department for an investigative report. The Police Department shall, within a reasonable time, not to exceed forty-five (45) days, report the results of its investigation to the City Clerk. 
(e)  The City Clerk shall submit the application, together with all reports required by this section to the City Council. The City Council shall approve such application, if the Council determines: 
(1)  The applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(2)  The application contains no misstatement of fact; 
(3)  The applicant has not been convicted of any crime involving sexual misconduct, or violation of any federal statute relating to prostitution, or for violation of any law or ordinance of any governmental unit concerning or related to the business or profession of massage; 
(4)  The applicant has not, for the three-year period preceding the application, had a previously issued license for engaging in the business or profession of massage revoked; and 
(5)  The applicant is free from communicable disease as evidenced by the medical certificate required herein. 
(f)  Upon approval of the application by the City Council and upon receipt of a license fee in an amount as established from time to time, the collector of revenue shall issue a privilege license to the applicant. 
(g)  The City Council shall have authority to direct that any person licensed under this section submit to a medical examination by a licensed physician approved by the City Council. This authority shall be exercised only when the Council has reason to believe that any such person has contracted a communicable disease. Refusal to submit to such examination shall be grounds for revocation of such license as provided in subsection (h) of this section. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, every person licensed under this section shall file and continue to file with the City Clerk a new medical certificate with each application for renewal of the license prescribed by this section. Failure to file such updated certificates shall be grounds for revocation of such license as provided in subsection (h) of this section. 
(h)  A license issued pursuant to this section shall be revoked by action of the City Council, if the City Council determines: 
(1)  The licensee has violated any provision of this article; 
(2)  The licensee is afflicted with a communicable disease; 
(3)  The licensee has failed to be examined by a licensed physician when required by the City Council, pursuant to subsection (g) of this section, or has failed to file any medical certificate required by subsection (a) of this section; or 
(4)  The licensee has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving sexual misconduct, or under any federal statute relating to prostitution, or for violation of any laws or ordinances of any governmental unit related to the business or profession of massage. 
(Code 1972, § 10A-4; Code 1993, § 8-172) 
Sec. 16-111. - Employer to use only licensed employees. 
    No person licensed under section 16-109 shall allow or permit any person to massage or treat any person upon the premises operated by the licensee unless the person giving such massage or treatment has complied with all requirements of licensing under section 16-110, including periodic medical examinations by a licensed physician. Violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license issued to such violator pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1972, § 10A-5; Code 1993, § 8-173) 
Sec. 16-112. - Posting of license. 
(a)  Every massagist shall post the license required by this division in his work area. 
(b)  Every person licensed under section 16-109 shall display such license in a prominent place in the licensed business. 
(Code 1972, § 10A-6; Code 1993, § 8-174) 
Sec. 16-113. - Notice and hearing. 
    Before the City Council revokes a license issued pursuant to this division or if the City Council determines reasonable grounds exist to deny an application for a license pursuant to this division, the City Council shall cause a written notice to be sent by certified mail to the licensee affected or applicant affected, at the address stated in the license or application. This notice shall advise the affected party of a right to appear before the City Council, with or without legal counsel, at a stated time and place, not less than ten (10) days after such notice is given, for the purpose of presenting any evidence relevant to such revocation or denial, and for the purpose of hearing all evidence submitted and examining or cross examining any person providing such evidence. 
(Code 1972, § 10A-7; Code 1993, § 8-175) 
Sec. 16-114. - Privilege license, annual. 
    The licenses required under this division are annual privilege licenses. Such licenses shall be due and payable in the same manner as prescribed for other privilege licenses issued by the city, pursuant to article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 10A-8; Code 1993, § 8-176) 
Sec. 16-115. - Applicability of other licensing provisions. 
    The general business licensing provisions in article II of this chapter, where applicable, shall also apply to the persons or entities licensed under this division. 
(Code 1972, § 10A-9; Code 1993, § 8-177) 
Secs. 16-116-16-138. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND VENDORS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of solicitation campaigns, flea markets, and itinerant merchants, G.S. 160A-178. 

Sec. 16-139. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for a transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor, as defined in section 16-140, to engage in such business within the city without first obtaining a license in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 8-190; Ord. No. 93-12, § 1, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 16-140. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Transient merchant or itinerant vendor means any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, or boat, public room in hotels, lodginghouses, apartments, shops, or any street, alley, or other place within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction provided that such definition shall not be construed to include: 
(1)  Any person selling at a flea market taxed under state law. 
(2)  Any auctioneer licensed and acting under the provisions of G.S. ch. 85B. 
(3)  Any person who, while occupying such temporary location, does not sell from stock, but exhibits samples only for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery only. 
(4)  Any person selling at the farmer's market sponsored by the county or the city. 
(5)  Any person who otherwise meets the definitions of this section but who is part of a group of ten (10) or more merchants selling at the invitation of the shopping area or trade show, and where such sales activities do not last longer than seven (7) days. 
(6)  Any person selling Christmas trees and holiday decorations. 
(7)  Licensed automobile dealers selling new automobiles. 
(b)  No person so engaged shall be relieved from complying with the provisions of this article merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
(Code 1993, § 8-191; Ord. No. 93-12, § 1, 9-13-1993; Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 7-11-1994) 
Sec. 16-141. - Application. 
    Applicants for licenses shall file a written sworn application, signed by the applicant, if an individual, by all partners if a partnership, and by the president if a corporation, with the City Clerk, showing: 
(a)  The name of the person having the management or supervision of applicant's business during the time that it is proposed that it will be carried on in the city; the local address of such person while engaged in such business; the permanent address or address of such person; the capacity in which such person will act (that is, whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise); the name and address of the person for whose account the business will be carried on, if any; and if a corporation, under the laws of what state the corporation is incorporated; 
(b)  Proof of a state sales tax reporting number issued by the state department of revenue; 
(c)  The place in the city where the applicant proposed to conduct business; the length of time during which it is proposed that the business shall be conducted; proof of permission from the owner or lessee of the property to be used allowing the applicant to conduct business at the proposed location; and a zoning compliance permit from the planning department of the city stating that the proposed sales activity is a permitted use in the proposed location; 
(d)  The place, other than the permanent place of business of the applicant, where the applicant was conducting business within the last six (6) months; 
(e)  A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by the applicant; the invoice value and quality of such goods, wares and merchandise, whether the same are proposed to be sold from stock in possession or from stock in possession and by sample, at auction, by direct sale and by taking orders for future delivery; where the goods or property proposed to be sold are manufactured or produced; and where such goods or products are located at the time the application is filed; 
(f)  The brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or proposed to be done in order to attract customers, and copies of all advertising whether by handbills, circular, newspaper advertising, or otherwise, shall be attached to the application; 
(g)  Whether or not the person having the management or supervision of the applicant's business has been convicted of a crime or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of such offense and the punishment assessed thereof; 
(h)  Credentials from the person for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such representative; and 
(i)  Such other reasonable information as to the identity of character of the person having the management or supervision of applicant's business, as the City Clerk may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this article in the protection of the public good. 
(Code 1993, § 8-192; Ord. No. 93-12, § 1, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 16-142. - Investigation and issuance of license. 
    Upon receipt of the application, the Finance Department shall forward it to the Police Department for investigation. The Chief of Police shall complete the investigation within twenty-one (21) days. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character and business responsibility are found to be unsatisfactory, the application shall be denied. If, as a result of the investigation, the applicant's character and business reputation appear to be satisfactory, the Finance Department shall so certify in writing, and a license shall be issued by the Finance Department. The Finance Department shall keep a full record of all licenses issued. Such license shall contain the number of the license, the date it is issued, the nature of the business authorized to be carried on, the amount of the license fee paid, the expiration date of the license, the place where the business may be carried on under the license, and the names of the persons authorized to carry on the business. 
(Code 1993, § 8-193; Ord. No. 93-12, § 1, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 16-143. - Bond. 
    Before any license shall be issued under the provisions of section 16-142 for engaging in a transient business as defined in section 16-140, an applicant shall file with the Finance Department a bond running to the city, in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), executed by the applicant as a principal, or a surety upon which service of process may be made in the state; the bond to be approved by the office of the City Attorney, conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all provisions of the ordinances of the city, and the statutes of the state, regulating and concerning the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, and will pay all judgments rendered against the applicant for any violation of such ordinances and statutes, together with all judgments and costs that may be recovered against him by any person for damages arising out of any misrepresentation or deceptive practices on any person transacting such business with the applicant, whether the misrepresentations or deceptions were made or practices by the owners or by their servants, agents, or employees, either at the time of making the sale or through any advertisement of any character whatsoever, printed or calculated with reference to the goods, wares and merchandise sold or any part thereof. Action on the bond may be brought in the name to the use of the aggrieved person. The bond required by this section shall be posted and remain in effect for a period of one (1) year from the date a license is issued, and one (1) year from the date of any renewal of any license issued under this article. Such bond must be approved by the office of the City Attorney, both as to form, and as to the responsibility of the surety. 
(Code 1993, § 8-194; Ord. No. 93-12, § 1, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 16-144. - Service of process. 
    Before any license may be issued for engaging in business as an itinerant merchant, the applicant shall file with the Finance Department an instrument appointing a person located in the county to be the agent of the applicant for service of process with respect to any matters connected with or arising out of the business transacted under the license given and the bond required by this article. The Finance Director may be named as the agent for the service of process by the applicant. 
(Code 1993, § 8-195; Ord. No. 93-12, § 1, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 16-145. - Exhibition of license. 
    The license issued under this article shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business named therein. In the event that the applicant desires to do business in more than one (1) place within the city, separate licenses may be issued for each place of business, and shall be posted conspicuously in each place of business. 
(Code 1993, § 8-196; Ord. No. 93-12, § 1, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 16-146. - Display area. 
    Any itinerant merchant conducting business shall have a display area with a tent not less than ten (10) feet by ten (10) feet. No items are to be displayed on automobiles, trucks, tractors or the ground. 
(Code 1993, § 8-197; Ord. No. 93-12, § 1, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 16-147. - Fees. 
(a)  Before issuing a license under this article, the Finance Department shall collect an administrative processing fee at an amount set by the City Council. This fee is to cover the administrative costs of processing the application required by this article and shall not be considered a tax, nor shall it relieve the applicant of paying any other state or local taxes required by law. 
(b)  The Finance Department shall collect an administrative processing fee for each renewal issued under section 16-152 at an amount set by the City Council. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, any person selling edible farm produce, such as fruits and vegetables, shall pay an annual application fee, in an amount as established from time to time, per location, in addition to a fee for a peddlers license, as set out in G.S. 105-53. 
(Code 1993, § 8-198; Ord. No. 93-12, § 1, 9-13-1993; Ord. No. 94-18, § 1, 9-12-1994) 
Sec. 16-148. - License not transferable. 
    No license issued under this article shall be transferable. 
(Code 1993, § 8-199; Ord. No. 93-12, § 1, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 16-149. - Duty of police to enforce. 
    It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 8-200) 
Sec. 16-150. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  Any license issued pursuant to this article may be revoked by the Finance Department after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license; 
(2)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise; 
(3)  Any violation of this article; 
(4)  Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or 
(5)  Conducting the business licensed under this article in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed postage prepaid to the licensee, at his last known address, at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing. 
(Code 1993, § 8-201; Ord. No. 93-12, § 1, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 16-151. - Appeal. 
    Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Finance Department to deny an application for a license or to remove a license may appeal to the City Council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Council within fourteen (14) days after notice of the decision by the Finance Department has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. The Council shall set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to such persons in the same manner as provided in section 16-150 for notice of hearing for revocation. The order of this Council on such appeal shall be final. 
(Code 1993, § 8-202; Ord. No. 93-12, § 1, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 16-152. - Expiration and renewal of license. 
(a)  All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire ninety (90) days after the date of issuance unless an earlier date is stated on the license. 
(b)  Any license issued under the provisions of this article may be renewed any number of times upon the following conditions: 
(1)  The applicant makes a written application for renewal stating that the person managing the business is the same as those listed in the original application, that the place where the applicant proposes to conduct business have not changed, and a statement explaining any material change in circumstances from the information given in the original application. 
(2)  The applicant must show to the satisfaction of the office of the City Attorney that the bond covering the applicant's business will be valid for at least one (1) year from the date of any license renewal. 
(3)  The Finance Department be satisfied that there is not cause for revocation under section 16-150. 
(Code 1993, § 8-203; Ord. No. 93-12, § 1, 9-13-1993) 
Sec. 16-153. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any violation of this article shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Violators shall be issued a written citation which must be paid within seventy-two (72) hours. 
(b)  Each day's continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct offense. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, provisions of this article may be enforced through equitable remedies issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  In addition to or in lieu of remedies authorized in subsections (a) and (c) of this section, violations of this article may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor in accordance with G.S. 160A-175. Conviction of a misdemeanor prosecution under this article shall subject the offender to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Code 1993, § 8-204; Ord. No. 93-12, § 1, 9-13-1993) 
Chapter 18 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Purposes of master plan, § 2-220; animals, ch. 4; cemeteries, ch. 8; traffic regulations in cemeteries, § 8-16; Fire-Rescue-EMS Services, fire prevention, ch. 14; Fire-Rescue-EMS apparatus to have right-of-way, § 14-26; parks and recreation, ch. 22; police, ch. 26; use of police cars, § 26-4; streets and sidewalks, ch. 32; throwing or burning trash on street; trucks, wagons, etc., carrying trash, § 32-5; street barricades-driving through, § 32-12 et seq.; parades, § 32-14; compliance with safety, traffic regulations, § 32-39. 
State Law reference- Motor vehicles, G.S. ch. 20; powers of local authorities, G.S. 20-169; streets, traffic and parking, G.S. 160A-296 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The definitions in G.S. 20-4.01 shall also apply to this chapter. 
    Authorized emergency vehicle means vehicles of the Fire Department, police vehicles and such ambulances designated or authorized by the Chief of Police. 
    Block means a portion of any street located between two (2) intersections adjacent to each other. 
    Crosswalk means that portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at intersections. Any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
    Destination means a specific location where persons or property are being loaded or unloaded; or where a service is being performed specifically requiring the use of such vehicle; or a location where off-street parking will be utilized for temporary storage of the vehicle while not in use. 
    Official time standard means, whenever certain hours are named herein, standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this city. 
    Official traffic control devices means all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of the City Council, or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
    Official traffic signals means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
    Park means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading. 
    Pedestrian means any person afoot. 
    Police officer means every officer of the Municipal Police Department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
    Public conveyance means any vehicle, other than a taxicab or railroad train, for transporting for fare. 
    Railroad means a carrier of persons or property upon cars other than street cars operated upon stationary rails. 
    Railroad train means a steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars. 
    Residence district means the territory contiguous to a street not comprising a business district when the frontage on such street for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is mainly occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for business. 
    Right-of-way means the privilege of the immediate use of the roadway. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Standing means any stopping of a vehicle whether occupied or not. 
    Stop or stopping, when prohibited, means any stopping of a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal. 
    Stop, when required, means complete cessation of movement. 
    Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes of travel. 
(Code 1972, § 11-1; Code 1993, § 9-1; Ord. No. 97-14, 9-8-1997) 
Sec. 18-2. - Persons propelling pushcarts; bicycle riders and animal riders or drivers. 
    Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal upon a roadway and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1972, § 11-2; Code 1993, § 9-2) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 4. 
State Law reference- Traffic laws apply to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn vehicles, G.S. 20-171. 
Sec. 18-3. - Authority of police in special cases. 
    In the event of a fire or other emergency, or when necessary to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, police officers may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 11-4; Code 1993, § 9-3) 
State Law reference- Duty of officers; manner of enforcement, G.S. 20-114. 
Sec. 18-4. - Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles. 
    No person shall board or alight from any public conveyance or other vehicle while such conveyance or vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1972, § 11-7; Code 1993, § 9-4) 
Sec. 18-5. - Unlawful riding. 
    No person shall ride on any public conveyance or vehicle not designated or intended for the use of passengers. This section shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty nor to persons riding within truck bodies in spaces intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1972, § 11-8; Code 1993, § 9-5) 
Sec. 18-6. - Entering or riding vehicles without permission. 
    No person shall enter, jump on or ride any automobile or other vehicle without the consent of the owner or driver. 
(Code 1972, § 11-9; Code 1993, § 9-6) 
Sec. 18-7. - Persons riding must stay inside. 
    No person shall allow any part of his body to protrude beyond the limits of the vehicle in which he is riding except to give such signals as are by law required, and no person shall hang on to any vehicle whatsoever. 
(Code 1972, § 11-10; Code 1993, § 9-7) 
Sec. 18-8. - Spinning of auto wheels. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to create noise or dust by spinning the wheels of a motor vehicle upon the ground or upon the hard-surfaced pavement. 
(Code 1972, § 11-14; Code 1993, § 9-8) 
Sec. 18-9. - Clinging to public conveyance or moving vehicle. 
    Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates, any toy vehicle, scooters, skateboards or other similar device shall not attach the same or himself to any public conveyance or moving vehicle upon any roadway. 
(Code 1993, § 9-9; Ord. No. 88-5, § 1, 4-11-1988) 
Sec. 18-10. - Use of roller skates, coasters, etc. 
(a)  No person shall be permitted to ride in, upon or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, skateboard, roller skates, roller blades or other similar device in the area defined as the Central Business District to include the Waterfront. The Central Business District shall encompass the following: 
Stewart Parkway, the adjacent parking lots, the Promenade and Boardwalk Main Street from Bridge Street to Bonner Street 
Second Street from Bridge Street to Bonner Street 
Third Street from Bridge Street to Bonner Street 
(b)  Additionally, coasters, toy vehicles, skateboards, roller skates, roller blades or other similar devices are not permitted on streets or highways maintained by the North Carolina Department of Transportation, which includes: 
Highway 32 (Third Street and Park Drive) 
Highway 264 (John Small Avenue and Fifth Street west from John Small Avenue) 
Market Street 
Highway 264 truck route (Fifteenth Street from Clarks Neck Road east to Twelfth Street and east to John Small Avenue) 
U.S. 17 (Bridge Street to Carolina Avenue, north) 
Airport Road, Clarks Neck Road, Grimes Road, Highland Drive, Hudnell Street, Lilley Road, Plymouth Street, Whispering Pines Road 
(Code 1993, § 9-10; Ord. No. 88-5, § 2, 4-11-1988; Ord. No. 02-7, 6-24-2002) 
Sec. 18-11. - Temporary impoundment for violation of section. 
(a)  In addition to any other penalties provided under this Code, any roller skates, coasters, toy vehicles, skateboards or other similar devices which are used in violation of section 18-9 or section 18-10 may be seized and impounded by any city law enforcement officer for a period of time not to exceed fourteen (14) days; provided; however, that if such device is being impounded as evidence to be used in a criminal trial, it may be held in the same manner and for the same period of time as any other evidence. Devices impounded under this section shall be identified and stored at the police station or such other place designated for such purposes by the Chief of Police. 
(b)  At the time of seizure, the person seizing a device under this section shall inquire into the ownership of the device, the address and telephone number of the owner (or, if the owner is a minor, such minor's parent or next of kin) and shall notify the owner or the owner's parent or next of kin whether the device is being seized and impounded as a penalty under this section or as evidence to be used in a criminal trial. If the device is being seized and impounded as a penalty under this section, the person seizing the device shall also notify the owner or the owner's parent or next of kin where the device will be stored during the impoundment and when the device shall be available for return to the owner. If the device is not claimed by the owner within one hundred eighty (180) days after the seizure of the same, it shall be disposed of as provided in G.S. 15-12 et seq. 
(c)  Upon application by the owner or such other person entitled to possession of the device, the Chief of Police may release the device, if he determines that the continued impoundment of the device is not necessary. If the Chief of Police refuses to release the device, the owner or such other person entitled to possession of the device may make application to the Magistrate for return of the property. The Magistrate, after notice to all parties and after a hearing, may in his discretion order the device to be returned to the owner or person entitled to possession. 
(Code 1993, § 9-11; Ord. No. 88-6, § 1, 4-11-1988) 
Sec. 18-12. - Penalty for violations. 
    If any person shall violate any provision of this chapter regulating the operation of vehicles, he shall be responsible for an infraction and shall be required to pay a penalty of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Code 1972, § 11-19; Code 1993, § 9-12; Ord. No. 00-1, 2-14-2000) 
State Law reference- Violations of certain ordinances as infractions, G.S. 14-4(b). 
Sec. 18-13. - Schedule of fines. 
    The schedule of fines for violating provisions of this chapter is as follows: 
Section Violation Fine 18-4 Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles $25.00 18-5 Unlawful riding $25.00 18-6 Entering or riding without permission $25.00 18-7 Persons riding must stay inside $25.00 18-8 Spinning of auto wheels $25.00 18-9 Clinging to public conveyance or moving vehicle $25.00 18-10 Use of roller skates, coasters, etc. $25.00 18-51 Obedience to; requirements. $25.00 18-52 Signal legends $25.00 18-54 Flashing signals-Legends $25.00 18-56 No parking and safety zone markers $25.00 18-76 One-way street $25.00 18-77 Stop intersections $35.00 18-78 Yield intersections $35.00 18-79 U-turns prohibited $35.00 18-80 Use of truck routes $25.00 18-81 Obstructing intersections and crosswalks prohibited $25.00 18-82 Funerals and other processions $25.00 18-84 No cruising $50.00 18-121 Stopping of vehicles in streets prohibited; exceptions $25.00 18-122 Standing vehicles not to obstruct passage $25.00 18-122 Stopping vehicles to solicit funds $25.00 18-123 to 18-130 Prohibited parking $25.00 18-131 Parking over forty-eight (48) hours unlawful $15.00 18-132 Loading and special purpose zones $15.00 18-133 Parallel parking $5.00 18-134 Parked with left side to curb $10.00 18-135 Parking within of marked spaces $10.00 18-136 Parking prohibited for certain purposes $25.00 18-137(1) Parked on a sidewalk $25.00 18-137(2) Parked within five (5) five feet of driveway $5.00 18-137(3) Parked on a crosswalk $25.00 18-137(4) Parked within thirty (30) thirty of a stop sign, traffic signal $10.00 18-137(5) Parked within fifty (50) feet of railroad crossing $10.00 18-137(6) Parked alongside or opposite construction obstructing traffic $25.00 18-137(7) Parked on a bridge $25.00 18-137(8) Double parked $25.00 18-137(9) Parked twenty-five (25) feet of intersection $10.00 18-138 Authority to move vehicle on public property $50.00 18-139 Parked at Havens Gardens $25.00 18-140 Restricted use parking areas $25.00 18-141 Parking in city-owned parking lots $15.00 18-143 Unauthorized parking-Handicap spaces $50.00 18-143(a) Failure to display placard $5.00 18-144 Unauthorized parking -Fire lanes $50.00 18-180(a) Riding on sidewalk $5.00 18-180(b) Riding without hands on handlebars $5.00 18-181 More than one (1) person riding $5.00 18-244 Abandoning vehicle unlawful $25.00 18-245 Nuisance vehicle unlawful $25.00  
(Ord. No. 06-15, §§ 1-3, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 18-5, § 2, 6-11-2018) 
Secs. 18-14-18-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Owner to secure registration and certificate of title, temporary registration workers, G.S. 20-50 et seq.; taxes credited to highway fund; municipal vehicle taxes, G.S. 20-97. 

Sec. 18-32. - Required registration fee. 
    Every resident in the city with a licensed vehicle, as defined by the N.C. General Statutes, shall be required to pay an annual registration fee, in an amount as established from time to time, on each licensed vehicle. 
(Code 1993, § 9-31; Ord. No. 89-22, § 1(11-20), 11-13-1989; Ord. No. 96-1, 2-12-1996) 
State Law reference- Renewal of vehicle registration, G.S. 20-66. 
Sec. 18-33. - Billing and collection of registration fee. 
    The registration fee shall be billed and collected by the Beaufort County Tax Office in conjunction with their annual tax billing for said licensed vehicles, for a collection fee in an amount as established from time to time. 
(Code 1993, § 9-32; Ord. No. 96-1, § 21, 2-12-1996) 
Secs. 18-34-18-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Uniform signs and other traffic control devices on highways, streets and public vehicular areas, G.S. 136-30 et seq.; obedience to railroad signal, G.S. 20-142.1; pedestrians subject to traffic-control signals, G.S. 20-172; vehicle control signs and signals, G.S. 20-158; erection of "yield right-of-way" signs, G.S. 20-158.1. 

Sec. 18-51. - Obedience to; requirements. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle shall obey the directions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto and placed in accordance with the traffic ordinances of this city, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted by law to the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle. 
(b)  No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective without signs being placed to give notice thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 11-25; Code 1993, § 9-51) 
State Law reference- Power of local authorities, G.S. 20-169. 
Sec. 18-52. - Signal legend. 
    Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the words "go," "caution" or "stop," or exhibiting differently colored lights successively one (1) at a time, the following colors shall be used, and such terms and lights shall indicate: 
(a)  Green alone or go. 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left, unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. Vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time such signal is exhibited. 
(2)  Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(b)  Yellow alone or caution. Yellow alone or caution when shown following or overlapping the green or go signal: 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop cannot be made in safety, a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection. 
(2)  Pedestrians facing such signal are hereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross a roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles. 
(c)  Red alone or stop. 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line and shall remain standing until green or go is shown alone. 
(2)  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic. 
(d)  Red with green arrow. 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to continue the movement in the direction indicated by such arrow, but shall not interfere with other traffic. 
(2)  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1972, § 11-26; Code 1993, § 9-52) 
Sec. 18-53. - Intersections controlled by traffic signals. 
    The following intersections are hereby declared to be intersections to be controlled by traffic signals: 
Second Street and Bridge Street 
Second Street and Gladden Street 
Second Street and Harvey Street 
Second Street and Market Street 
Third Street and Bonner Street 
Third Street and Bridge Street 
Third Street and Hackney Avenue 
Martin Luther King Drive and Bridge Street 
Fifth Street and Bonner Street 
Fifth Street and Bridge Street 
Fifth Street and Gladden Street 
Fifth Street and Hackney Avenue 
Fifth Street and John Small Avenue 
Fifth Street and Market Street 
Twelfth Street and Highland Drive 
Fifteenth Street and Market Street 
Harvey Street and Third Street 
John Small Avenue, Brown Street, and Ninth Street 
John Small Avenue and Hudnell Street 
Main Street and Bridge Street 
Main Street and Gladden Street 
Main Street and Market Street 
Main Street and Union Drive 
(Code 1972, § 11-27; Code 1993, § 9-53; Ord. No. 05-12, § 1, 6-27-2005; Ord. No. 06-12, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 14-5, § 1, 9-8-2014; Ord. No. 15-8, § 1, 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 18-54. - Flashing signals-Legend. 
    Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(a)  Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit when marked, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(b)  Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
(Code 1972, § 11-28; Code 1993, § 9-54) 
Sec. 18-55. - Flashing signals-Intersections enumerated. 
    The following intersections are to be controlled by flashing signals: 
Second and Respess Streets 
Ninth Street and Bonner Street 
(Code 1972, § 11-29; Code 1993, § 9-55) 
Sec. 18-56. - No parking and safety zone markers. 
    Whenever authorized signs or markings are placed, erected or installed indicating no parking zones or safety zones, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the regulations in connection therewith. 
(Code 1972, § 11-31; Code 1993, § 9-56) 
Secs. 18-57-18-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Operation of vehicles and rules of the road, G.S. art. 3, part 10. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-76. - One-way streets. 
    Upon the following designated one-way streets, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited: 
Second Street, from Charlotte Street to Hackney Avenue for westbound traffic 
Bonner Street, from Main Street to Second Street for northbound traffic 
Main Street, from Hackney Avenue to Park Drive for eastbound traffic 
Union Drive, from Main Street to Second Street for northbound traffic 
(Code 1972, § 11-36; Code 1993, § 9-76; Ord. No. 90-15, § 1, 9-10-1990; Ord. No. 91-15, § 1, 10-14-1991) 
State Law reference- One-way traffic, G.S. 20-165.1; powers of local authorities, G.S. 20-169. 
Sec. 18-77. - Stop intersections. 
    The following intersections are hereby declared to be stop intersections when entered from the streets last named; and when stop signs are placed, erected or installed at such intersections, every driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to such signs before entering the intersection and shall not proceed into or across the through street until he has first determined that no conflict with traffic will be involved: 
Second Street from Academy Street 
Second Street from Bonner Street 
Second Street from Brown Street 
Second Street from Fleming Street 
Second Street from MacNair Street 
Second Street from Pierce Street 
Second Street from Respess Street 
Second Street from Van Norden Street 
Second Street from Washington Street 
Second Street from Wilson Street 
Third Street from Brown Street 
Third Street from Fleming Street 
Third Street from Hackney Avenue 
Third Street from Harvey Street 
Third Street from Kinston Street (north side only) 
Third Street from MacNair Street 
Third Street from New Bern Street (north side only) 
Third Street from Pierce Street 
Third Street from Respess Street 
Third Street from Tarheel Drive (south side only) 
Third Street from Union Drive 
Third Street from Van Norden Street 
Third Street from Washington Street 
Third Street from Wilson Street (north side only) 
Fourth Street from Aycock Street 
Fourth Street from Kinston Street (north side) 
Fourth Street from Simmons Street 
Fourth Street from Tarboro Street (north side) 
Fourth Street from Wilson Street (north side) 
Fifth Street from Aycock Street 
Fifth Street from Berry Street 
Fifth Street from Bowers Street (north side only) 
Fifth Street from Davis Lane 
Fifth Street from Fleming Street 
Fifth Street from Kinston Street 
Fifth Street from MacNair Street 
Fifth Street from Pierce Street 
Fifth Street from Plant Street 
Fifth Street from Plymouth Street 
Fifth Street from Pontiac Drive 
Fifth Street from Respess Street 
Fifth Street from Simmons Street (north side only) 
Fifth Street from Tarboro Street 
Fifth Street from Telfair Street 
Fifth Street from Van Norden Street 
Fifth Street from Washington Street 
Fifth Street from Wilson Street 
Sixth Street from Aycock Street 
Sixth Street from MacNair Street 
Sixth Street from Simmons Street 
Seventh Street from Calais Avenue 
Seventh Street from Gladden Street 
Seventh Street from Harvey Street 
Seventh Street from Respess Street 
Seventh Street from Simmons Street (north side) 
Seventh Street from Van Norden Street 
Eighth Street from Aycock Street 
Eighth Street from Boston Avenue 
Eighth Street from Harvey Street 
Ninth Street from Aycock Street 
Ninth Street from Boston Avenue 
Ninth Street from Byron Place 
Ninth Street from Calais Avenue 
Ninth Street from Gladden Street 
Ninth Street from MacNair Street 
Ninth Street from Nicholson Street 
Ninth Street from Respess Street 
Ninth Street from Telfair Street 
Ninth Street from Van Norden Street 
Tenth Street from MacNair Street (south side only) 
Tenth Street from Nicholson Street 
Tenth Street from Telfair Street 
Eleventh Street from Cooper Street 
Eleventh Street from Nicholson Street 
Eleventh Street from Respess Street 
Eleventh Street from Thompson Lane 
Eleventh Street from Trade Street 
Twelfth Street from Fifteenth Street (north side) 
Twelfth Street from Brown Street (south side) 
Twelfth Street from Nicholson Street (north side) 
Twelfth Street from Pamlico Street 
Thirteenth Street from Cooper Street 
Thirteenth Street from Nicholson Street 
Thirteenth Street from Trade Street 
Fourteenth Street from Nicholson Street 
Fourteenth Street from Summit Avenue 
Fifteenth Street from Thirteenth Street 
Fifteenth Street from Fourteenth Street 
Fifteenth Street from Bennett Street 
Fifteenth Street from Bonner Street 
Fifteenth Street from Bridge Street 
Fifteenth Street from Hackney Avenue 
Fifteenth Street from Jackson Street 
Fifteenth Street from Paul Street 
Fifteenth Street from Nicholson Street 
Fifteenth Street from Pierce Street 
Fifteenth Street from Respess Street 
Fifteenth Street from Summit Avenue 
Fifteenth Street from Van Norden Street 
Fifteenth Street from Washington Street 
Sixteenth Street from Rodman Road (north side) 
Academy Street from Water Street 
Alderson Road from Dimock Road 
Alderson Road from Lodge Road 
Alderson Road from Palmer Place 
Azalea Drive from Dogwood Trail 
Azalea Drive from Cypress Circle 
Bonner Street from Second Street 
Bonner Street from Martin Luther King Drive 
Bonner Street from Sixth Street 
Bonner Street from Seventh Street 
Bonner Street from Eighth Street 
Bonner Street from Ninth Street 
Bonner Street from Tenth Street 
Bonner Street from Eleventh Street 
Bonner Street from Twelfth Street 
Bonner Street from Thirteenth Street 
Bonner Street from Fourteenth Street 
Bonner Street from Water Street 
Brick Kiln Road from Patricia Road 
Brick Kiln Road from Landon Drive 
Brick Kiln Road from Smaw Road 
Bridge Street from Sixth Street 
Bridge Street from Seventh Street 
Bridge Street from Ninth Street 
Bridge Street from Eleventh Street (west side only) 
Bridge Street from Mitchells Alley 
Brown Street from East Main Street 
Brown Street from East Second Street 
Brown Street from East Fourth Street 
Brown Street from Fifth Street 
Brown Street from Sixth Street 
Brown Street from Seventh Street (east side) 
Brown Street from Seventh Street (west side) 
Brown Street from Eighth Street (east side) 
Brown Street from Ninth Street 
Brown Street from Tenth Street 
Brown Street from Eleventh Street 
Brown Street from Old Second Street 
Byron Place from Tenth Street 
Camelia Drive from Wood Duck Drive 
Camelia Drive from Lake Drive 
Camelia Drive from Cypress Circle 
Camelia Drive from Beechtree Road 
Camelia Drive from Mallard Drive 
Camelia Drive from Hillside Drive 
Camelia Drive from Hampton Drive 
Camilla Road from Tucker Lane 
Carolina Avenue from Ninth Street (west side) 
Carolina Avenue from Eleventh Street 
Carolina Avenue from Thirteenth Street 
Carolina Avenue from Bridge Street (north side) 
Carolina Avenue from Hackney Avenue 
Carolina Avenue from Pierce Street (north side) 
Carolina Avenue from Trade Street 
Carolina Avenue from Washington Street (both sides) 
Carolina Avenue and U.S. 17 from Eleventh Street 
Carolina Avenue and U.S. 17 from Thirteenth Street 
Charlotte Street from East Fourth Street 
Charlotte Street from Fifth Street 
Charlotte Street from Sixth Street 
Charlotte Street from Seventh Street 
Charlotte Street from Eighth Street 
Charlotte Street from Ninth Street 
Charlotte Street from Old Second Street 
Charlotte Street from Willow Street 
Cherry Run Road from Northgate Drive 
Cherry Run Road from Steeplechase Drive 
Clarks Neck Road from Grimes Road 
Cypress Circle from Azalea Drive 
Cypress Circle from Dogwood Trail 
Dimock Road from Fowle Place 
Dimock Road from Lawson Road 
Dogwood Trail from Beechtree Road 
Eden Drive from Alderson Road 
Eden Drive from Lawson Road 
Eden Drive from Rowan Place 
Ellison Drive from Marsh Road 
Forest Drive from Hillside Drive 
Forest Drive from Mallard Drive 
Fowle Drive from Tarboro Street 
Flemming Street from Second Street 
Gladden Street from Sixth Street (west side only) 
Gladden Street from alley 
Gladden Street from Harding Street (east side) 
Grimes Road from Plant Street (south side) 
Grimes Road from S.R. 1430 
Grimes Road from Whispering Pines Road 
Hackney Avenue from Second Street 
Hackney Avenue from Third Street 
Hackney Avenue from Martin Luther King Drive 
Hackney Avenue from Eighth Street 
Hackney Avenue from Ninth Street (east side only) 
Hackney Avenue from Tenth Street 
Hackney Avenue from Fowle Street 
Hackney Avenue from Tayloe Street 
Harvey Street and East Second Street 
Harvey Street from Fourth Street 
Harvey Street from Seventh Street 
Harvey Street from Eighth Street 
Harvey Street from Main Street 
Havens Street from East Fourth Street 
Havens Street from Fifth Street 
Havens Street from Sixth Street 
Havens Street from Seventh Street 
Havens Street from Willow Street 
Highland Drive from Eleventh Street 
Highland Drive from Azalea Drive 
Highland Drive from Camelia Drive 
Highland Drive from Reed Drive 
Hudnell Street from East Fourth Street 
Hudnell Street from Fifth Street 
Hudnell Street from Sixth Street 
Hudnell Street from Seventh Street 
Hudnell Street from Eighth Street 
Hudnell Street from Pennsylvania Avenue 
Hudnell Street from Willow Street 
John Small Avenue from Seventh Street (east side) 
John Small Avenue from Eighth Street (west side) 
John Small Avenue from Ninth Street 
John Small Avenue from Tenth Street 
John Small Avenue from Avon Road 
John Small Avenue from Brown Street 
John Small Avenue from Charlotte Street 
John Small Avenue from Harvey Street 
John Small Avenue from Hodges Street 
John Small Avenue from MacNair Street 
John Small Avenue from Pennsylvania Avenue 
Lake Drive from Meadow Drive 
Landon Drive from Camilla Road 
Lawson Road from Beaufort Place 
Lawson Road from Cary Place 
Lawson Road from Dimock Road 
Lawson Road from Eden Drive 
Lawson Road from Ellison Drive 
Lawson Road from Morgan Place 
Lawson Road from Riley Place 
MacNair Street from Water Street 
Main Street from Academy Street 
Main Street from Bonner Street 
Main Street from Brown Street 
Main Street from Charlotte Street 
Main Street from Hackney Avenue 
Main Street from Harvey Street 
Main Street from MacNair Street 
Main Street from Pierce Street 
Main Street from Respess Street 
Main Street from Simmons Street 
Main Street from Van Norden Street 
Main Street from Washington Street 
Mallard Drive from Lake Drive 
Mallard Drive from Meadow Drive 
Maple Street from Runyon Road 
Market Street from Martin Luther King Drive 
Market Street from Sixth Street 
Market Street from Seventh Street 
Market Street from Eighth Street 
Market Street from Ninth Street 
Market Street from Tenth Street 
Market Street from Eleventh Street 
Market Street from Twelfth Street 
Market Street from Thirteenth Street 
Market Street from Fourteenth Street 
Market Street from Fifteenth Street 
Market Street from Airport Road 
Market Street from Harding Street 
Market Street from Lawson Road 
Market Street from Marsh Road 
Market Street from Northwood Road 
Market Street from Oak Drive 
MacNair Street from East Second Street 
MacNair Street from Eighth Street (west side) 
MacNair Street from Main Street 
Martin Luther King Drive from Davis Lane 
Martin Luther King Drive from Fleming Street 
Martin Luther King Drive from Gladden Street 
Martin Luther King Drive from Pierce Street 
Martin Luther King Drive from Respess Street 
Martin Luther King Drive from Union Drive 
Martin Luther King Drive from Van Norden Street 
Martin Luther King Drive from Washington Street 
Nicholson Street from Tenth Street 
Northgate Drive from Asheberne Drive 
Northgate Drive from Red Oak Drive 
Northgate Drive from Steeplechase Drive 
Northgate Drive from Fox Run Drive 
Northwood Road from Blount Place 
Northwood Road from Eden Drive 
Northwood Road from Ellison Drive 
Northwood Road from Lee Place 
Northwood Road from Reed Drive 
Northwood Road from Rowan Place 
Oak Drive from Respess Street 
Oak Drive from Stewart's Drive (south side) 
Old Bath Highway from Panticough Drive 
Old Fort Drive from Gladden Street 
Panticough Drive from Arrowhead Trail 
Park Drive from Second Street 
Park Drive from Hudnell Street 
Park Drive from Main Street 
Park Drive from Simmons Street 
Patricia Road from Camilla Road 
Patricia Road from Tucker Lane 
Pennsylvania Avenue from Havens Street 
Pennsylvania Avenue from Pamlico Street 
Pennsylvania Avenue from Runyon Road (north side) 
Pennsylvania Avenue from Simmons Street 
Pierce Street from Second Street 
Pierce Street from Seventh Street (east side) 
Pierce Street from Ninth Street 
Pierce Street from Tenth Street (west side) 
Pierce Street from Eleventh Street 
Pierce Street from Main Street 
Pierce Street from Thirteenth Street 
Pierce Street from Cox Boulevard (west side only) 
Plymouth Street from Second Street 
Plymouth Street from Third Street 
Plymouth Street from West Fourth Street 
Pontiac Drive from Manuel Drive (two locations) 
Reed Drive from Alderson Road 
Reed Drive from Dudley Place 
Reed Drive from Lawson Road 
Respess Street from Sixth Street 
Respess Street from Twelfth Street 
Respess Street from Thirteenth Street 
Respess Street from Fourteenth Street 
Respess Street from alley 
Respess Street from Harding Street 
Respess Street from Main Street 
Respess Street from Old Fort Drive 
Rodman Road from Stewart Drive (north side) 
Rodman Road from Van Norden Street (south side) 
Simmons Street from Ninth Street 
Simmons Street from Willow Street 
Slatestone Drive from Panticough Drive 
Slatestone Drive from Huguenot Trail 
Slatestone Road from Slatestone Drive 
Smaw Road from Hodges Road 
Smaw Road from Landon Drive 
Smaw Road from Patricia Road 
Steeplechase Drive from Fox Run Drive 
Stewart Parkway from Respess Street 
Summit Avenue from Eleventh Street (east side) 
Summit Avenue from Thirteenth Street 
Summit Avenue from Fourteenth Street 
Tarboro Street from Tenth Street 
Tarboro Street from Fowle Drive 
Tarboro Street from Harrington Street 
Tarboro Street at Triangle Intersection 
Telfair Street from Tenth Street 
Union Drive from alley 
U.S. 17 from Hamilton Beach Road 
U.S. 264 from Clarks Neck Road 
U.S. 264 from S.R. 1430 
U.S. 264 from Whispering Pines Road 
Van Norden Street from Sixth Street 
Van Norden Street from Tenth Street 
Van Norden Street from Thirteenth Street 
Van Norden Street from Sixteenth Street 
Van Norden Street from Harding Street 
Van Norden Street from Mitchells Alley 
Washington Street from Second Street 
Washington Street from Martin Luther King Drive 
Washington Street from Ninth Street 
Washington Street from Tenth Street 
Washington Street from Eleventh Street 
Washington Street from Thirteenth Street 
Washington Street from Anderson Place 
Washington Street from Boston Avenue 
Washington Street from Main Street 
Washington Street from Short Drive 
Washington Street from Trade Street 
Water Street from Academy Street 
Water Street from Bonner Street 
Water Street from Harvey Street 
Water Street from Market Street 
Water Street from Aycock Street 
Water Street from Wye Avenue 
Water Street from MacNair Street 
West Twelfth Street from Respess Street 
(Code 1972, § 11-37; Code 1993, § 9-77; Ord. No. 89-12, § 1, 9-11-1989; Ord. No. 89-18, 10-9-1989; Ord. No. 89-19, § 1, 11-13-1989; Ord. No. 89-27, § 1, 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 90-2, § 1, 1-8-1990; Ord. No. 90-14, § 1, 9-10-1990; Ord. No. 92-6, § 1, 5-11-1992; Ord. No. 93-11, § 1, 8-9-1993; Ord. No. 94-8, § 1, 6-13-1994; Ord. No. 95-19, § 1, 10-9-1995; Ord. No. 96-5, 5-13-1996; Ord. No. 96-14, 8-26-1996; Ord. No. 01-8, § 1, 8-13-2001; Ord. No. 02-16, 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 02-17, 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 04-14, § 1, 8-9-2004; Ord. No. 05-1, § 1, 2-14-2005; Ord. No. 05-08, § 1, 4-11-2005; Ord. No. 05-12, § 2, 6-27-2005; Ord. No. 05-15, § 1, 9-12-2005; Ord. No. 05-16, § 1, 9-12-2005; Ord. No. 07-10, § 1, 12-10-2007; Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, 12-10-2007; Ord. No. 08-03, § 1, 3-17-2008; Ord. No. 11-11, § 2, 8-8-2011; Ord. No. 11-13, § 1, 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 14-1, § 2, 4-14-2014; Ord. No. 14-5, § 2, 9-8-2014; Ord. No. 15-8, § 2, 8-10-2015; Ord. No. 18-8, § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 18-78. - Yield intersections. 
    The following intersections are hereby declared to be yield right-of-way intersections when entered from the streets last named; and where proper signs are placed, erected or installed at such intersections, no driver of a vehicle shall enter or cross such intersection until he has first determined that no conflict with traffic will be involved: 
Fourth Street, from Kinston Street (south side only) 
Fourth Street, from New Bern Street (south side only) 
Fourth Street, from Simmons Street (south side only) 
Fourth Street, from Wilson Street (south side only) 
Seventh Street, from Aycock Street 
Seventh Street, from MacNair Street 
Seventh Street, from Simmons Street (south side only) 
Eighth Street, from Fleming Street (north side only) 
Eighth Street, from Simmons Street 
Ninth Street, from Aycock Street (south side) 
Ninth Street, from Boston Avenue (south side only) 
Ninth Street, from Fleming Street (south side only) 
Ninth Street, from Sparrows Alley (south side only) 
Eleventh Street, from Cooper Street (west side) 
Eleventh Street, from Cox Boulevard (south side only) 
Twelfth Street, from Nicholson Street (south side only) 
Thirteenth Street, from Cooper Street (east side) 
Bridge Street, from Thirteenth Street 
Brown Street, from Eighth Street (west side only) 
Carolina Avenue, from Pierce Street (east side only) 
Harrington Street, from Berry Avenue 
Harrington Street, from Bowers Avenue (south side) 
Harrington Street, from Kinston Street (north side) 
Harrington Street, from Plymouth Street 
Harrington Street, from Wilson Street 
Havens Street, from Seventh Street (west side) 
Highway 33, from Grimes Road (west side only) 
Highway 33, from Plant Street (north side only) 
MacNair Street, from Eighth Street (east side only) 
Pamlico Street, from Pennsylvania Avenue 
Park Drive, from Main Street (west side) 
Pennsylvania Avenue, from James Drive (north side) 
Pennsylvania Avenue, from Pamlico Street (east side) 
Respess Street, from Twelfth Street (west side) 
Simmons Street, from Ninth Street (west side) 
Summit Avenue, from Twelfth Street (east side only) 
Van Norden Street, from Sparrows Alley (east side only) 
Washington Street, from Tenth Street (east side) 
(Code 1972, § 11-38; Code 1993, § 9-78; Ord. No. 95-19, § 2, 10-9-1995; Ord. No. 96-5, 5-13-1996; Ord. No. 02-16, 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 05-08, § 2, 4-11-2005; Ord. No. 11-11, § 1, 8-8-2011; Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 4-14-2014) 
State Law reference- Erection of "yield right-of-way" signs, G.S. 20-158.1. 
Sec. 18-79. - U-turns prohibited. 
    No driver shall turn any vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction in any street intersection or anywhere else in the city. 
(Code 1972, § 11-39; Code 1993, § 9-79) 
Sec. 18-80. - Use of truck routes. 
    Trucks with a gross weight of more than ten thousand (10,000) pounds having no destination within the city are prohibited from using any street in the city, except the following designated truck routes: 
Third Street 
Fifth Street, west of Harvey Street 
Fifteenth Street 
Bridge Street, south of Fifth Street 
Brown Street, north of Park Drive 
Carolina Avenue 
Charlotte Street, north of Park Drive 
Hackney Street, north of Third Street 
Hudnell Street, north of Park Drive 
John Small Avenue 
Market Street, north of Third Street 
(Code 1972, § 11-41; Code 1993, § 9-80; Ord. No. 97-15, 9-8-1997) 
State Law reference- Weight of vehicles and load, G.S. 20-118. 
Sec. 18-81. - Obstructing intersections and crosswalks prohibited. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indications to proceed. 
(Code 1972, § 11-42; Code 1993, § 9-81) 
Sec. 18-82. - Funerals and other processions. 
(a)  Conditions for right-of-way. Funerals and other processions on, across and/or through the streets and highways within the jurisdiction of the city Police Department shall have the right-of-way, regardless of traffic signs and signals, upon the following conditions: 
(1)  A city Police Department vehicle displaying its blue light and burning its headlamps is leading such procession; and 
(2)  A majority of the vehicles in such procession are burning their headlamps. 
(b)  Driving through funeral processions. No vehicle shall be driven through a funeral procession so long as a majority of the vehicles in such procession are burning their headlamps and are proceeding within the posted speed limits of the streets or highways upon which such funeral procession is traveling. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section shall not deny right-of-way to Fire Department vehicles, police vehicles and ambulances when the same are responding to calls. 
(Code 1972, § 11-43; Code 1993, § 9-82) 
State Law reference- Use of red or blue lights on vehicles prohibited; exceptions, G.S. 20-130.1. 
Sec. 18-83. - Regulation of traffic on a portion of Stewart Parkway. 
(a)  Use, access to as well as from, and travel upon that largely unpaved portion of Stewart Parkway being approximately seventy (70) feet wide and beginning on its western end at its intersection with the currently paved (as of the date this ordinance was originally enacted) Stewart Parkway and running and extending generally in an easterly and then northerly direction and terminating on its eastern end at its intersection with Water Street shall be restricted to use by pedestrians traveling on foot exclusively. All other modes of travel thereupon are prohibited, specifically including but not limited to, golf carts, skateboards, ATVs, motor vehicles and all vehicles propelled by combustible engines with the exception of emergency as well as public safety vehicles and vehicles operated by individuals or entities given specific permission to access any portion thereof, including service areas established, authorized, or recognized by the City. The portion of Stewart Parkway subject to the above restrictions is all of that area labeled "Unpaved Portion of Stewart Parkway" as shown on that survey for the City of Washington by Russell Waters dated January 24, 2011 and recorded in Plat Cabinet H, Slide 65-4, Beaufort County Registry, to which reference is herein made for a more complete and accurate description. 
(b)  Pursuant to G.S. 160A-175, as amended, a violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor or infraction as provided by G.S. 14-4, as amended, and subject to the penalties therein. 
(Ord. No. 11-2, § 1, 2-14-2011) 
Sec. 18-84. - No cruising. 
(a)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    Cruising means the repetitive driving of any motor vehicle past a traffic control point in traffic at or near the traffic control point. 
    Repetitive driving means operating a motor vehicle past a traffic control point more than three (3) times within two (2) hours. 
    Traffic control point, as used in this section, means any point or points within the "no cruising" area established by the Police Department for the purposes of monitoring cruising. 
(b)  Cruising prohibited. 
(1)  No person shall engage in cruising. The person having care, custody or control of a motor vehicle shall be considered the person cruising regardless of whether that person was actually driving the motor vehicle all or any of the times it passed the traffic control point. 
(2)  In order to help prevent traffic congestion; obstruction of streets, sidewalks or parking lots; impediment to access of shopping centers or other buildings open to the public; or interference with the use of property or the conduct of business in the area adjacent thereto, no person shall drive or permit a motor vehicle under his care, custody or control to be driven past a traffic control point three (3) or more times within a two-hour period from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, or from 3:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., Saturday or Sunday, in or around a posted "no cruising" area. 
(3)  At every point where a public street or alley becomes or provides ingress to a "no cruising" area, there shall be posted a sign which designates "No Cruising" and gives the applicable time period. A "no cruising" area is an area designated where no person shall drive or permit a motor vehicle under his care, custody or control to be driven past a traffic control point three (3) or more times within a two-hour period. 
(4)  No violations shall occur except upon the third passage by the same traffic control point within the aforementioned two-hour period. 
(5)  No area shall be designated or posted as a "no cruising" area except upon passage of an ordinance by the Washington City Council specifically mandating said designation and posting for a particular area. 
(6)  Where there is a violation of any provision of this section, the city may take the following actions: 
a.  Any violation of this section shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). Any duly authorized local government official is authorized to issue this civil citation and the violator shall pay the penalty to the city tax collector's office within ten (10) days of receipt. The failure of such violator to pay the civil penalty within the specified time shall subject such violator to a civil action to collect all penalties and costs for such violation and any civil penalty that has not been paid for which a delinquent notice was sent shall carry an additional late payment penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Continued violation or continuing violations shall subject the violator to separate, distinct and successive civil penalties. 
b.  In addition to or in lieu of the remedies authorized in subsection (b)(6)a. above, violations of this section may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor and punished as provided by G.S. 14-4, and shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days and violators shall be subject to the provisions of G.S. 160A-175. 
(c)  No cruising areas. The following areas shall be designated as "no cruising" areas: 
All of Stewart Parkway 
Water Street, from Market Street to McNair Street 
(d)  Exemptions. 
(1)  The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this section: 
a.  Any publicly owned vehicle of any city, county, state, federal, or other governmental unit, while the vehicle is being operated for the official purposes of the governmental unit; 
b.  Any authorized emergency vehicle; and 
c.  Any taxicabs for hire, public transit buses, livery or other vehicles being operated for business purposes. 
(2)  The violator's conduct must be such as to demonstrate a specific intent to cruise. No arrest shall be made for a violation of this section unless the arresting officer first affords the operator of the vehicle an opportunity to explain such conduct. No person shall be convicted of violating this section if it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose, not unnecessary, repetitive driving. Lawful purposes include traveling to a specific destination by a person whose residential address is in the designated area or by a person whose business or employment requires driving in the designated area, and operating an official emergency or police vehicle in the designated area. 
(Ord. No. 18-6, § 1, 7-9-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-6, § 1, adopted July 9, 2018, repealed the former § 18-84 and enacted a new § 18-84 as set out herein. The former § 18-84 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 18-5, § 1, adopted June 11, 2018. 
Secs. 18-85-18-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPEED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Speed restrictions, G.S. 20-141 et seq.; special speed limitation on bridges, G.S. 20-144; when speed limit not applicable, G.S. 20-145; powers of local authorities, G.S. 20-169. 

Sec. 18-101. - Through highways; exception for school zones. 
(a)  A vehicle may be operated on any street of the city designated elsewhere in this chapter as a through highway at a rate of speed not exceeding thirty-five (35) miles per hour; provided, however, that at no time shall the speed be greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing and such rate of speed shall not exceed the speed limits imposed by state law. 
(b)  Due to traffic hazards around city schools, a twenty-five-mile-per-hour (25 mph) speed zone is hereby established and shall be in effect on the following sections of streets and highways 7:00 a.m. until 8:30 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. until 3:30 p.m. on school days only. 
Ninth Street, from Bridge Street to Market Street 
Avon Avenue, from 235 feet North of U.S. 264 to one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of a mile South of Highland Drive 
Bridge Street, from Carolina Avenue to Thirteenth Street 
Hudnell Street (S.R. 1352), from Pennsylvania Avenue to a point 0.2 mile south of U.S. 264 
(c)  A vehicle may be operated on the following streets at a rate of speed not exceeding fifty-five (55) miles per hour; provided, that at no time shall the speed be greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing: Springs Road (S.R. 1509), from a point 0.86 mile east of U.S. 17 eastward to a point 0.45 mile west of Market Street (S.R. 1422). 
(d)  A vehicle may be operated on U.S. Highway 264 from the western corporate limit eastwardly to Whispering Pines Road (S.R. 1404) at a rate of speed not exceeding fifty (50) miles per hour. 
(e)  A vehicle may be operated along the following streets at a rate of speed not to exceed forty-five (45) miles per hour: 
Highland Drive, from Avon Avenue to Reed Drive 
John Small Avenue, from Hudnell Street eastward to the city limits 
Market Street (S.R. 1422), from Oak Drive northwardly to the city limits 
(Code 1972, § 11-49; Code 1993, § 9-101; Ord. No. 88-12, § 1, 8-8-1988; Ord. No. 00-15, 9-11-2000; Ord. No. 05-06, § 1, 3-14-2005; Ord. No. 07-2, § 1, 2-12-2007) 
Sec. 18-102. - Nonhighway streets. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vehicle on a nonhighway system street in a residential area in excess of thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(b)  No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour in the following areas and times specified: in the business area at any time. For the purpose of this section only, the business area is described as follows: 
Main Street, from Bridge Street to Bonner Street 
Second Street, from Bridge Street to Bonner Street 
All of Stewart Parkway 
All streets within these bounds 
(c)  No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour on the following portions of street: 
Water Street from Market Street to McNair Street 
(d)  No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour on the following portions of street: 
Second Street, from Bonner Street to Park Drive 
Second Street, from Bridge to Hackney Avenue 
Seventh Street, between Bonner Street and Harvey Street 
Eighth Street, between Bonner Street and Harvey Street 
Hackney Avenue, from Second Street to Main Street 
Harvey Street, between Seventh Street and Eighth Street 
Main Street, from Bonner Street to Park Drive 
Main Street, from Hackney Avenue to Bridge Street 
Respess Street, from Fifteenth Street to Oak Drive 
All streets within Smallwood Subdivision 
All streets within the Iron Creek Subdivision 
Oak Drive 
Hillcrest Drive 
Stewart Drive 
Tenth Street, from Market Street to John Small Avenue 
Market Street (S.R. 1422) from Third Street (S.R. 1300) to Fifth Street (U.S. 264) 
West Eleventh Street, from Market Street to Summit Avenue 
(e)  No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of forty-five (45) miles per hour on the following portions of streets: (Reserved) 
(f)  No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of fifty (50) miles per hour on the following portions of streets: (Reserved) 
(g)  No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of fifty-five (55) miles per hour on the following portions of streets: (Reserved) 
(Code 1972, § 11-50; Code 1993, § 9-102; Ord. No. 87-13, § 1, 6-8-1987; Ord. No. 88-14, § 1, 10-10-1988; Ord. No. 88-18, § 1, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 96-17, 11-11-1996; Ord. No. 01-17, 11-19-2001; Ord. No. 02-11, 6-24-2002; Ord. No. 03-11, § 1, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 07-2, § 2, 2-12-2007; Ord. No. 07-12, § 1, 12-10-2007; Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 4-14-2014; Ord. No. 16-1, § 1, 8-8-2016; Ord. No. 18-4, §§ 1-4, 6-11-2018) 
Secs. 18-103-18-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Stopping on highway prohibited; warning signals; removal of vehicles from public highway, G.S. 20-161 et seq.; municipal regulation of parking, G.S. 160A-301. 

Sec. 18-121. - Stopping of vehicles in streets prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  No vehicle shall stop in any street, except for the purpose of parking as prescribed in this chapter, unless such stop is made necessary by the approach of fire apparatus, by the approach of a funeral or other procession which is given the right-of-way, by the stopping of a public conveyance, by the lowering of railway gates, by the giving of traffic signals, by the passing of some other vehicle or a pedestrian, or to avoid a collision or by some emergency. 
(b)  In any case covered by these exceptions, such vehicles shall stop so as not to obstruct any footway, pedestrian aisle, safety zone, crossing or street intersection if such can be avoided. 
(Code 1972, § 11-51; Code 1993, § 9-121) 
Sec. 18-122. - Standing vehicles not to obstruct passage of other vehicles. 
    No vehicle shall so stand on any street as to interrupt or interfere with the passage of public conveyances or other vehicles. No person, organization or civic club may stop traffic on any of the streets or bridges of the city for the purpose of soliciting funds or contributions for any purpose. 
(Code 1972, § 11-52; Code 1993, § 9-122) 
State Law reference- Pedestrian soliciting rides, employment, business or funds upon highways or streets, G.S. 20-175. 
Sec. 18-123. - Designated prohibited parking areas. 
    When signs are placed, erected or installed giving notice thereof, or the curbing has been painted yellow in lieu of such signs, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the following streets: 
Second Street (north side), between Bonner Street and Charlotte Street 
Second Street (north side), between Gladden Street and Bridge Street; provided that parking on the north side of Second Street between Gladden Street and Bridge Street will be allowed on Sundays only 
Second Street (south side), between Gladden Street and Bridge Street 
Third Street (north side), for one hundred (100) feet east of Gladden Street and for one hundred fifty (150) feet west of Gladden Street 
Third Street (south side), for one hundred (100) feet east of Gladden Street and for one hundred fifty (150) feet west of Gladden Street 
Martin Luther King Drive (north side), between Bonner Street and Market Street 
Martin Luther King Drive (south side), between Market Street and Hackney Avenue 
Fifth Street (north side), from Brown Street west for two hundred (200) feet 
Fifth Street (both sides), from city limits to John Small Avenue 
Fifth Street (both sides), one hundred (100) feet west of Harvey Street 
Seventh Street (south side), between Market Street and Carolina Avenue, Monday through Friday 
Seventh Street, between Market Street and Respess Street, twenty (20) feet on either side of all driveways into the Washington Housing Authority property 
Ninth Street (south side), between Market Street and Bridge Street, Monday through Friday 
Eleventh Street (south side), between Pierce Street and Bridge Street 
Twelfth Street (both sides), from Highland Drive, two hundred (200) feet to the west 
Twelfth Street (both sides), from Highland Drive to John Small Avenue (U.S. 264) 
Twelfth Street (both sides), between Market Street and Bonner Street 
Airport Circle (both sides) excluding thirty (30) feet centered in front of the Airport Terminal Building 
Airport Road (both sides) 
Airport Road (both sides), from Market Street to Airport Circle 
Bonner Street (both sides), from Fifteenth Street northward to the Oakdale Cemetery Entrance 
Bonner Street (east side), between Second Street and Third Street 
Bonner Street (east side), between Fifth Street and Third Street 
Bonner Street (west side), between Eighth Street and Ninth Street 
Bonner Street (east side), between Water Street and Second Street 
Bonner Street (west side), within thirty (30) feet from the intersections of Bonner Street and Second Street and Bonner Street and Third Street 
Bonner Street (west side), between Fifth Street and one hundred (100) feet north of Eighth Street 
Bonner Street (west side), for fifty (50) feet north of Third Street 
Bonner Street (west side), for fifty (50) feet north of Martin Luther King Drive 
Bonner Street (west side), between Ninth Street and Fifteenth Street; provided parking on the west side of Bonner Street between Ninth Street and Tenth Street will be allowed on Sundays only 
Bridge Street (both sides), between Seventh Street and Ninth Street 
Bridge Street (both sides), between Pamlico River Bridge and Fifth Street 
Bridge Street (west side), beginning at a point one hundred seventy-five (175) feet south of Eleventh Street northwardly to Fifteenth Street 
Bridge Street and Second Street, on the north side of Second Street for sixty-two (62) feet west of Bridge Street and for one hundred twenty (120) feet east of Bridge Street 
Bridge Street and Third Street, on the south side of Third Street for one hundred forty (140) feet west of Bridge Street and for two hundred (200) feet east of Bridge Street; on the north side of Third Street for fifty-two (52) feet west of Bridge Street and for two hundred (200) feet east of Bridge Street 
Brown Street (east side), between Park Drive and East Fourth Street 
Brown Street and Third Street, on the north and south side of Third Street one hundred sixty (160) feet west of Brown Street 
Brown Street and Twelfth Street, on the north side of Twelfth Street for one hundred (100) feet to the east of Brown Street; on the south side of Twelfth Street for seventy-five (75) feet east of Brown Street; on the east side of Brown Street for seventy-five (75) feet south of Twelfth Street 
Brown Street and Park Drive, on the north and south side of Park Drive one hundred sixty (160) feet east of Brown Street 
Carolina Avenue (both sides), from Fifth Street to the northern city limits 
Charlotte Street (both sides), between Jack's Creek and Park Drive 
Charlotte Street (east side), between Main Street and Second Street 
Charlotte Street (west side), from Main Street one hundred (100) feet north 
Davis Lane, between Martin Luther King Drive and Fifth Street 
East Ninth Street (south side), within twenty (20) feet of a driveway leading into the high school property 
East Second Street, between MacNair Street and Academy Street, in front of First Christian Church 
Gladden Street (west side), between Second Street and Fifth Street 
Gladden Street (west side), between Main Street and Second Street except on Sundays and public holidays 
Hackney Avenue (east side), beginning at the intersection of Martin Luther King Drive and Hackney Avenue and running south one hundred fifty (150) feet 
Hackney Avenue (east side), beginning at the intersection of Martin Luther King Drive and Hackney Avenue and running north for seventy-five (75) feet 
Hackney Avenue (west side), between Third Street and Fifth Street 
Hackney Avenue (both sides), between Third Street and Main Street, except on the east side of Hackney Avenue beginning at a distance of 50 feet north of West 2nd Street and running north for 338 feet 
Harvey Street (east side), between Martin Luther King Drive and Fifth Street 
Harvey Street (east side), beginning at a point three hundred thirty-four (334) feet north of the centerline of East Seventh Street and running southwardly a distance of one hundred (100) feet 
Harvey Street (both sides), between the eastern entrance to the boat ramp and railroad track 
Highland Drive (both sides), from Tenth Street to the northern city limits 
Hudnell Street (west side), from John Small Avenue (U.S. 264) to Pennsylvania Avenue 
Hudnell Street (east side), from U.S. 264 south for six hundred (600) feet 
John Small Avenue (both sides), from a point approximately two hundred (200) feet northeast of the intersection of Fifth Street and John Small Avenue to the eastern city limits 
John Small Avenue and Harvey Street, on the west side of Harvey Street for fifty-five (55) feet south of John Small Avenue; on the east side of Harvey Street for seventy-five (75) feet south of John Small Avenue; on the south side of John Small Avenue for ninety-five (95) feet east of Harvey Street; on the north side of John Small Avenue for two hundred (200) feet west of Harvey Street and for one hundred ninety (190) feet east of Harvey Street 
Kinston Street (west side), beginning at the intersection of Third Street and running south one hundred (100) feet 
Main Street (north side), twenty (20) feet west of the driveway to the Peterson Building 
Main Street and Market Street (southwest corner), for a distance of one (1) parking space along Main Street 
Main Street and Respess Street (northeast corner), for a distance of one (1) parking space along Main Street 
Market Street (both sides), from Fifteenth Street to a point approximately two hundred (200) feet north of Oak Drive 
Market Street (east side), for a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet south of the intersection of Market Street and Fifteenth Street 
Market Street (west side), for a distance of one (1) parking space north of Water Street 
Market Street (west side), between Third Street and Fifteenth Street 
Market Street (west side). No truck may park at any time in the parking space just north of the entrance to the City Hall property 
Market Street and Second Street, on the west side of Market Street for eighty (80) feet south of Second Street and for twenty (20) feet north of Second Street; on the east side of Market Street for eighty-six (86) feet south of Second Street; on the south side of Second Street for twenty-five (25) feet east of Market Street 
Market Street and Third Street, on the west side of Market Street for ninety (90) feet south of Third Street, on the east side Market Street for eighty (80) feet south of Third Street, on the east side of Market Street for twenty (20) feet from a point one hundred (100) feet south of Third Street, on the south side of Third Street for one hundred (100) feet west of Market Street and for eighteen (18) feet east of Market Street; on the north side of Third Street for one hundred fifty (150) feet west of Market Street and for forty (40) feet east of Market Street 
Midtown Lane (both sides) between Gladden Street and Union Alley 
N.C. 32 (Third Street and Park Drive), from U.S. 17 (Bridge Street) to Hudnell Street 
N.C. 33 (both sides), from the western city limits to Hackney Avenue 
North Market Street (west side), beginning twenty-four (24) feet from the centerline of Main Street and running north for forty-five (45) feet 
North Market Street (west side), fifteen (15) feet either side of the driveway entrance into City Hall 
North Market Street (both sides), beginning twenty-eight (28) feet from the centerline of Second Street and running south for forty (40) feet 
Pierce Street (both sides), from Fifteenth Street northwardly to dead end 
Pierce Street (east side), between Seventh Street and Eleventh Street 
Pierce Street (west side), between Third Street and Martin Luther King Drive 
Plymouth Street (both sides), for a distance of one hundred (100) feet north of West Fifth Street (U.S. 264) 
Respess Street (both sides), between Second Street and Third Street 
Respess Street, between Seventh Street and Ninth Street, twenty (20) feet on either side of all driveways into the Washington Housing Authority property 
Respess Street (east side), between Main Street and Second Street for sixty-five (65) feet north of Main Street, for ten (10) feet south of an alley extending to Union Drive from the southern edge of the driveway of Embarq at 135 West Second Street to Second Street 
Respess Street (east side); between Main Street and the Pamlico River and between Main Street and Fifth Street 
Respess Street (east side), between Third Street and Martin Luther King Drive 
Respess Street (west side), from Third Street northward one hundred seventy (170) feet 
Respess Street (west side), between Main Street and Second Street for fifty-two (52) feet north of Main Street and for thirty (30) feet south of an alley leading to Gladden Street 
Respess Street (west side), two hundred and thirty (230) feet south of the intersection of Respess and Main, from a point two hundred and sixty-five (265) feet south of the intersection of Respess Street and Main Street to Stewart Parkway, and no parking on (east side) between Main Street and Stewart Parkway 
South Market Street (west side), beginning fifteen (15) feet from the centerline of Water Street and running north for forty (40) feet 
South Market Street (east side), beginning ninety-five (95) feet from the centerline of Water Street and running north for eighty (80) feet 
South Market Street (both sides), beginning twenty-four (24) feet from the centerline of Main Street and running south for thirty-five (35) feet 
Stewart Parkway (north side) 
Stewart Parkway (both sides), from parking lot entrance in front of 222 Stewart Parkway east to Market Street 
Tarboro Street (both sides), from Fowle Drive to dead end 
Union Drive, between West Main Street and Second Street 
Van Norden Street (both sides), from Martin Luther King Drive to Fifth Street; provided, that parking in front of Evergreen Holiness Church located at 423 Van Norden Street be allowed on Sundays only 
Washington Street, (east side) between Main Street and Second Street 
Washington Street (east side), for a distance of four hundred thirty-five (435) feet north of the intersection of Fifth Street and Washington Street 
Water Street (south side), between Market Street and 156 Water Street 
Water Street (south side), between 226 Water Street and Harvey Street 
Water Street (both sides), from Harvey Street to MacNair Street 
Water Street (north side) from Market Street to 156 Water Street 
West Third Street (south side), for a distance of two hundred ninety (290) feet from Plymouth Street 
West Main Street (north side), between Main Street and Second Street for thirty (30) feet south of an alley extending to Gladden Street and for approximately fifty-two (52) feet north of Main Street 
(Code 1972, § 11-53; Code 1993, § 9-123; Ord. No. 87-6, § 1, 4-13-1987; Ord. No. 88-8, § 1, 5-9-1988; Ord. No. 89-13, 9-11-1989; Ord. No. 92-13, § 1, 10-12-1992; Ord. No. 94-7, § 1, 6-13-1994; Ord. No. 97-4, 5-19-1997; Ord. No. 97-5, 5-19-1997; Ord. No. 98-15, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 00-10, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 01-2, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 01-9, § 1, 8-13-2001; Ord. No. 02-9, 6-24-2002; Ord. No. 03-05, 3-10-2003; Ord. No. 03-06, 3-10-2003; Ord. No. 04-23, §§ 1, 2, 10-18-2004; Ord. No. 05-19, §§ 1, 2, 12-12-2005; Ord. No. 08-2, § 1, 2-12-2008; Ord. No. 10-8, §§ 1, 2, 9-13-2010; Ord. No. 15-6, § 1, 7-13-2015; Ord. NO. 15-9, §§ 1, 2, 9-28-2015; Ord. No. 18-2, § 1, 5-14-2018) 
Sec. 18-124. - Fifteen-minute parking areas. 
    Parking shall be limited to a maximum of fifteen (15) minutes in the following areas: 
(a)  Airport Circle, the thirty (30) feet centered in front of the Airport Terminal Building; 
(b)  Along the western side of Stewart Parkway beginning at the intersection of West Main Street and Gladden Street, one hundred twenty (120) feet southward on Saturdays (May through October, 6:00 a.m. until 12:00 p.m.); 
(c)  The five most westerly spaces in the parking lot located southeast of the intersection of West Main Street where Gladden Street intersects with Stewart Parkway, said lot bounded on the south and west by Stewart Parkway and on the east by Repass Street (during the months of May though October, from 6:00 a.m. until 12:00 p.m.). 
(Code 1972, § 11-53.2; Code 1993, § 9-124; Ord. No. 06-21, § 1, 8-14-2006; Ord. NO. 15-9, §§ 3, 4, 9-28-2015) 
Sec. 18-125. - Prohibited parking locations-Between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
    Parking is prohibited in the following places between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.: 
East Seventh Street (north side), from a point four hundred ten (410) feet east of the center of Bonner Street eastwardly to Harvey Street 
East Eighth Street (north side), from a point three hundred seventy-five (375) feet east of the center of Bonner Street eastwardly approximately two hundred seventy-five (275) feet to the loading zone 
East Eighth Street (south side), from a point three hundred seventy-five (375) feet east of the center of Bonner Street eastwardly to Harvey Street 
Harvey Street (east side); from East Seventh Street northwardly to a point two hundred thirty-four (234) feet north of the center of East Seventh Street 
Harvey Street (west side), from Seventh Street to Eighth Street 
(Code 1972, § 11-53.3; Code 1993, § 9-125; Ord. No. 87-18, § 1, 11-9-1987; Ord. No. 89-24, § 1, 11-13-1989; Ord. No. 93-14, § 1, 11-8-1993) 
Sec. 18-126. - Prohibited parking locations-Between 7:30 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., and 2:00 p.m. and 3:30 p.m., on schooldays. 
    Parking is prohibited between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., and also between 2:00 p.m. and 3:30 p.m., on school days only at the following locations: John Small Avenue, between Hudnell Street and Hodges Avenue. 
(Code 1972, § 11-53.4; Code 1993, § 9-126) 
Sec. 18-127. - Prohibited parking locations-Between 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m., school days only. 
    Parking is prohibited between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on school days only at the following locations: 
Ninth Street (north side), from Bonner Street to MacNair Street 
Ninth Street (south side), from Bonner Street to Nicholson Street 
(Code 1993, § 9-127; Ord. No. 88-4, § 1(11-53.5), 4-11-1988) 
Sec. 18-128. - One-hour parking areas. 
(a)  Areas designated as one-hour parking areas shall be properly marked by adequate signs or parking meters. No person shall park a vehicle for longer than one (1) hour between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except on Sundays and public holidays, upon any of the streets designated in this section. The changing of the position of a vehicle from one (1) point to another point in the same block shall be deemed one (1) continuous parking period. 
(b)  The one-hour parking areas are as follows: 
(1)  Second Street (north side), from Gladden to a point one hundred fifty (150) feet east of the centerline of Market Street; 
(2)  East Seventh Street (south side), from a point four hundred ten (410) feet east of the centerline of Bonner Street eastwardly a distance of two hundred ten (210) feet; 
(3)  Market Street (east side), from the centerline of Second Street two hundred thirty (230) feet north; 
(4)  Market Street (west side), from the centerline of Second Street to the centerline of Third Street; 
(5)  East Second Street (south side), from a point one hundred twenty-five (125) feet east of Market Street, westwardly a distance of one hundred (100) feet; 
(6)  West Second Street (south side), from Market Street westwardly a distance of one hundred ninety (190) feet. 
(Code 1972, § 11-54; Code 1993, § 9-128; Ord. No. 96-12, 7-8-1996; Ord. No. 11-8, § 1, 6-13-2011; Ord. No. 11-9, § 1, 7-18-2011) 
Sec. 18-129. - Two-hour parking areas. 
(a)  Areas designated as two-hour parking areas shall be properly marked by adequate signs. Unless otherwise stated below, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than two (2) hours between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except on Sundays and public holidays, upon any of the streets or areas designated in this section. The changing of the position of a vehicle from one (1) point directly to another point in the same block shall be deemed one (1) continuous parking period. 
(b)  The two-hour parking areas are as follows: 
Hackney Avenue (east side), from Second Street to a point one hundred forty-two (142) feet north of the northern right-of-way of Second Street. 
West Second Street (north side), from Hackney Avenue to a point one hundred eighty-eight (188') feet east of the eastern right-of-way of Hackney Avenue. 
(Code 1972, § 11-55; Code 1993, § 9-129; Ord. No. 98-4, 3-8-1998; Ord. No. 98-6, 4-13-1998; Ord. No. 02-13, 8-12-2002; Ord. No. 03-14, § 1, 9-8-2003; Ord. No. 10-4, § 1, 5-10-2010) 
Sec. 18-129.1. - Three-hour parking areas. 
(a)  Areas designated as three-hour parking areas shall be properly marked by adequate signs. Unless otherwise stated below, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than three (3) hours between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except on Sundays and public holidays, upon any of the streets or areas designated in this section. The changing of the position of a vehicle from one (1) point directly to another point in the same black shall be deemed one (1) continuous parking period. 
(b)  East Main Street (north side), from Market Street to 116 East Main Street. 
East Main Street (south side), from Market Street to 139 East Main. Street 
Market Street (both sides), between 2nd Street and Water Street. 
West Main Street (both sides), between Gladden Street and Market. Street 
(Ord. No. 10-4, § 2, 5-10-2010) 
Sec. 18-130. - Truck parking prohibited. 
(a)  Trucks are prohibited from parking on the following streets or portions of streets: Second Street (south side), between Union Drive and the Courthouse Annex located at 111 West Second Street. 
(b)  Garbage or refuse collection trucks are prohibited from parking on any portion of a street or lot within the city limits that is located within or directly abuts a residential zoning district, as shown on the Official Zoning Map of the city. The Police Department shall be responsible for enforcing this provision. 
(Code 1972, § 11-55; Code 1993, § 9-130; Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 4-10-1995) 
Sec. 18-131. - Parking over forty-eight hours unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be left parked on any street in the city for a period longer than forty-eight (48) hours; provided the Police Department shall make a diligent attempt to give the owner or agent of such vehicle twenty-four (24) hours' notice to remove such vehicle. 
(Code 1972, § 11-56; Code 1993, § 9-131) 
Sec. 18-132. - Loading and special purpose zones. 
    The following streets shall be reserved as stands for the specific purpose and at the exact location named herein and no automobile or other vehicle shall park therein, except those for which the space or stand has been designated: 
(a)  Loading zones. The following spaces are designated as loading zones: 
(1)  One (1) zone in front of 210 West Main Street. 
(2)  Two (2) zones in front of 107 and 109 Gladden Street. 
(3)  One (1) continuous zone on the east side of Market Street, beginning at a point eighty-five (85) feet south of the intersection with Third Street and continuing in a southerly direction for a distance of eighty-six (86) feet. 
(4)  One (1) continuous loading zone on the south side of Midtown Lane, between Union Drive and Respess Street. 
(5)  One (1) continuous loading zone on the east side of Harvey Street, beginning at a point three hundred thirty-four (334) feet north of the centerline of east Seventh Street and running northwardly a distance of fifty (50) feet. 
(6)  On the west side of Harvey Street, from Main Street to the southern property line of Myer's Florist. 
(7)  One (1) zone in front of 169 West Main Street. 
(8)  One (1) zone in front of 184 West Main Street. 
(9)  One (1) continuous loading zone in front of 208 West Martin Luther King Jr. Drive. 
(10)  One (1) zone beginning two hundred and thirty (230) feet south of Main and Respess Street, for a distance of thirty-five (35) feet along the west side of Respess Street. 
(11)  One (1) loading zone on Harris Lane, south of Main Street, behind 141 West Main Street. 
(12)  Two (2) spaces directly behind the loading dock at the Turnage Theater, 150 West Main Street, in the municipal parking lot adjacent to the Turnage Theater. 
(13)  One (1) space on the south side of Second Street at the western-most property line of 609 West Second Street. 
(b)  School loading zones. School loading zones are designated for dropping off or picking up students, teachers or other persons at the school and shall not be used for parking. It shall be unlawful to leave an unattended vehicle parked in a school loading zone. The designated school loading zone is as follows: the west side of Bridge Street from Seventh Street to Ninth Street at Beaufort County Alternative School. 
(c)  School bus loading zones. School bus loading zones shall be used for the parking of only school buses during school hours, 8:00 a.m. until 3:00 p.m. Designated school bus loading zones are as follows: 
(1)  East Ninth Street (south side), from four hundred (400) feet east of the center of Bonner Street, eastwardly along the P.S. Jones Middle School property a distance of nine hundred sixty (960) feet. 
(2)  Martin Luther King Drive (north side), from the center of Harvey Street westwardly three hundred ninety-seven (397) feet. 
(Code 1972, § 11-57; Code 1993, § 9-132; Ord. No. 92-8, § 1, 6-8-1992; Ord. No. 01-13, § 1, 10-8-2001; Ord. No. 03-07, 3-10-2003; Ord. No. 08-5, § 1, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 09-3, § 1, 8-10-2009) 
Sec. 18-133. - Parallel parking required, when not provided otherwise. 
    Where not otherwise indicated by this chapter and where the street is not marked to show how vehicles shall park, all vehicles shall park parallel to the curb and not more than twelve (12) inches therefrom. 
(Code 1972, § 11-59; Code 1993, § 9-133) 
Sec. 18-134. - Parking with left side to curb. 
(a)  No vehicle shall park with its left side to the curb anywhere in the city, except on one-way streets. 
(b)  Parking with the left side to curb is allowed on one-way streets unless prohibited by ordinance on designated streets. 
(Code 1972, § 11-61; Code 1993, § 9-134) 
Sec. 18-135. - Parking within marked parking spaces required. 
    On any street or municipal parking lot which is marked off with lines indicating the parking spaces for cars, vehicles shall be parked between such lines. 
(Code 1972, § 11-62; Code 1993, § 9-135) 
Sec. 18-136. - Parking prohibited for certain purposes. 
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any street for the principal purposes of: 
(a)  Displaying it for sale, rent, lease or lease-purchase. 
(b)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(c)  Storage thereof by garages, dealers or other persons, when such storage is not incident to the bona fide use and operation of such automobile or other vehicles. 
(d)  Storage of any detached trailer or van, when the towing unit has been disconnected, or for the purpose of transferring merchandise or freight from one (1) vehicle to another. 
(e)  Advertising. 
(Code 1972, § 11-63; Code 1993, § 9-136; Ord. No. 96-15, 9-9-1996) 
Sec. 18-137. - Parking prohibited in certain places. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle attended or unattended, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(a)  On the sidewalk. 
(b)  Within an intersection or within five (5) feet of a driveway. 
(c)  On a crosswalk. 
(d)  Within thirty (30) feet of the approach side of any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a street or roadway. 
(e)  On either side of any street approaching a grade crossing within fifty (50) feet of the closest rail; provided that where existing permanent structures are located along the street and closer than fifty (50) feet, parking may be permitted in front of such structures unless otherwise prohibited if such parking does not interfere with the view in either direction of an approaching locomotive or train. 
(f)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction, when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(g)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure. 
(h)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, standing or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(i)  Within twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of curblines or, if none, then within fifteen (15) feet of the intersection of property lines at an intersection of highways or streets. 
(j)  Designated areas where the curb is painted yellow in the parking lot located south of West Second Street in front of the Beaufort County Courthouse located at 112 West Second Street. Said lot is bounded on the east by the Beaufort County Courthouse Annex located at 111 West Second Street and on the west by Union Drive and on the south by Midtown Lane. 
(Code 1972, § 11-64; Code 1993, § 9-137; Ord. No. 99-17, 12-13-1999) 
State Law reference- Parking near emergency vehicle, G.S. 20-157(e); parking in front of private driveway, fire hydrant, fire stations, intersections, curblines, or fire lanes, G.S. 20-162. 
Sec. 18-138. - Authority to remove vehicle on public property. 
    No person other than a police officer or someone under the direction of a police officer shall move a vehicle not owned by such person that is parked unlawfully on public property or is subject to removal therefrom. 
(Code 1972, § 11-65; Code 1993, § 9-138) 
Sec. 18-139. - Parking at Havens Gardens. 
(a)  No person using the parking area adjacent to the boat loading ramps at Havens Gardens, bounded by East Main Street, Park Drive and Runyon's Creek, shall park any vehicle or boat trailer except in the designated spaces along the sides of this area. Parking shall be perpendicular to the Main Street side or the Park Drive side. 
(b)  No trailers may be parked in that part of Havens Gardens which is located southwardly of Main Street and Park Drive. No vehicles may be parked in that part of Havens Gardens which is located southwardly of Main Street and Park Drive, except in the existing black-topped parking area. 
(Code 1972, § 11-66; Code 1993, § 9-139) 
Sec. 18-140. - Restricted use parking areas. 
(a)  When so posted, parking in restricted use parking areas shall be limited to the posted use. 
(b)  The restricted use parking areas are as follows: Parking lot to the west of and adjacent to the Washington Civic Center, 110 Gladden Street, shall be restricted to patrons and other persons having business at the civic center. 
(Code 1993, § 9-140; Ord. No. 91-5, § 1, 6-10-1991) 
Sec. 18-141. - Parking in city-owned parking lots. 
    No person shall park and occupy any vehicle in a city-owned parking lot between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. An occupied vehicle is one in which one (1) or more persons are in/on, or in close proximity to the vehicle and one (1) or more of the vehicle systems is in operation. These restrictions apply, but are not limited to the following: 
(a)  Parking lot located on the west side of Gladden Street, between West Second Street and West Third Street, said lot being adjacent to the First United Methodist Church property located at 304 West Second Street and west of the United States Post Office located at 222 West Second Street. 
(b)  Parking lot located west of the Civic Center located at 110 West Gladden Street building running from West Second Street to West Main Street. 
(c)  Parking lot located on the north side of Water Street and being bounded on the west by Market Street and on the east by Bonner Street. 
(d)  Parking lot located north of East Main Street, between Market Street and Bonner Street to East Second Street. 
(e)  Parking lot located south of West Second Street, in front of Beaufort County Courthouse. Said lot is bounded on the east by the Courthouse Annex at 111 West Second Street and on the west by Union Alley; lot bounded on the south by Midtown Lane. 
(f)  Parking lot located southeast of the intersection of West Main Street, where Gladden Street intersects with Stewart Parkway. Said lot is bounded on the South and West by Stewart Parkway and on the east by Respess Street. 
(g)  Parking lot located on the north side of Stewart Parkway and being bounded on the west by Respess Street and on the east by Market Street. 
(Code 1993, § 9-141; Ord. No. 94-19, § 1, 9-1-1994; Ord. No. 95-11, § 1, 5-8-1995; Ord. No. 99-10, 8-9-1999; Ord. No. 02-6, 6-24-2002; Ord. No. 18-12, §§ 1, 2, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 18-142. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 19-1, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 14, 2019, repealed § 18-142, which pertained to prohibited parking lot locations between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., and derived from Code 1993, § 9-141.1; and Ord. No. 02-6, adopted June 24, 2002. 
Sec. 18-143. - Unauthorized parking-Handicapped spaces. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Designated handicapped parking space means a parking space which has been designated for parking for handicapped, as defined in this subsection. These spaces shall be designated in accordance with G.S. 136-30 and shall have an appropriate sign erected. 
    Distinguished license plate means any license plate issued by the State of North Carolina or any other state within the United States that displays the international symbol of access, as defined in G.S. 20-37.5(3). 
    Handicapped means a person with a mobility impairment who is determined by a licensed physician to have any of the conditions stated in G.S. 20-37.5(2). 
    Removable windshield placard means a two-sided, hooked placard which includes on each side: 
(1)  The international symbol of access which is at least three (3) inches in height, centered on the placard, and is white and blue in color; 
(2)  An identification number; 
(3)  An expiration date; and 
(4)  The seal or other identification of the issuing authority. 
(b)  Unauthorized parking in designated handicapped spaces prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, leave, or let stand any vehicle in a designated handicapped parking space, when the vehicle does not display the distinguishing license plate or windshield placard, as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park, leave or let stand any vehicle so as to obstruct a curb ramp or curb cut for handicapped persons, as provided for in the state building code or as designated in G.S. 136-44.14. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of any officer of the Washington Police Department or other person, as authorized by the Chief of the Washington Police Department, detecting a violation of this article, to take the state and license number of the vehicle involved in the violation and to place in or on the vehicle a parking ticket. 
(e)  It shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle was parked and left in the space by the person in whose name the vehicle is registered and licensed according to the records of the Division of Motor Vehicles. 
(Code 1993, § 9-142; Ord. No. 95-18, § 1, 10-9-1995; Ord. No. 96-7, 5-13-1996; Ord. No. 00-1, 2-14-2000) 
Sec. 18-144. - Unauthorized parking-Fire lanes. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle or permit it to stand, whether attended or unattended, upon any public vehicular area, street, or highway in any area designated as a fire lane; provided the persons engaged in the act of loading or unloading merchandise may park temporarily as long as the vehicle is not left unattended. 
(b)  It shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle was parked and left in the space by the person in whose name the vehicle is registered and licensed according to the records of the Division of Motor Vehicles. 
(Code 1993, § 9-143; Ord. No. 96-6, 5-13-1996; Ord. No. 00-1, 2-14-2000) 
Sec. 18-145. - No left turn in designated area. 
    No person shall turn a vehicle as to make a left hand turn at the following intersections: 
Tarboro Street and Tenth Street between the hours of 7:30 a.m - 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. - 3:30 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § 1(9-144), 5-13-1996) 
Sec. 18-146. - Notice. 
    If any vehicle shall be found illegally parked or stopped, standing or parked in violation of any of the provisions of this article, it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or other peace officers of the city to attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof, if the owner or operator is absent, or to deliver to the owner or operator thereof, if he is present, a notice to the effect that the vehicle has been illegally parked or stopped, standing or parked in violation of a provision of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 9-144; Ord. No. 00-1, 2-14-2000) 
Sec. 18-147. - Penalty for illegal stopping, standing, or parking. 
    Upon receiving of a violation of a provision of this article prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, the owner or operator of the motor vehicle so stopped, standing or parked shall pay a civil penalty in the amount as set forth on the violation notice issued by the city. The civil penalty shall be paid within fourteen (14) calendar days from the issuance of the violation notice. If the citation is not paid within fourteen (14) calendar days, the owner or operator of the vehicle so stopped, standing or parked shall be liable for an additional civil penalty for failure to pay within fourteen (14) days as set forth in the violation notice. The civil penalties imposed under this article shall be the sole method of enforcing the provisions of this article, and no stopped, standing or parked violation issued pursuant to this article shall be enforced through criminal misdemeanor penalties. Said penalties may be collected by the city through Magistrate's Court, the cost for which will be assessed to the owner or operator receiving the citation. 
(Code 1993, § 9-145; Ord. No. 00-1, 2-14-2000) 
Sec. 18-148. - Prohibited areas for parking-At all times. 
    The following areas are prohibited for parking at all times: 
(a)  Stewart Parkway (north side). 
(b)  Stewart Parkway (both sides), from parking lot entrance in front of 222 Stewart Parkway east to Market Street. 
(c)  Water Street (south side), between Market Street and 156 Water Street. 
(d)  Water Street (south side), between 226 Water Street and Harvey Street. 
(e)  Water Street (north side) from Market Street to 156 Water Street. 
(Code 1993, § 11-87; Ord. No. 02-14, 8-12-2002; Ord. No. 18-2, § 1, 5-14-2018) 
Sec. 18-149. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 19-2, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 14, 2019, repealed § 18-149, which pertained to prohibited areas for parking-between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., and derived from Code 1993, § 11-88; and Ord. No. 02-14, adopted Aug. 12, 2002. 
Sec. 18-150. - Areas limiting vehicle operation speeds to fifteen (15) miles per hour or less. 
    No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour in the following areas and times specified: in the business district, at any time. For the purpose of this section only, the business district is described as follows: 
Main Street, from Bridge Street to Bonner Street 
Second Street, from Bridge Street to Bonner Street 
All of Stewart Parkway 
All streets within these bounds 
(Ord. No. 18-4, §§ 1-2, 6-11-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-4, §§ 1-2, adopted June 11, 2018, amended § 18-150 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 18-150 pertained to areas limiting vehicle operation speeds to twenty (20) miles per hour or less, and derived from Code 1993, § 11-89; and Ord. No. 02-14, adopted Aug. 12, 2002. 
Secs. 18-151-18-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BICYCLES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Definitions, G.S. 20-171.1; bicycle racing, G.S. 20-171.2; North Carolina Bicycle and Bikeway Act of 1974, G.S. 136-71.6 et seq. 

Sec. 18-180. - Riding on sidewalk or without hands on handlebars. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle upon any sidewalk or pedestrian walkway in the city except residential zones. 
(b)  It shall also be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle on any street, alley or highway in the city without having his hands upon the handlebars. 
(Code 1972, § 11-80; Code 1993, § 9-156) 
Sec. 18-181. - More than one (1) person riding. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of a bicycle on the public streets to carry any other person on the handlebar, frame or other part of such bicycle, unless built for two (2); and it shall be unlawful for any person to so ride upon a bicycle. 
(Code 1972, § 11-81; Code 1993, § 9-157) 
Secs. 18-182-18-221. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RAILROADS 

Sec. 18-222. - Speed limit. 
    No railroad engine or train or cars shall be run at a greater rate of speed than six (6) miles per hour within the corporate limits. 
(Code 1972, § 11-85; Code 1993, § 9-176) 
Sec. 18-223. - Entering or leaving trains in motion. 
    No person shall jump off or on any of the cars or engines of the several railroads entering the city while the same are in motion and within the corporate limits, except employees of the several companies operating such railroads. 
(Code 1972, § 11-86; Code 1993, § 9-177) 
Sec. 18-224. - Obstructing certain streets. 
    No person shall allow an engine, car or train of cars to remain on or across Main Street or Park Drive for a longer period than four (4) minutes. 
(Code 1972, § 11-87; Code 1993, § 9-178) 
State Law reference- Railroad crossings, G.S. 160A-298. 
Secs. 18-225-18-241. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ABANDONED, NUISANCE AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Pursuant to Ord. No. 06-05, adopted March 13, 2006, references in this article to "Chief of Fire-Rescue-EMS-Inspections" were inserted to replace former references to "Director of Inspections and Zoning." 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 28; junkyards, § 20-5. 
State Law reference- Abatement of public health nuisances, G.S. 160A-193; removal and disposal of junked and abandoned motor vehicles, G.S. 160A-303; regulation of abandonment of junked motor vehicles, G.S. 160A-303.2. 

Sec. 18-242. - Administration. 
    The Police Department and the Chief Building Official of the city shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article. The Police Department shall be responsible for administering the removal and disposition of vehicles determined to be abandoned on the public streets and highways within the city, and on property owned by the city. The Chief Building Official shall be responsible for administering the removal and disposition of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles located on private property. The city may contract with private tow truck operators or towing businesses to remove, store, and dispose of abandoned vehicles, nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles in compliance with this article and applicable state laws. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the legal authority or powers of officers of the Police Department and Inspections Department in enforcing other laws or in otherwise carrying out their duties. 
(Code 1993, § 9-196; Ord. No. 12-5, § 1, 10-8-2012) 
Sec. 18-243. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned vehicle means, as authorized and defined in G.S. 160A-303, one that: 
(a)  Is left upon a public street or highway in violation of a law or ordinance prohibiting parking; 
(b)  Is left on a public street or highway for longer than seven (7) days; 
(c)  Is left on property owned or operated by the city for longer than twenty-four (24) hours; or 
(d)  Is left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant or lessee thereof, for longer than two (2) hours. 
    Authorizing official means any police officer or the Chief Building Official, respectively, designated to authorize the removal of vehicles under the provisions of this article. 
    Junked motor vehicle means, as authorized and defined in G.S. 160A-303.2, a vehicle that does not display a current license plate lawfully upon that vehicle and that: 
(a)  Is partially dismantled or wrecked; 
(b)  Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it originally was intended to move; 
(c)  Is more than five (5) years old and appears to be worth less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
    Motor vehicle or vehicle means all machines designed or intended to travel over land by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle. 
    Nuisance vehicle means a vehicle on public or private property that is determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance, and unlawful, including a vehicle found to be: 
(a)  A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other insects, rats or other pests; 
(b)  A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over eight (8) inches in height; 
(c)  A point of collection of pools or ponds of water; 
(d)  A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil or other flammable or explosive materials, as evidenced by odor; 
(e)  One which has areas of confinement which cannot be operated from the inside, such as trunks, hoods, etc.; 
(f)  So situated or located that there is a danger of it falling or turning over; 
(g)  One which is a point of collection of garbage, food waste, animal waste, or any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind; 
(h)  One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp edges of metal or glass; 
(i)  Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and safety hazard and a public nuisance by the City Council. 
(Code 1993, § 9-197; Ord. No. 12-5, § 1, 10-8-2012) 
Sec. 18-244. - Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be abandoned, as the term is defined herein. 
(b)  Upon investigation, proper authorizing officials of the city may determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle removed. 
(Code 1993, § 9-198) 
Sec. 18-245. - Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle. 
(b)  Upon investigation, the Chief Building Official may determine and declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a nuisance vehicle and order the vehicle removed. 
(Code 1993, § 9-199; Ord. No. 12-5, § 1, 10-8-2012) 
Sec. 18-246. - Junked motor vehicles regulated; removal authorized. 
    The purpose of this section is to promote or enhance the quality of urban attractiveness and aesthetic appearance of the city; the protection of property values throughout the city; the preservation of the livability and attractiveness of neighborhoods; the promotion of tourism, conventions, and other opportunities for economic development for the city; the attractiveness of the city's thoroughfares and commercial roads which present the primary, public visibility to visitors and to passersby of the city; and the promotion of the comfort, happiness, and emotional stability of occupants of property in the vicinity of junked motor vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the vehicle has been ordered removed. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to have more than one (1) junked motor vehicle, as defined herein, on the premises of public or private property. A single, permitted junked motor vehicle must strictly comply with the location and concealment requirements of this section. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, person entitled to the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to fail to comply with the locational requirements or the concealment requirements of this section. 
(d)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (e) of this section, upon investigation, the Chief Building Official may order the removal of a junked motor vehicle, as defined in this article, after finding in writing that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed on the private property owner. Such finding shall be based on a balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent owner against the corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing community, neighborhood or area appearance. The following, among other relevant factors, may be considered: 
(1)  Protection of property values; 
(2)  Promotion of tourism and other economic development opportunities; 
(3)  Indirect protection of public health and safety; 
(4)  Preservation of the character and integrity of the community; and 
(5)  Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional stability of area residents. 
(e)  The following shall be permitted concealment or enclosure of junked motor vehicles: 
(1)  One (1) junked motor vehicle, in its entirety, can be located in the rear yard, as defined by the city's zoning chapter, if the junked motor vehicle is entirely concealed from public view from a public street and from abutting premises by an acceptable covering. The Chief Building Official has the authority to determine whether any junked motor vehicle is adequately concealed as required by this provision. The covering must remain in good repair and must not be allowed to deteriorate. The covering or enclosure must be compatible with the objectives stated in the preamble of the model ordinance from which this article derives. 
(2)  More than one (1) junked motor vehicle. Any other junked motor vehicle must be kept in a garage or building structure that provides a complete enclosure so the junked motor vehicles cannot be seen from a public street or abutting property. A garage or building structure means either a lawful, nonconforming use or a garage or building structure erected pursuant to the lawful issuance of a building permit and which has been constructed in accordance with all zoning and building code regulations. 
(Code 1993, § 9-200; Ord. No. 12-5, § 1, 10-8-2012) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; zoning, ch. 40. 
Sec. 18-247. - Removal procedure. 
(a)  Notice. Except as set forth in section 18-248, an abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle which is to be removed shall be towed only after notice to the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle. In the case of a nuisance vehicle or a junked motor vehicle, if the names and mailing addresses of the registered owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle, or the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located can be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the notice shall be given by first class mail. The person who mails the notice shall retain a written record to show the name and address to which mailed, and the date mailed. If such names and addresses cannot be ascertained or if the vehicle to be removed is an abandoned motor vehicle, notice shall be given by affixing on the windshield or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle a notice indicating that the vehicle will be removed by the city on a specified date (no sooner than seven (7) days after the notice is affixed). The notice shall state that the vehicle will be removed by the city on a specified date, no sooner than seven (7) days after the notice is affixed or mailed, unless the vehicle is moved by the owner or legal possessor prior to that time. 
(b)  Appeal. With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property, nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles to which notice is required to be given, if the registered owner or person entitled to possession does not remove the vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle is abandoned, a nuisance vehicle or in the case of a junked motor vehicle that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens, such appeal shall be made to the Washington Board of Adjustment in writing, heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of Adjustment, and further proceedings to remove the vehicle shall be stayed until the appeal is heard and decided. 
(Code 1993, § 9-201; Ord. No. 12-5, § 1, 10-8-2012) 
Sec. 18-248. - Exceptions to prior notice requirement. 
    The requirement that notice is given prior to the removal of an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle may, as determined by the authorizing official, be omitted in those circumstances where there is a special need for prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and welfare. Such findings shall, in all cases, be entered by the authorizing official in the appropriate daily records. Circumstances justifying the removal of vehicles without prior notice includes: 
(a)  Vehicles abandoned on the streets. For vehicles left on the public streets and highways, the City Council hereby determines that immediate removal of such vehicles may be warranted when they are: 
(1)  Obstructing traffic; 
(2)  Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or restricting parking; 
(3)  Parked in a no-stopping or no-standing zone; 
(4)  Parked in loading zones; 
(5)  Parked in bus zones; or 
(6)  Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions imposed under code sections. 
(b)  Vehicles on property other than streets. With respect to abandoned or nuisance vehicles left on city-owned property other than the streets and highways, and on private property, such vehicles may be removed without giving prior notice only in those circumstances where the authorizing official finds a special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the public health, safety and welfare. By way of illustration and not of limitation, such circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstructing ingress or egress to businesses and residences, vehicles parked in such a location or manner as to pose a traffic hazard, and vehicles causing damage to public or private property. 
(Code 1993, § 9-202) 
Sec. 18-249. - Removal of vehicles; post-towing notice requirements. 
(a)  Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which has been ordered removed may, as directed by the city, be removed to a storage garage or area by the tow truck operator or towing business contracting to perform such services for the city. Whenever such a vehicle is removed, the authorizing city official shall immediately notify the last known registered owner of the vehicle, such notice to include the following: 
(1)  The description of the removed vehicle; 
(2)  The location where the vehicle is stored; 
(3)  The violation with which the owner is charged, if any; 
(4)  The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and 
(5)  The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause hearing on the removal. 
(b)  The city shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written notice, including the information set forth in subsection (a) of this section, shall also be mailed to the registered owner's last known address, unless this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his agent. 
(c)  If the vehicle is registered in this state, notice shall be initiated within twenty-four (24) hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the state, notice shall be given to the registered owner within seventy-two (72) hours from the removal of the vehicle. 
(d)  Whenever an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle is removed, and such vehicle has no valid registration or registration plates, the authorizing city official shall make reasonable efforts, including checking the vehicle identification number, to determine the last known registered owner of the vehicle and to notify him of the information set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 9-203) 
Sec. 18-250. - Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final disposition of vehicle. 
    After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle or junked motor vehicle, the owner or any other person entitled to possession is entitled to a hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause existed for removing the vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed in writing with the county magistrate designated by the chief district court judge to receive such hearing requests. The magistrate will set the hearing within seventy-two (72) hours of receipt of the request, and the hearing will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of G.S. 20-219.11. 
(Code 1993, § 9-204) 
Sec. 18-251. - Redemption of vehicle during proceedings. 
    At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the towing fee, including any storage charges, or by posting a bond for double the amount of such fees and charges to the tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the removed vehicle. Upon regaining possession of a vehicle, the owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle shall not allow or engage in further violations of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 9-205) 
Sec. 18-252. - Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicle. 
    Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which is not claimed by the owner or other party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle. The disposition of such a vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the city and in accordance with G.S. 44A, art. I (G.S. 44A-1 et seq.). 
(Code 1993, § 9-206) 
Sec. 18-253. - Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property. 
    As a general policy, the city will not remove a vehicle from private property if the owner, occupant or lessee of such property could have the vehicle removed under applicable state law procedures. In no case will a vehicle be removed by the city from private property without a written request of the owner, occupant or lessee, except in those cases where a vehicle is a nuisance vehicle or is a junked motor vehicle which has been ordered removed by the Chief Building Official. The city may require any person requesting the removal of an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle from private property to indemnify the city against any loss, expense or liability incurred because of the removal, storage or sale thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 9-207; Ord. No. 12-5, § 1, 10-8-2012) 
Sec. 18-254. - Protection against criminal or civil liability. 
    No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle, for disposing of such vehicle as provided in this article. 
(Code 1993, § 9-208) 
Sec. 18-255. - Exceptions. 
    Nothing in this article shall apply to any vehicle: 
(a)  Which is located in a bona fide automobile graveyard or junkyard, as defined in G.S. 136-143, in accordance with the Junkyard Control Act, G.S. 136-141 et seq.; 
(b)  Which is in an enclosed building; 
(c)  Which is on the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a lawful place and manner, if the vehicle is necessary to the operation of the enterprise; or 
(d)  Which is in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city. 
(Code 1993, § 9-209) 
Sec. 18-256. - Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any storage facility designated by the city any vehicle which has been impounded pursuant to the provisions of this article, unless and until all towing and impoundment fees which are due, or bond in lieu of such fees, have been paid. 
(Code 1993, § 9-210; Ord. No. 01-15, 10-8-2001) 
Secs. 18-257-18-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - GOLF CARTS ON PUBLIC STREETS 

Sec. 18-271. - Purpose, disclaimer, and assumption of risks. 
(a)  Purpose. This article is adopted under the authority of G.S. 160A-300.6, which authorizes municipalities to permit and regulate the operation of golf carts on public streets, roads and highways where the speed limit is thirty-five (35) mph or less or on property owned or leased by the municipality. The purpose of this article is to provide a means of travel that is convenient, cost-effective and energy efficient. In order to promote the safety of drivers, passengers and the general public in the city, the operation of golf carts must comply with applicable State of North Carolina laws and regulations pertaining to the operation of traditional motor vehicles, and must also comply with the specific provisions included in this article. 
(b)  Disclaimer. Golf carts are not designed for nor manufactured to be used on public streets and the city neither advocates nor endorses the golf cart as a safe means of travel on public streets, roads and highways. The city shall in no way be liable for accidents, injuries or deaths involving or resulting from the operation of a golf cart. 
(c)  Assumption of risk. Any person who owns, operates, or rides on a golf cart on a public street, road, or highway within the city does so at his or her own risk and peril and assumes all liability resulting from the operation of the golf cart. 
(Ord. No. 18-13, § 1, 12-12-2018) 
Sec. 18-272. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    Golf cart means a vehicle designed and manufactured for operation on a golf course for sporting or recreational purposes and that is not capable of exceeding speeds of twenty (20) mph. Any vehicle subject to state regulation and licenses is exempt from this article. 
    Operate means to drive, or be in physical control of a golf cart that is moving or has its key inserted and in the on position. 
(Ord. No. 18-13, § 1, 12-12-2018) 
Sec. 18-273. - Operation of golf carts permitted. 
(a)  Permitted. The operation of golf carts on the public streets, roads and highways with a posted speed limit of thirty-five (35) mph or less within the city and on property owned or leased by the city in compliance with the provisions of this article shall be permitted. However, it shall be unlawful to operate any golf cart that is not properly registered with and permitted by the city or to operate any golf cart at any place or in any manner not authorized herein. 
(b)  Exceptions. The operation of golf carts in the following circumstances is not subject to the provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  The operation of golf carts on private property, with the consent of the owner; 
(2)  The operation of golf carts within private, gated or limited access communities, unless the streets of the community are dedicated for public use and maintained by the city; 
(3)  The use of a golf cart in connection with a parade, a festival, or other special event provided the consent of the sponsor is obtained, the Police Department is notified, and provided the golf cart is only used during such event. 
(Ord. No. 18-13, § 1, 12-12-2018) 
Sec. 18-274. - Registration and permit requirements. 
(a)  Registration and permit required. No golf cart may be operated on any public street, road, or highway within the city or on any property owned or leased by the city unless the golf cart has first been registered with the city and permitted as required herein. The permit shall be issued annually from January 1st to December 31st of each year, thereafter in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Application and permit. The owner shall complete a golf cart registration application provided by the Washington Police Department and the golf cart shall be inspected by the Chief of Police, or his designee, for compliance with the provision of this chapter prior to the issuance of an annual permit which must be attached to the driver's side of the golf cart. The following fees shall apply: 
(1)  Inspection by Police Department-fifty dollars ($50.00) annually. 
(2)  Re-inspection by Police Department (if cart fails initial inspection)-five dollars ($5.00). 
(3)  Renewal by Police Department-twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(4)  The initial fee and any renewal fee are for all or part of any calendar year without proration. 
(c)  Loss or stolen permits are the responsibility of the owner. A police report must be filed in the event of a lost or stolen permit. The Chief of Police will have the discretion in determining a decision if no record can be found. The Chief of Police or designee may direct the applicant to reapply, and also resubmit any and all fees necessary, before a replacement permit is issued. 
(d)  The Washington Police Chief, or his designee, retains the right to refuse to issue and/or revoke any permit from any golf cart at any time for any reason that the Chief feels is appropriate to ensure the safety and well-being of the citizens of Washington. 
(e)  Basic requirements. In order to register a golf cart and secure an annual permit, the owner and golf cart must meet the following basic requirements: 
(1)  Only persons over eighteen (18) years of age and holding a valid driver's license may operate a golf cart on roads. Any driver or operator that is exempt from the requirement of a valid North Carolina license must still present and have on record and while operating a golf cart, a valid North Carolina identification card. 
(2)  The owner must possess and maintain liability insurance in an amount not less than required by North Carolina law for traditional motor vehicles operated on a public highway in North Carolina; 
(3)  The golf cart must be registered to a physical address in Washington; 
(4)  The golf cart must not have been modified to exceed a speed of twenty (20) mph; and 
(5)  The golf cart must have an identifiable identification number. 
(f)  Required safety features. In order to register a golf cart and secure an annual permit, a golf cart must have the following safety features installed: 
(1)  Two operating front headlights, visible from a distance of at least two hundred fifty (250) feet; 
(2)  Two operating tail lights, with brake lights and turn signals, visible from a distance of at least two hundred fifty (250) feet; 
(3)  A rear vision mirror; 
(4)  At least one (1) reflector per side; 
(5)  A parking brake; 
(6)  Seat belts for all seating positions on the golf cart. A Type 1 or Type 2 seatbelt assembly conforming to section 571.209 of the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 29 shall be installed at each designated seat; 
(7)  A windshield; and 
(8)  Must be limited to a maximum of three (3) rows of seats. 
(g)  Inspection. Prior to the issuance of an initial permit, designated police staff shall inspect the golf cart for compliance with the requirements of this article. No golf cart shall be registered and permitted unless if it in compliance with all requirements. 
(h)  Acknowledgment. Prior to issuance of an initial permit or annual renewal, the owner shall sign an acknowledgment that he/she has read and understands the provisions of this chapter. 
(i)  Disqualified vehicles. All-terrain vehicles, four-wheel utility vehicles, go-karts, and other similar utility vehicles which are not manufactured for operation on a golf course, and/or a golf cart which has been modified so that it no longer meets the definition of golf cart may not be registered as a golf cart under this chapter or shall such vehicles be operated on the public roads, streets and highways within the town, unless such vehicles are registered and permitted under the motor vehicle laws of North Carolina. 
(Ord. No. 18-13, § 1, 12-12-2018) 
Sec. 18-275. - Standards of operation. 
    It is unlawful to operate a golf cart on a public street, road or highway within the city unless the following requirements are met: 
(a)  A golf cart must display a valid city-issued golf cart annual registration sticker. 
(b)  A golf cart may be operated on all public streets and roads in Washington, with the exception of Highway 17 Business (Bridge Street and Carolina Avenue), 15th Street, 5th Street/John Small Avenue and 3rd Street. 
(c)  Golf carts may cross a road with a posted speed limit greater than thirty-five (35) mph. However, once this segment of road has been traversed, the golf cart is still required to travel only on or along a roadway with a speed limit of thirty-five (35) mph or less. Golf carts must cross in a manner that is the most direct route in order to decrease crossing distance, i.e. no riding along a road or crossing at an angle. 
(d)  Any person who operates a golf cart shall comply with section 18-274(d)(1). 
(e)  The driver and passengers must be properly seated while the golf cart is in motion, with seat belts properly fastened, and may not be transported in a negligent manner. The seating capacity with seat belts shall not be exceeded. 
(f)  No golf cart may be operated at a speed greater than reasonable and prudent for the existing conditions, and in no instance at a speed greater than twenty (20) miles per hour. 
(g)  No golf cart may be operated in a careless or reckless manner. 
(h)  Golf carts must be operated in accordance with all applicable state and local traffic laws and ordinances, including all laws, regulations and ordinances pertaining to the possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(i)  Golf carts are subject to the same parking regulations as traditional motor vehicles, and may only be parked in the same manner and in the same places designated for the parking of traditional motor vehicles. 
(j)  Golf carts are permitted to park in all parking spaces provided. The city encourages the use of one (1) parking space for two (2) golf carts. 
(k)  Golf carts may only park in handicapped spaces if the driver has a valid handicapped placard or sticker and the same is clearly posted or displayed in the golf cart. 
(l)  Golf carts may not be used for the purpose of towing another cart, trailer or vehicle of any kind, including a person on roller skates, skateboard, or bicycle. Golf carts shall not be operated on sidewalks. 
(m)  The possession of open containers of alcohol and/or consumption of alcohol by the driver and/or passengers of a golf cart is prohibited. 
(n)  The operator of a golf cart shall yield the right of way to traditional motor vehicles and pedestrians. 
(o)  Golf carts may not be operated or parked on any sidewalk or in any city park, except for golf carts operated by government agencies for official business. 
(Ord. No. 18-13, § 1, 12-12-2018) 
Sec. 18-276. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating the motor vehicle laws of North Carolina, which shall also apply to golf carts registered under this chapter, shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in North Carolina law for said violation. 
(b)  Any person who knowingly allows an underage driver to operate a golf cart shall be charged and subject to the penalties prescribed in North Carolina law for contributing to the delinquency of a minor. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be required to pay a civil violation in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(d)  Any person violating the city's parking ordinances shall be subject to the penalties outlined for parking violations. 
(e)  Operating a golf cart under the influence of an impairing substance (such as alcohol or drugs) on a public street or road is a violation of North Carolina law, and is punishable as provided therein. 
(f)  The city may refuse to register and issue a permit for the operation of a golf cart, or may revoke a previously issued permit, if the registered golf cart and/or the owner of the golf cart is involved in three (3) or more violations of this article and/or violations of North Carolina law within a three-year time period. The revocation and/or denial of a permit shall be effective for one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 18-13, § 1, 12-12-2018) 
Chapter 20 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- False alarm of fire, § 14-27; parades, § 32-14. 
Federal law reference- Active and honorably retired law enforcement officer may carry concealed weapons nationwide if certain conditions met, Law Enforcement Officers Safety Act of 2004, 18 USC 926B, 926C. 
State Law reference- Criminal law, G.S. ch. 14; general ordinance-making power, G.S. 160A-174. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Public possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or to possess in an open container any alcoholic malt beverages and unfortified wine upon any of the public streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, city-owned or city-controlled recreational property without permission from the city, public parking lots, private parking lots or land without permission of the owner or possessor, or in vehicles upon any such property. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, upon application, the City Council may permit the public consumption and possession of alcoholic malt beverages and unfortified wine at municipal sponsored events on city-owned property and parking lots subject to the restrictions and conditions which the City Council may impose. 
(c)  No person shall serve, sell, possess and/or consume alcoholic malt beverages and unfortified wine on city-owned property, to include streets, parking lots, sidewalks, city-owned or city-lease property, and public, parks except at permitted special events with prior approval by the City Council and subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  That any organization using city property for such special event shall be required to secure all property state alcoholic beverages control board licenses and permits for the particular event held; 
(2)  That the organization serving alcoholic beverages on the city-owned property shall comply in all respects with current regulations of the state alcoholic beverage control board; 
(3)  The City Council shall designate the time and place where alcoholic malt beverages and unfortified wine may be served; 
(4)  The City Council reserves the right to make such other rules and regulations as may be necessary to govern the use of the city-owned property where alcoholic malt beverages and unfortified wine may be served; and 
(5)  Only bonafide, nonprofit organizations, as defined under G.S. 18B-1002(a)(5), shall be eligible under this section. 
(Code 1993, § 10-1; Ord. No. 89-25, § 1(13-1), 11-13-1989; Ord. No. 03-17, §§ 1, 2, 10-20-2003) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, hours for sale and consumption, § 16-1. 
State Law reference- Purchase, prossession and consumption of malt beverages and unfortified wine, G.S. 18B-300(c). 
Sec. 20-2. - Entertainment activities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate in the city, within three hundred (300) feet of any church or residence or building where people reside, an open air picture show or open air theatre, medicine show, carnival, tent show, slides, swings or riding devices of any kind or any other kind of entertainment with or without an admission charge or collection taken; provided this section shall not apply to athletic fields, public parks, recreation centers or school grounds under municipal or county control and supervision of religious organizations, nor shall this section apply to events sponsored by religious, educational, county or city agencies. 
(Code 1972, § 13-7; Code 1993, § 10-2) 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, ch. 16; zoning, ch. 40. 
State Law reference- Regulation of places of amusement, G.S. 160A-181. 
Sec. 20-3. - Discharging firearms, air rifles, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm, air rifle or pellet gun of any kind within the corporate limits, except when used in defense of person or property or pursuant to lawful directions of law enforcement officers, or by a peace officer in the performance of his duty. This section shall not apply to formal training or target matches with air rifles or pellet guns so long as such training and target matches are supervised by certified firearms instructors and the Chief of Police approves the time and place of such training sessions or target matches. 
(b)  An explicit exception is granted only for historical reenactment events sponsored explicitly by the Beaufort County Chamber of Commerce in which the discharge of period firearms/cannot with blanks and/or black gunpowder is planned. Such events shall not take place without approval of the Chief of Police, to include time and place, and requires proper supervision, certified if necessary. 
(Code 1972, § 13-8; Code 1993, § 10-3; Ord. No. 04-17, 9-13-2004) 
State Law reference- Firearms, G.S. 160A-189; pellet guns, G.S. 160A-190. 
Sec. 20-4. - Malicious mischief. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, injure, damage, deface, trespass upon or break any property belonging to the city. 
(Code 1972, § 13-9; Code 1993, § 10-4) 
State Law reference- Trespasses to personal property, G.S. 14-160 et seq.; damages and other offenses to land and fixtures, G.S. 14-127 et seq. 
Sec. 20-5. - Junkyards. 
    No material commonly known as scrap iron or junk may be put, kept or stored within fifty (50) feet of the curbline of any street in the city, unless the same is protected from the view by a solid fence eight (8) feet or more in height. 
(Code 1972, § 13-11; Code 1993, § 10-5) 
Cross reference- Abandoned, nuisance and junked motor vehicles, § 18-142 et seq. 
State Law reference- Junkyard Control Act, G.S. 136-141 et seq. 
Sec. 20-6. - Noise control-Prohibitions. 
(a)  Unreasonably loud noises unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to create or assist in creating, permit, continue or permit the continuance of any unreasonably loud noise or a noise that either disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others in the city. 
(b)  Declared acts. The following acts, among others, are declared to be unreasonably loud noises in violation of this section: 
(1)  Vehicular horns or signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street, way, avenue or alley or other public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for an unreasonable length of time; the use of any signaling device, except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(2)  Sirens. The use of any gong or siren upon any vehicle, other than police, fire or other emergency vehicle. 
(3)  Radios, phonographs and musical instruments. The use of radios, phonographs and musical instruments. 
a.  The using of, operating of or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. 
b.  The using of, operating of or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in a public vehicular area, on the sidewalks, or in other public ways in such a manner as is unreasonably loud so as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of other persons or at a louder volume than is necessary for the convenient hearing of the individual carrying the instrument, machine or device or those individuals immediately adjacent thereto and who are voluntary listeners thereto. 
c.  The using of, operating of or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling and singing. 
a.  Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets or from private property at any time or place so as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or any persons in the vicinity. 
b.  Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets or private property at any time or place in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the location from which the noise emanates. 
(5)  Animals and birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(6)  Vehicles in disrepair. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud grating, grinding, ratting or other noise. 
(7)  Discharges of open air or exhaust of steam engines, etc. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  Mechanical device operated by compressed air. The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air unless the noise created hereby is effectively muffled and reduced. 
(9)  Buildings erections, demolitions, alterations or repair. The erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building in a residential or business district, other than the hours from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., on weekdays, except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and then only with a permit from the City Clerk, which permit may be renewed for a period of three (3) days or less while the emergency continues. 
(10)  Creation of excessive noise on streets adjacent to schools, etc. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning or court while the same are in session, or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any hospital which unreasonably interferes with the working of such institution; provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such street indicating the same is a school, court or hospital street. 
(11)  Excessive noise on Sundays on streets adjacent to churches. The creation of any excessive noise on Sundays on any street adjacent to any church; provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets adjacent to churches indicating that the same is a church street. 
(12)  Creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with loading and unloading of vehicles. The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(13)  Shouting and crying of peddlers, barkers, hawkers and vendors. The shouting and crying of peddlers, barkers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the quiet and peace of the neighborhood. 
(14)  Drums, loudspeakers or other instruments or devices. The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale or display of merchandise. 
(15)  Mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving vehicles. The use of any mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving vehicles for advertising purposes or other purposes. 
(16)  Conducting, operating or maintaining of garages, filling stations. The conducting, operating or maintaining of any garage or filling station in any residential district so as to cause loud noises to be emitted therefrom between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(17)  Firing or discharging of squibs, crackers, gunpowder or other combustible substances. The firing or discharging of squibs, crackers, gunpowder or other combustible substance in the streets or elsewhere for the purpose of making noise or disturbance, except by permit from the City Council. 
(Code 1972, § 13-12; Code 1993, § 10-6; Ord. No. 90-13, § 1, 8-13-1990) 
State Law reference- Noise regulation, G.S. 160A-184. 
Sec. 20-7. - Noise control-Responsibility of owner of premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit the making, creation or maintenance of unreasonably loud noises upon any premises owned or possessed by him or under his control. 
(Code 1993, § 10-7; Ord. No. 90-13, § 1(13-12.1), 8-13-1990) 
Sec. 20-8. - Picketing. 
(a)  Peaceful picketing in the furtherance of a lawful purpose shall be permitted in the city; provided the same is done under the following conditions: 
(1)  Picketing may be conducted only on the sidewalks or other city-owned area normally used or reserved for pedestrian movement and may not be conducted on the portion of a street used primarily for vehicular traffic. The term "owned," as used herein, includes easements and rights-of-way. 
(2)  Not more than ten (10) pickets promoting the same objective shall be permitted to use the sidewalks within a block in the city at any one (1) time. 
(3)  Such pickets may carry written or printed placards or signs not exceeding two (2) feet in width and two (2) feet in length promoting the objective for which the picketing is done; provided the words used are not defamatory in nature or would tend to produce violence. The staff on which such placard is carried shall not exceed forty (40) inches in length, must be made of wood, shall not exceed three-fourths (3/4) of an inch in diameter at any point and must be blunt at each end. 
(4)  Pickets must march in single file and not abreast and may not march closer together than fifteen (15) feet, except in passing one (1) another. 
(5)  If pickets promoting different objectives desire to use the same sidewalk for picketing and such use would result in the presence of more than ten (10) pickets thereon, the Chief of Police shall allot time to each group of pickets for the use of such sidewalk on an equitable basis, but each group shall be permitted to picket subject to the provisions of this section at least once every two (2) hours. 
(6)  The term "block" as used in this section shall mean that portion of a street lying between street intersections. 
(7)  If minors less than eighteen (18) years of age are engaged in picketing and the Chief of Police or in his absence the acting Chief of Police shall be of the opinion that such picketing, under the circumstances then existing, is detrimental to the health, safety, morals or welfare of such minors, then they may be ordered from the place of picketing by the police officers of the city. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful for any person to physically interfere with such pickets in the use of the sidewalk or to address threatening language to or at such pickets which would tend to provoke such pickets or others to a breach of the peace. 
(9)  The police officers of the city may in the event of the assemblage of persons in such numbers as to tend to intimidate pickets pursuing their lawful objective, through numbers alone or through use of inflammatory words, direct the dispersal of persons so assembled and may arrest any person who fails to absent himself from the place of such assemblage when so directed by the police. 
(10)  Whenever the free passage of any street or sidewalk in the city shall be obstructed by a crowd, the persons composing such crowd shall disperse or move on when directed to do so by a police officer. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to so disburse or move on when so directed by a police officer as herein provided. 
(11)  The terms "picketing" and "pickets," as used herein, shall be construed to include demonstrating or demonstrators. 
(b)  Picketing done contrary to the provisions of this section shall be unlawful. 
(Code 1972, § 13-13; Code 1993, § 10-8) 
State Law reference- Picketing or parading, G.S. 14-225.1. 
Sec. 20-9. - Playing on streets and sidewalks. 
    All games of every description and the throwing of stones, shot or missiles on the streets and sidewalks are forbidden. 
(Code 1972, § 13-14; Code 1993, § 10-9) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 32. 
Sec. 20-10. - Police and fire signals. 
    No person without special authority from the Police Department or Fire Department shall carry or use any horn or siren similar in appearance or sound to the horns or sirens used by the Police or Fire Department. 
(Code 1972, § 13-15; Code 1993, § 10-10) 
Cross reference- Fire-Rescue-EMS Services, fire prevention, ch. 14; police, ch. 26. 
Sec. 20-11. - Spitting on sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful to spit on any paved sidewalk or street, upon any platform connected with any railroad or bus passenger station or upon the floor or wall of any public building. 
(Code 1972, § 13-20; Code 1993, § 10-11) 
Sec. 20-12. - Loitering for the purpose of engaging in drug-related activity. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller means a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any court within this state of any violation involving the use, possession or sale of any of the substances referred to in the North Carolina Controlled Substances Act, G.S. 90-86 et seq., or has been convicted of any violation of any substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this state or of any other state or federal law. 
    Public place means any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley or alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or transportation facility, or the doorways and entranceways to any building which fronts on any of those places, or a motor vehicle in or on any of those places, or any property owned by the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to remain or wander about in a public place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose to engage in a violation of any subdivision of the North Carolina Controlled Substances Act, G.S. 90-86 et seq). Such circumstances shall include: 
(1)  Repeatedly beckoning to, stopping, or attempting to stop passersby, or repeatedly attempting to engage passersby in conversation; 
(2)  Repeatedly stopping or attempting to stop motor vehicles; 
(3)  Repeatedly interfering with the free passage of other persons; 
(4)  Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller; 
(5)  Such person behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he is about to engage in or is engaged in an unlawful drug-related activity; 
(6)  Such person repeatedly passes to or receives from passersby, whether on foot or in a vehicle, money or objects; 
(7)  Such person takes flight upon the approach or appearance of a police officer; 
(8)  Such person is at a location frequented by persons who use, possess, or sell drugs; or 
(9)  Any vehicle involved is registered to a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller, or is known to be or have been involved in drug-related activities. 
(Code 1993, § 10-12; Ord. No. 90-4, § 1(13-22), 3-12-1990) 
Sec. 20-13. - Curfew-During state of emergency. 
(a)  A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever during times of great public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe or similar public emergency, for any reason, municipal public safety authorities are unable to maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives, safety or property. 
(b)  In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within the city or threatening damage to or destruction of property, the Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all persons the existence of such a state of emergency and, in order more effectively to protect the lives, safety and property of people within the city, to define and impose a curfew applicable to all persons within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(c)  The Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit the application of such a curfew to any area specifically designated and described within the corporate limits of the city and to specific hours of the day or night and to exempt from the curfew police officers, firefighters, doctors, nurses and such other classes of persons as may be essential to the preservation of public order and immediately necessary to serve the safety, health and welfare needs of the people within the city. 
(d)  The Mayor shall proclaim the end of such state of curfew as soon as circumstances warrant or when directed to do so by the City Council. 
(e)  During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency when a curfew has been imposed, it shall be unlawful for anyone subject to such curfew: 
(1)  To be or travel upon any public street, alley or roadway or upon public property unless in search of medical assistance, food or other commodity or service necessary to sustain the well-being of himself or his family or some member thereof. 
(2)  To possess off one's own premises, buy, sell, give away or otherwise transfer or dispose of any explosives, firearms, ammunition or dangerous weapon of any kind. 
(3)  To sell beer, wines or intoxicating beverages of any kind or to possess or consume the same off one's own premises. 
(4)  To sell gasoline or any other similar petroleum products or any other inflammable substances, except as expressly authorized by the provisions of the curfew imposed. 
(Code 1972, § 13-5; Code 1993, § 10-13) 
State Law reference- Power of municipalities to enact ordinances to deal with states of emergency, G.S. 14-288.12. 
Sec. 20-14. - Same-For minors. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section shall be to establish a curfew for minors in the city. Unsupervised minors are particularly vulnerable to being induced to participate in drug abuse and other criminal activities during the nighttime. Minors often lack the ability to make informed, mature decisions when faced with the temptation to engage in criminal activities. Also, it is important that parents are encouraged to take an active role in the proper upbringing of their children. Furthermore, there is need to protect businesses and other persons from vandalism and other types of criminal activities frequently committed by minors. This section will assist parents in the difficult task of child rearing and the city in regulating those activities which are detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of its citizens and to the peace and dignity of the city. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Custodian means a parent, guardian, stepparent, foster parent, houseparent or other person legally responsible for the care and custody of a minor, as defined by this section. 
    Minor means any person who has not reached his sixteenth (16th) birthday and is not married, emancipated or a member of the armed services of the United States. 
    Public place means any place which is generally open to and used by the public, whether it be publicly or privately owned, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, public vehicular areas, places of business and amusement parks, and other common areas open to the public. 
(c)  Time limits. It is unlawful for any minor to be in or remain upon any public place, as defined in this section, within the city or on any property or right-of-way belonging to the city and located outside the corporate limits of the city, between the hours of midnight Friday and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday or between midnight Saturday and 5:00 a.m. on Sunday or between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., of the following morning on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday. 
(d)  Exceptions. The restrictions provided by subsection (c) of this section shall not apply to any minor who is: 
(1)  Accompanied by his custodian, as defined in subsection (b) of this section; 
(2)  Accompanied by a responsible person over the age of eighteen (18) years, who has the written permission of the minor's custodian to have the minor under his supervision; 
(3)  Traveling in connection with his employment, religious activity or attendance at a function supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, religious or civic organization, or a school; 
(4)  Temporarily within the city or on city property while engaged in interstate travel; 
(5)  Attempting to obtain assistance in a medical emergency; 
(6)  Is on the sidewalk directly abutting a place where he resides with a parent or guardian; or 
(7)  Is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as, the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly. 
(e)  Responsibility of adults. It is unlawful for any custodian to allow or permit any minor to be in or upon, or remain in or upon a public place within the city or on any property or right-of-way belonging to the city and located outside the corporate limits of the city, within the curfew hours set by subsection (c) of this section, except as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(f)  Responsibility of business establishments. It is unlawful for any person operating a place of business or amusement to allow or permit any minor to be in or upon, or to remain in or upon the premises of such place of business of amusement within the curfew hours set by subsection (c) of this section, except as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(g)  Enforcement. 
(1)  When a minor is found to be in violation of this section a police officer will, by telephone, check with the communications center of the city Police Department to determine if the minor is a first time offender. If the minor is a first time offender, he will be taken to the residence of his custodian. A written warning will be given to the custodian and an information report will be taken by the officer. The report shall include the name of the minor and the custodian, the time, date and location of the offense. This report will be turned in to the Police Department computer system. 
(2)  If, upon checking with the communications center, the minor is found to be a repeat offender, he will be taken to the residence of his custodian and the custodian may be issued a criminal citation charging him with a violation of this section. A report will be turned in to the communications center and entered into the Police Department computer system. 
(3)  If the minor is found to be a repeat offender, the minor may be treated as a delinquent juvenile. 
(4)  If the minor is under twelve (12) years of age, a report will be made and a copy forwarded to the county Department of Social Services. 
(h)  Aiding and abetting by adult, guardian or parent. It shall be a violation of this section for any person over eighteen (18) years of age to aid or abet a minor in the violation of subsection (c) of this section. 
(i)  Refusal of custodian to take custody of a minor. If the custodian of a minor found to be in violation of this section refuses to take custody of such minor, the officer having custody of the minor shall contact the county Department of Social Services and release the minor to that agency, pending further investigation by the Police Department and the Department of Social Services. The custodian may be issued a criminal citation charging him with a violation of this section. 
(j)  Punishment. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in an amount as established from time to time, or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days. 
(Code 1993, § 10-14; Ord. No. 92-7, § 1, 5-11-1992) 
Sec. 20-15. - Signs regarding concealed handguns prohibition. 
(a)  Posting of signs required. The city Public Works Department is hereby authorized and instructed to post conspicuous signage at appropriate locations on or within each park and each building or portion of a building owned, leased as lessee, operated, occupied, managed or controlled by the city, as well as the appurtenant premises to such buildings, indicating that carrying a concealed handgun is prohibited therein. 
(b)  Location of signs. Signs on buildings shall be visibly posted on the exterior of each entrance by which the general public can access the building. The city Public Works Department shall exercise discretion in determining the number and appropriate location of signs to be placed on or within appurtenant premises and parks. 
(Code 1993, § 10-15) 
Sec. 20-16. - Urinating, defecating in public. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate on any public place, sidewalk, alleyway, right-of-way, or in any public building, or private property, except in designated water closets, toilet facilities, or places with the owner's permission. 
(b)  Penalty for violation. Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(Code 1993, § 10-16; Ord. No. 95-23, § 1, 11-13-1995; Ord. No. 98-1, 1-12-1998) 
Sec. 20-17. - Graffiti. 
(a)  Graffiti defined. Graffiti shall mean writings, drawings, inscriptions, figures, or marks of paint, ink, chalk, dye or other similar substances on public or private buildings, sidewalks, streets, structures, or places which are not authorized or permitted by the owner or person in possession of the property upon which the same are located. However, for the purposes of this section, graffiti shall not mean or include and this section shall not be construed to prohibit temporary, easily removable chalk or other water soluble markings on public or private sidewalks, streets or other paved surfaces which are used in connection with traditional children's activities such as drawings, or bases for stickball, kickball, handball, hopscotch or similar activities, or which are used in connection with any lawful business or public purpose or activity. 
(b)  Graffiti prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to write, paint, inscribe, scratch, scrawl, spray, place, draw, or locate graffiti of any type, or otherwise cause graffiti to appear, on any public or private building, street, sidewalk, structure or any other real or personal property. The existence of graffiti on public or private property in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the public as well as the peace and dignity of the city, and is therefore subject to removal, abatement and penalty as specifically set forth below. 
(c)  Penalty for violation. Except as specifically provided for hereinafter, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden by this section, fail to do or perform any act required by this section, or otherwise violate the provisions of this section. This section 20-17(c) shall be inapplicable to section 20-17(d)(3) and the matters provided for therein. 
(d)  Removal of graffiti. Any person owning property, acting as manager or agent, or in possession or control of property shall remove or effectively obscure any graffiti upon such property. 
(1)  Notice to remove. Upon determination that graffiti in violation of this section is present, the city shall deliver a Notice to Remove to the perpetrator of the graffiti, if known, and to the owner or person in possession of the property upon which the graffiti is located. A Notice to Remove shall include: 
a.  The street address or description of the property sufficient for proper identification of such property; 
b.  A description and general location of the graffiti; 
c.  A statement that said graffiti is a public nuisance; 
d.  An order that the graffiti must be removed or effectively obscured within ten (10) working days and that, if the nuisance is not so abated within such time, the city will abate the public nuisance at the cost of the property owner as set forth hereinbelow; and 
e.  Information concerning procedures for appeal of the Notice to Remove. 
(2)  Removal by perpetrator. It shall be unlawful for any person placing graffiti on public or private property in violation of this section to fail to appropriately remove such graffiti and return such property to its original condition within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt of delivery of a Notice to Remove by the city. The removal of said graffiti by the person identified in said Notice to Remove as the person responsible for said graffiti (perpetrator) shall only be completed with the permission of, and consistent with the direction of, the owner or person in possession of the property upon which said graffiti is located. 
(3)  Removal by the city. If the city has delivered a Notice to Remove to the owner or person in possession of such property and that person fails or refuses to remove or effectively obscure such graffiti upon their property as directed in the Notice to Remove, the city is authorized to remove the graffiti and the cost to remove the same shall be charged to the owner or person in possession of said property. If the expenses of removing or obscuring the graffiti are not paid within thirty (30) days of receipt of a statement for the cost of such removal, the expense of the abatement actions by the city shall become a lien upon said property and shall be collected as unpaid taxes. Any violation of this section 20-17(d)(3) is not a misdemeanor or unlawful and is not subject to criminal prosecution. 
(4)  Appeal. Any owner or person in possession of property who receives a Notice to Remove or obscure graffiti may appeal said Notice to Remove by filing a written appeal with the Planning Department to the Washington Board of Adjustment within seven (7) days of receipt of the Notice to Remove. Said written appeal shall state the reasons for the appeal. The Board of Adjustment shall conduct a hearing on the appeal during its next regularly scheduled meeting after the Planning Department's receipt of the notice of appeal. If the Board of Adjustment affirms the Notice to Remove as well as determines that the graffiti is in violation of this section and must be removed, the Director of Planning or his designee shall provide the owner or person in possession of the property a written copy of the Board of Adjustment's decision. The owner or person in possession of the property shall remove or effectively obscure said graffiti within ten (10) working days of receipt of the Board of Adjustment's decision, which decision shall be treated as a new Notice to Remove and shall be subject to the provisions of section 20-17(d)(3). 
(e)  Enforcement. The City Manager shall designate staff person(s) who shall enforce this section. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, § 1, 8-8-2011) 
Secs. 20-18-20-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Abatement of public health nuisances, G.S. 160A-193; abatement of public health nuisance, G.S. 130A-19; abatement of an imminent hazard, G.S. 130A-20. 

Sec. 20-36. - Nuisances declared unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in possession of any lot or parcel of land within the corporate limits to cause, suffer or permit a nuisance, as defined in section 20-37, to exist upon such lot or parcel of land. 
(b)  In addition to other remedies available to the city, the city shall have the right to abate such nuisance and the cost of abating such nuisance shall become a lien upon such lot or parcel of land as set out in this article. 
(Code 1993, § 10-31; Ord. No. 89-17, § 1, 10-9-1989) 
Sec. 20-37. - What constitutes a nuisance. 
    The existence of any of the following conditions on any lot or parcel of land within the corporate limits is hereby declared to be dangerous and prejudicial to the public health or public safety and constitutes a nuisance: 
(a)  The growth of weeds, grass or nonornamental bushes to a height in excess of eighteen (18) inches; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to ornamental shrubs or trees having a base diameter greater than four (4) inches. 
(b)  Any accumulation of animal, vegetable, or other matter that is or may be offensive by virtue of odors or vapors, or any condition which constitutes a breeding ground or harbor for rats, mosquitoes, insects, or other pests. 
(c)  Any accumulation of rubbish, trash, junk, wood, plastic, mattresses, boxes, paper, rubber tires, brush, old clothes, rags, old building materials, garbage, food and/or human waste, animal waste, furniture, appliances, or other debris causing or threatening to cause a fire hazard or accumulation of stagnant water. 
(d)  Any condition detrimental to the health of persons or property which violates any regulations of the county Health Department. 
(Code 1993, § 10-32; Ord. No. 89-17, § 1, 10-9-1989) 
State Law reference- Plant pests defined, G.S. 106-419 et seq. 
Sec. 20-38. - Investigation. 
    Upon notice by phone, personal visit, or letter from any person of the existence of any of the conditions described in section 20-37, the Code Enforcement Officer shall make such investigations as may be necessary to determine whether such conditions exist and constitute a nuisance. 
(Code 1993, § 10-33; Ord. No. 89-17, § 1, 10-9-1989) 
Sec. 20-39. - Procedure. 
(a)  After a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that a nuisance does exist, the following procedures shall apply: 
(1)  The Code Enforcement Officer shall give notice to the owner and person in possession, if any, that the nuisance must be abated within ten (10) days after the date such notice is mailed or posted. The notice shall also provide that if: 
a.  The owner and/or person in possession does not appeal the notice or abate the nuisance within the ten-day notice period; 
b.  The city thereafter abates the nuisance; and 
c.  The owner and/or person in possession thereafter suffers or permits a similar nuisance to subsequently exist upon the same lot or parcel of land during the same calendar year; 
then, in that event, the Code Enforcement Officer shall, without further notice to the owner and/or person in possession, cause abatement of such subsequent nuisance and the cost of such subsequent abatement shall also become a lien upon such lot or parcel of land, as hereinafter set forth. 
(2)  The notice shall be sent by certified mail to the owner at his last known address and by certified mail of personal delivery to the person in possession, if any. If, after exercising reasonable diligence, no owner can be ascertained and no person is in possession of the property, then the notice shall be given by posting the notice conspicuously upon the subject property. 
(3)  The owner or person in possession may, before the expiration of the ten-day period, appeal the Code Enforcement Officer's findings to the Washington Board of Adjustment by delivering a written notice of appeal to the Planning Department, which appeal shall stay the abatement process until a final determination is made by the Board of Adjustment. 
(4)  If the owner and/or person in possession does not appeal the notice or abate the nuisance within the ten-day notice period, the Code Enforcement Officer shall cause abatement of the nuisance. If the owner and/or person in possession thereafter suffers or permits a similar nuisance to subsequently exist upon the same lot or parcel of land during the same calendar year, the Code Enforcement Officer shall cause abatement of such subsequent nuisance. 
(5)  Upon abatement of the nuisance, the Code Enforcement Officer shall deliver a statement of actual cost to the City Tax Collector, which actual cost shall be based upon time and materials expended by the city, the amounts charged by private contractors, administrative fees and costs of postage. 
(6)  The City Tax Collector shall mail the bill for the cost of abatement to the owner at his last known address or to the person in possession, if any, with instructions that such charges are due and payable within thirty (30) days from the receipt thereof. In addition to the actual cost, an administrative fee as established from time to time will be added. 
(7)  The cost of abatement shall become a lien on the subject property when such cost is incurred and, if not paid within thirty (30) days from date of billing, may be collected in the manner provided for the collection of unpaid taxes. 
(8)  If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the nuisance poses an imminent danger or peril to persons or property, the city may, without notice, immediately abate the nuisance and the cost thereof shall be charged as provided for other nuisances. 
(b)  The city abatement procedures, as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, shall be in addition to any other remedies available under law for the abatement of public nuisances, including but not limited to G.S. 160A-193. 
(Code 1993, § 10-34; Ord. No. 89-17, § 1, 10-9-1989; Ord. No. 91-11, § 1, 8-5-1991; Ord. No. 00-20, §§ 1, 4, 11-13-2000; Ord. No. 04-3, § 1, 2-9-2004; Ord. No. 12-5, § 1, 10-8-2012) 
Sec. 20-40. - Enforcement of liens. 
    Liens created in the abatement of nuisances shall be enforced in the manner provided for the collection of unpaid taxes under G.S. 105-349 et seq., including, but not limited to foreclosure proceedings pursuant to G.S. 105-374, in rem proceedings pursuant to G.S. 105-375 and levy, garnishment and attachment upon personal property pursuant to G.S. 105-366. 
(Code 1993, § 10-35; Ord. No. 89-17, § 1, 10-9-1989) 
Secs. 20-41-20-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ALARMS 

Sec. 20-69. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means any electronic or mechanical device which transmits an electronic alarm signal or recorded message to the county communications center or other receiving station indicating an actual or attempted unauthorized entry into a building or indicating the commission or attempted commission of a crime in or about a building. For purposes of this definition, the term "other receiving station" means any person or business that receives an electronic alarm signal or recorded message and transmits information regarding such signal or message to the city Police Department. 
    Alarm system owner means any person, corporation, partnership, governmental or education entity owning or leasing an alarm system. 
    Audible alarm system means any alarm owned by an alarm system owner that, by sound of a whistle, bell, buzzer, siren or other noise generator, alerts those outside a home, building or vehicle, but in the near vicinity, of a break-in or robbery, but does not transmit a signal by telephone or other communications device. 
    False alarm means activation of an alarm system that elicits a response by police when no situation requiring such a response does, in fact, exist. This includes accidental, avoidable and unnecessary alarm activation due to user error, equipment malfunction, improper or unsuited equipment, but does not include alarm activation caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user including disruption of the telephone circuits, an area power failure, or failure of the equipment at the receiving station. 
(Code 1993, § 10-36; Ord. No. 91-16, § 1, 10-14-1991) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 20-70. - False alarms. 
(a)  Notice to owner. If the Washington Police Department communications center receives in excess of three (3) false alarms within a calendar quarter from any single alarm system, a notice will be sent to the alarm system owner indicating the system must be inspected by a state licensed alarm industry, business or representative. The user will have ten (10) working days, excluding holidays, after receipt of that notice to return a form certifying that the alarm system has been checked out and is functioning properly. 
(b)  Charge for additional false alarms. For each false alarm after the ten-working-day period without the certification form being returned, the alarm systems owner shall pay a charge as established from time to time. 
(c)  Renewal of false alarm allowance. A properly returned certification form will renew the three-false-alarm allowance during the calendar quarter and the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Suspension of alarm system response. If the Washington Police Department Communications Center receives in excess of six (6) false alarms within a calendar quarter from any single alarm system owner or if an alarm system owner fails to pay charges within thirty (30) days of being billed, the Chief of Police may suspend response to that alarm system. When the Chief of Police is satisfied that the system has been repaired and is found to be reliable or that employees have been trained properly, he may reinstate response to the alarm system. 
(Code 1993, § 10-52; Ord. No. 91-16, § 2(A)-(D), 10-14-1991) 
Sec. 20-71. - Continuous sounding audible alarms. 
    If an audible alarm system is activated and the sound does not cease after fifteen (15) minutes, then the city Police Department may use any reasonable means to silence the alarm. 
(Code 1993, § 10-53; Ord. No. 91-16, § 2(E), 10-14-1991) 
Secs. 20-72-20-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FENCES 

Sec. 20-101. - Applicability. 
    This article shall regulate all fences, unless otherwise stipulated in this article. Fences are permitted in required setbacks, as set forth in chapter 40, pertaining to zoning, provided the requirements of this article are met. 
(Code 1993, § 10-75; Ord. No. 95-13, § 2, 7-10-1995) 
Sec. 20-102. - Temporary fences. 
    Nothing in this article shall preclude the installation of temporary fences around construction works, erected or maintained pursuant to the state building code. In addition, silt fences are permitted in compliance with the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act. 
(Code 1993, § 10-76; Ord. No. 95-13, § 2, 7-10-1995) 
Sec. 20-103. - Permitted fence types. 
    The following fences are permitted in the city and the extraterritorial jurisdiction. Where different, the historic guidelines shall govern in the Historic District. 
(a)  Masonry or stone walls; 
(b)  Ornamental iron; 
(c)  Chainlink; 
(d)  Wood; or 
(e)  A combination of approved fence types or similar material. 
(Code 1993, § 10-77; Ord. No. 95-13, § 2, 7-10-1995) 
Sec. 20-104. - Prohibited fence types. 
    The following fence types are prohibited because of their detrimental effect to the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city, and because these fence types would cause disruption to the peace and dignity of neighborhoods: 
(a)  Fences constructed primarily of barbed or razor wire, except for the purpose of enclosing livestock in agricultural zoning districts; 
(b)  Fences carrying electrical current, except for enclosing livestock in agricultural zoning districts; 
(c)  Fences constructed of readily flammable material such as paper, cloth, or canvas; 
(d)  Fences topped with barbed wire or metal spikes in residential zoning districts, except for those serving public institutions for public safety or security purposes; and 
(e)  Fences constructed of concertina wire. 
(Code 1993, § 10-78; Ord. No. 95-13, § 2, 7-10-1995) 
Sec. 20-105. - Maintenance. 
    Fences shall be maintained in a safe manner plumb (vertical) to the ground. Fences no longer maintained in a safe manner through neglect, lack of repair, manner of construction, method of placement, or otherwise shall be repaired, replaced or demolished. 
(Code 1993, § 10-79; Ord. No. 95-13, § 2, 7-10-1995) 
Sec. 20-106. - Fences expressly allowed. 
    Fences constructed of approved material are allowed to be constructed in conjunction with electrical or gas substations, solid waste disposal facilities or solid waste transfer stations, water and sewage treatment plants, or facilities, public correctional and mental institutions, military facilities, municipal or county building or facilities, including baseball and softball installations. 
(Code 1993, § 10-80; Ord. No. 95-13, § 2, 7-10-1995) 
Sec. 20-107. - Other fence requirements. 
(a)  Obstruction-View. No fence shall be placed or retained in such a manner as to obstruct vision at any intersection of public or private streets. 
(b)  Obstruction-Access. No fence shall block access to windows or doors. Fences shall be located at least two (2) feet from building walls except when fences project from a building wall. 
(c)  Obstruction-Drainageways. Fence construction shall not alter or impede the natural flow of water in any stream, creek, drainage swell, or ditch. 
(d)  Height of barbed wire. On fences topped with barbed wire, the bottom strand must be at least six (6) feet above grade. 
(e)  Historic districts. Fences in a historic district shall meet the guidelines for that particular historic district. 
(f)  Fences within required planting yards. The setback of fences within required planting yards shall be subject to the approval of a landscaping plan. 
(Code 1993, § 10-81; Ord. No. 95-13, § 2, 7-10-1995) 
Sec. 20-108. - Existing barbed wire fences. 
    In residential neighborhoods or within residential zoning districts, existing barbed wire fences are required to be removed within thirty (30) days. Property owners with existing barbed wire fences will be notified by certified mail. Appeals from enforcement of this section may be submitted in writing for City Council review. 
(Code 1993, § 10-82; Ord. No. 95-13, § 2, 7-10-1995) 
Sec. 20-109. - Enforcement. 
    The Code Administrator, or his designee, is responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this article, with assistance to be provided by the Police and Public Works Departments. 
(Code 1993, § 10-83; Ord. No. 95-13, § 2, 7-10-1995) 
Chapter 22 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; Fire-Rescue-EMS Services, fire prevention, ch. 14; licenses and business regulations, ch. 16; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 18; solid waste, ch. 28; streets and sidewalks, ch. 32; master plan, § 2-219 et seq.; playing ball on streets or sidewalks, § 32-9. 
State Law reference- Boating and water safety, G.S. ch. 75A; conservation of marine and estuarine and wildlife resources, G.S. 113-127 et seq.; state parks and recreation authority, G.S. 143B-313.1 et seq.; municipal parks and recreation, G.S. 160A-350 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department of Parks and Recreation includes recreation centers. 
    Recreation activities means those activities which fall within the general classification of arts and crafts, athletics, sports and games, dances, hobbies, music, nature and outings, reading, writing and speaking, social recreation, special events and activities and volunteer service. 
    Recreation areas and facilities means the outdoor and indoor properties on or in which people derive their opportunity for the pursuit of happiness, whether or not they are owned, controlled or operated within or without the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 14-1; Code 1993, § 11-1) 
State Law reference- Recreation defined, G.S. 160A-352. 
Sec. 22-2. - Department of Parks and Recreation, Director of Parks and Recreation created. 
    Subject to the general control and supervision of the City Manager, there is hereby created a Department of Parks and Recreation and the office of the Director of Parks and Recreation. The Director of Parks and Recreation shall: 
(a)  Be appointed by the City Manager. 
(b)  Be paid such compensation as may be fixed by the City Council. 
(c)  Have general supervision, direction and control, under the direction of the City Manager, over all matters pertaining to: 
(1)  Public recreation including public playgrounds, public parks, public centers, public docks, public restrooms and other public property used or intended for public recreational purposes in the city. 
(2)  Enterprise recreational facilities; the Hildred T. Moore Aquatic and Fitness Center. 
(d)  Supervise generally, administer and control the use of all the: 
(1)  Public playgrounds, public parks, public centers, public restrooms and equipment owned by the city and used or intended for use for public recreation. 
(2)  Enterprise recreational facilities and equipment used; the Hildred T. Moore Aquatic and Fitness Center. 
The Director shall have the duty and authority to promulgate reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with any ordinance adopted by the City Council for the proper and efficient administration of the Department of Parks and Recreation and for the wholesome use of such recreational facilities and equipment by the general public to the end that the greatest benefit from the use of such facilities shall be gained by the citizens of the city. 
(e)  Have authority to employ and to discharge, within the limits of the budget and with the approval of the City Manager, all center and playground leaders, supervisors, recreation specialists, maintenance personnel and such other employees as the Director may deem necessary and proper for the purpose of properly and efficiently carrying out the provisions of this chapter. 
(f)  Enforce all the ordinances of the city regarding playgrounds and recreation centers, parks, athletic fields, docks, the Hildred T. Moore Aquatic and Fitness Center and their uses and may, in furtherance of such duty, have power to remove or cause to be removed and excluded from any of the city playgrounds, recreation centers, parks, docks, athletic fields, the Hildred T. Moore Aquatic and Fitness Center, any person violating any of such ordinances or any rules or regulations concerning their use for a period as the Director deems appropriate, according to the guidelines and procedures set forth by the Recreation Advisory Committee. He shall have the care and control of all equipment, grounds and paraphernalia owned or controlled by the city for use for parks or playground or recreation purposes and shall be responsible for the custody of such property. 
(Code 1972, § 14-5; Code 1993, § 11-2) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 22-3. - Appropriation and disposition of funds. 
    The City Council may, at its discretion, appropriate such moneys as it may deem necessary for the purpose of carrying on the activities of the Parks and Recreation Department. The Parks and Recreation Director shall submit his annual budgetary request to the City Manager for his consideration. His recommendations shall be presented for consideration by the City Council. Funds received by the Recreation Advisory Committee and the Recreation Department, other than revenue from appropriations and facilities of the Parks and Recreation Department, shall be used to supplement the department's budget. Such funds shall be paid to the city, shall be disbursed for the purposes for which the funds were accepted and shall be disbursed in the same manner as other department funds. 
(Code 1972, § 14-4; Code 1993, § 11-3) 
State Law reference- Parks and Recreation, G.S. 160A-353. 
Sec. 22-4. - Assistance by city officials. 
    All officers, departments and department heads of the city shall cooperate and render reasonable and necessary assistance to the Recreation Advisory Committee and to the Parks and Recreation Department. 
(Code 1972, § 14-10; Code 1993, § 11-4) 
Sec. 22-5. - Rules and regulations. 
    The following rules shall apply at all recreation areas: 
(a)  Persons drinking, intoxicated or otherwise under the influence of alcohol are not admitted; provided, however, that alcoholic beverages may be served and consumed during official outdoor special events for which all necessary ABC permits, liability insurance and the city's consent have been obtained. 
(b)  Profane, vulgar, or threatening language is not allowed. 
(c)  Gambling is not permitted. 
(d)  Smoking is not permitted on athletic fields and in centers. 
(e)  Animals and pets are not permitted without special permission, excluding service animals. 
(f)  Fighting or scuffling are not permitted. 
(g)  All persons using the facilities must adhere to the program schedule, unless deviation is authorized by the Director. 
(h)  Game equipment must be used properly. 
(i)  Furniture, fixtures and equipment must not be abused. 
(j)  Trash and paper must not be thrown on floor or grounds. 
(k)  Chairs and tables must not be taken from facilities, except with special permission. 
(l)  Marking or defacing building walls or signs will not be permitted. 
(m)  There shall be no peddling or soliciting on parks or recreation properties or facilities, except on the site of and as a part of a permitted special event or pursuant to a contract entered into with the city. 
(n)  The use of any smokeless tobacco products at organized recreational athletic activities on city properties and/or properties leased by the city is prohibited. 
(Code 1972, § 14-2; Code 1993, § 11-5; Ord. No. 90-10, § 1, 7-9-1990; Ord. No. 07-04, § 1, 3-12-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 10-8-2007; Ord. No. 15-7, 8-10-2015, § 1) 
Sec. 22-6. - Penalty for violation of rules. 
    The policy for persons breaking the rules and regulations of section 22-5 is: 
(a)  Verbal report of incident. 
(b)  Written report and notification to the offender that a report has been filed. 
(c)  Conference with offender according to severity. 
(d)  Conference with parents of the offender, if person is under the age of 18. 
(e)  Suspension for limited period. 
(f)  Indefinite suspension. 
Serious offenses and failure to observe suspensions will be reported to civil authorities. 
(Code 1972, § 14-3; Code 1993, § 11-6) 
Sec. 22-7. - Participation assessments for designated activities. 
    All persons living or working in the county and participating in city recreation activities shall be assessed a fee. The year in which fees are assessed shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30 of any budget year. A schedule of fees and charges shall be approved by the City Council prior to the beginning of a budget year. The City Council shall have the power to amend such schedule at any time during the calendar year. 
(Code 1972, § 14-30; Code 1993, § 11-7) 
Secs. 22-8-22-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 22-33. - Created. 
(a)  Composition, officers. A committee to be known as the Washington Recreation Advisory Committee is established. The Committee shall be composed of nine (9) voting members appointed by City Council in accordance with section 2-531(a). Three (3) members shall reside outside the city. The members of the Committee shall meet within thirty (30) days after their appointment and shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman. The chairman and vice-chairman shall be elected from amongst the newly-appointed and incumbent members. The term of chairman, vice-chairman and other officers shall be for one (1) year with eligibility for re-election. The responsibility of the City Manager and/or Director of Parks and Recreation shall be to provide relevant information to the Committee on issues to be reviewed. The Director of Parks and Recreation or his designee shall attend each meeting to serve in an advisory capacity to the City Council. 
(b)  Term. Committee members shall serve three (3) year terms. 
(c)  Term expiration. Terms shall expire June 30. As the term of each member of the committee expires, a successor shall be appointed by the City Council as provided in subsection (a) of this section for a term of three (3) years. The City Council shall fill vacancies on the Committee occurring otherwise than by expiration of term, by appointment for the remainder of the unexpired term. All appointments shall be by majority vote of the membership. 
(d)  Removal of members. For removal of members and filling of vacancies, refer to section 2-531(b). 
(Code 1972, § 14-6; Code 1993, § 11-26; Ord. No. 91-7, § 1, 7-8-1991; Ord. No. 97-12, 7-14-1997) 
Sec. 22-34. - Committee member qualifications. 
    The members of the Recreation Advisory Committee shall be participants or past participants of Parks and Recreation Department activities and/or programs and shall be citizens of recognized ability and good judgment and standing, which, in the opinion of the City Council, can and will perform their official duties to the best interest of the city and the participants of the city Parks and Recreation Department activities. All efforts will be extended by the City Council to select individuals who are thus qualified and who represent the populous of the city and county. 
(Code 1972, §§ 14-6, 14-7; Code 1993, § 11-27; Ord. No. 91-7, § 1, 7-8-1991; Ord. No. 97-12, 7-14-1997) 
Sec. 22-35. - Duties of Committee members. 
    The Recreation Advisory Committee shall act as an advisory body to the City Council, City Manager, and Director of Parks and Recreation. The Committee shall review all policy changes occurring within the Parks and Recreation Department operation. The Committee shall also perform other duties as the Council may direct. Decisions made by the Committee shall be consistent with all codes and policies of the city and the city Parks and Recreation Department. The Committee shall have a regular meeting each month, date and time to be decided at the organizational meeting, with special meetings called by the chairman. 
(Code 1972, § 14-8; Code 1993, § 11-28; Ord. No. 97-12, 7-14-1997) 
State Law reference- Joint Parks and Recreation systems, G.S. 160A-355. 
Sec. 22-36. - Rules of procedure. 
    The Committee shall adopt rules of procedure in governance of its meetings in accordance with section 2-532. 
Sec. 22-37. - Records. 
    The Recreation Advisory Committee shall keep full and accurate records of all meetings held and official action taken. 
(Code 1993, § 11-29; Ord. No. 97-12, 7-14-1997) 
Sec. 22-38. - Liability. 
    Neither the Recreation Advisory Committee nor any person representing said Committee shall incur any financial liability in the name of the City. 
(Code 1972, § 14-11; Code 1993, § 11-30; Ord. No. 97-12, 7-14-1997) 
State Law reference- Financing Parks and Recreation, G.S. 160A-356. 
Sec. 22-39-22-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USE OF RECREATION AREAS 

Sec. 22-59. - Applications. 
(a)  Applications for use of Parks and Recreation Department facilities must be made in person, and in writing, at the department office at least one (1) week in advance. 
(b)  All applications must be approved by the Director of Parks and Recreation or his designee. 
(c)  The Parks and Recreation Department reserves the right to refuse the use of any recreation area to any applicant. 
(Code 1972, § 14-19; Code 1993, § 11-51) 
Sec. 22-60. - Fees. 
(a)  A fee will be charged for use of the recreation area per hour for all nonrecreation-sponsored events. A schedule of such fees shall be approved by the City Council and kept in the office of the City Clerk. 
(b)  An hourly fee will be charged to all groups to pay recreation personnel who must be present at the event. 
(c)  If a fee is charged for admission, there is an additional charge for use of the facility. 
(d)  Payment for use of Parks and Recreation Department facilities shall be made at the Department office in advance. 
(e)  Fees in this section shall be as determined from time to time by ordinance. 
(Code 1972, § 14-20; Code 1993, § 11-52) 
Sec. 22-61. - Supervision by Parks and Recreation Department. 
    A member of the Parks and Recreation Department staff or his appointed representative must be present at all activities conducted in department facilities. 
(Code 1972, § 14-21; Code 1993, § 11-53) 
Sec. 22-62. - Liability for damages. 
    Persons using recreation facilities or grounds will be held liable for any unreasonable damage to or defacing of facilities or grounds or the equipment contained therein. 
(Code 1972, § 14-22; Code 1993, § 11-54) 
Sec. 22-63. - Department-sponsored activities. 
    Parks and Recreation Department sponsored activities shall have precedence over all other activities. The schedule of such activities will be available one (1) week in advance. 
(Code 1972, § 14-23; Code 1993, § 11-55) 
Sec. 22-64. - Use of gymnasium. 
(a)  For rental of a gymnasium by groups other than nonprofit groups, the fee will be a flat fee per period. If a nonprofit organization, such as, a church, school or civic group rents the facility for any function, they will pay a janitorial and utilities fee and shall pay a staff person by the hour to be present from the Parks and Recreation Department. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section refer to the rental of the facility for one (1) of the three (3) periods per day: morning, afternoon or night. 
(c)  These facilities are for recreation purposes and cannot be used for political or politically-related meetings. 
(Code 1972, § 14-24; Code 1993, § 11-56) 
Sec. 22-65. - Susiegray McConnell Sports Complex. 
(a)  The Susiegray McConnell Sports Complex is closed to the public when the main gate is closed. 
(b)  Coolers are not allowed at any sporting event at the complex. 
(c)  Individual practices or games are not allowed on any athletic fields unless preapproved by the Director of Parks and Recreation or designee. 
(d)  Unauthorized vehicles allowed on designated roadways and right-of-way only. 
(Code 1993, § 11-57; Ord. No. 15-10, §§ 1, 2, 11-9-2015) 
Sec. 22-66. - Use for charitable events. 
    Recreation facilities may be used for approved charitable events where an admission fee is charged upon approval of the application for such events by the Director of Parks and Recreation. This rule applies to civic clubs or other nonprofit organizations. 
(Code 1972, § 14-26; Code 1993, § 11-58) 
Sec. 22-67. - School usage. 
    No fee will be charged for the use of recreation facilities for any official school approved student activity of the schools. The Parks and Recreation Department requires the following items be strictly observed in such cases: 
(a)  There shall be one (1) chaperon for each twenty-five (25) persons expected to attend. Couples are preferred as chaperones for large events. 
(b)  Reservations for such events, as well as special arrangements, must be made a minimum of one (1) week in advance. A nominal fee may accompany extra amenities. 
(c)  If special privileges are required, the Parks and Recreation Department may charge a minimum service fee which shall be as established from time to time. 
(Code 1972, § 14-27; Code 1993, § 11-59) 
Sec. 22-68. - Closing time for dances. 
    All dances in city recreation facilities must close no later than 11:00 p.m., unless special permission is given by the Director of Parks and Recreation to continue until a later hour. 
(Code 1972, § 14-29; Code 1993, § 11-60) 
Sec. 22-69. - Use-The Hildred T. Moore Aquatic and Fitness Center. 
(a)  Use of the Hildred T. Moore Aquatic and Fitness Center shall be through membership fees, assessments, rentals and open swim fees. Fee schedules, policies and procedures may be obtained from the Hildred T. Moore Aquatic and Fitness Center. 
(b)  Operation of the Hildred T. Moore Aquatic and Fitness Center shall be subject to the Hildred T. Moore Aquatic and Fitness Center Policy adopted by the City Council. 
(Code 1993, § 11-62) 
Sec. 22-70. - Patrick Cochran Memorial Skatepark. 
(a)  Skatepark designation. Skateboarding, roller skating, inline skating, and similar activities are prohibited in city parks and recreational facilities, unless specifically authorized in areas designated by this section. The Patrick Cochran Memorial Skatepark (the Skatepark), owned by and located in the city, is hereby designated for skateboarding and inline skating. The boundaries of the Skatepark shall be defined by the signs required by this section. 
(b)  Unlawful acts. Within the Skatepark, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Ride, operate, or use a skateboard or inline skates unless that person is wearing an appropriate helmet specifically designed for skateboard and/or inline skating use, with a properly fastened chin strap and elbow pads, specifically designed for skateboard and/or inline skating use, and knee pads specifically designed for skateboard and/or inline skating use; all of which equipment shall be in good repair at all times during use; or otherwise 
(2)  Violate the rules and regulations for the Skatepark or the provisions of the waiver that is required to be executed prior to entering or using the Skatepark. 
(c)  Waiver. All participants are required to execute a waiver from the city before entering the Skatepark and display a decal furnished by the city at all times when using the Skatepark. In addition, the parent, guardian or custodian of a minor is required to execute a waiver from the city before the minor may enter or use the Skatepark. 
(d)  Posted signs. The Skatepark shall be posted with signs at the following locations: 
(1)  At each entrance to the Skatepark; and 
(2)  Along the exterior of the Skatepark. 
(e)  Rules and regulations. All persons entering or utilizing the Skatepark must comply with the rules and regulations established and as amended from time to time by the city for the use of the Skatepark. A copy of said rules and regulations can be obtained from the Office of Parks and Recreation and will be posted at the entrance to the Skatepark. 
(f)  Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this section or fails to comply with any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, may be prosecuted in accordance with G.S. §§ 160A-175 and 14-4 and may be punished by a citation for trespassing, a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or seizure of skating, skateboarding or other equipment. 
(Ord. No. 08-1, § 1, 1-14-2008) 
Secs. 22-71-22-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - USE OF WATERWAYS, WHARVES, DOCKS, BOARDWALK AND PROMENADE 

Sec. 22-92. - Supervision of waterways, wharves and docks. 
    The public waterways, wharves, and docks within the city limits shall be under the supervision of and subject to regulation by the Parks and Recreation Department. 
(Code 1972, § 26-1; Code 1993, § 11-81; Ord. No. 09-1, § 1, 2-9-2009) 
Sec. 22-93. - Refusal to move vessels unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for the officer in command of any boat or vessel lying in any of the public docks to refuse or neglect to move such vessel or boat upon being commanded to so do for cause by an officer of the city or the Parks and Recreation Director of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 26-2; Code 1993, § 11-82) 
Sec. 22-94. - Restricted area and activities. 
    No person shall operate a boat in excess of four (4) miles per hour in Runyon's Creek upstream from the Washington Park Bridge on River Road or downstream within one hundred (100) yards of the bridge. It shall also be unlawful for anyone to ski or swim in this same area. 
(Code 1972, § 13-3; Code 1993, § 11-83) 
Sec. 22-95. - Stewart Parkway bulkhead. 
(a)  Free docking. No vessel shall remain at such mooring for a period in excess of forty-eight (48) hours in seven (7) days along the main bulkhead (not T docks) having no water or electrical usage, without special permission from the City Manager or designee. 
(b)  Commercial vessels. A monthly fee will be negotiated by the City Manager, or his designee, with commercial vessels that bring value to the community (nonfishing vessels). 
(c)  Private vessels. All fees are payable in advance. Fees for temporary docking, transient fees, fees for permanent vessels, and fees for use of the pump-out station shall be as established from time to time by ordinance. 
(d)  Rules and regulations. All persons utilizing the Waterfront must comply with the Rules and Regulations for Washington Waterfront Docking. A copy of the rules and regulations can be obtained from the Office of Parks and Recreation. 
(Code 1972, § 26-3; Code 1993, § 11-84; Ord. No. 02-14, 8-12-2002; Ord. No. 02-19, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 06-19, § 1, 6-19-2006) 
Sec. 22-96. - Swimming, diving unlawful from Stewart Parkway or Havens Gardens bulkheads. 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone to swim or dive from the bulkhead of Stewart Parkway or Havens Gardens. 
(Code 1972, § 13-4; Code 1993, § 11-85) 
Sec. 22-97. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  Dumping, etc., into river. It shall be unlawful for any person navigating any boat in the Pamlico River to pump, unload or dump any bilge oil or other inflammable gases, oils or human waste in such river within the corporate limits or opposite the city. 
(b)  Swimming. It shall be unlawful to use any part of Havens Gardens or any part of the Stewart Parkway area for swimming purposes. 
(c)  Throwing garbage, etc., into docks. It shall be unlawful to throw garbage, rubbish or other refuse matter into any waterway within the city. 
(d)  Fishing . It shall be unlawful to fish on the Boardwalk and in Jack's Creek between John Small Avenue and Park Drive. 
(e)  Skateboards, roller skates, roller blades, or similar devices and bicycles. It shall be unlawful to ride in, upon or by means of skateboards, roller skates, roller blades, or similar devices in the Business District which includes Stewart Parkway, the adjacent parking lots, the Promenade and the Boardwalk. Wheelchairs and strollers are permitted in said above areas. With the exception of law enforcement officers performing their official duties, it shall be unlawful to ride bicycles on the Promenade and Boardwalk. 
(f)  No walking or sitting on railing. It shall be unlawful to walk or sit on the railing of the Boardwalk. 
(g)  Pets on Boardwalk and Promenade. It shall be unlawful to have a pet, on a leash or not on a leash, on the Boardwalk, excluding service animals. Pets are allowed on the Promenade on a leash. Failure to remove feces is a violation of section 4-40. 
(h)  Authorized personnel only. It shall be unlawful for unauthorized persons to go into the wetlands project. This is a restricted area. 
(i)  Animal and bird feeding restrictions. Restrictions upon feeding of animals and birds in specified areas. 
(1)  No person shall do any of the following: 
a.  Feed any bird or animal; or 
b.  Disperse any food material or other matter edible by any bird or animal so as to make such material or matter available to other birds or animals for ingestion. 
(2)  No person shall leave any food or other matter edible by any bird or animal to remain on the ground after dispersing or dropping the same in or on the designated area. 
(3)  These restrictions shall apply to all city-owned parks, facilities, boardwalks, roads, easements, and rights-of-way including, but not limited to, the following areas: 
a.  Downtown area further defined by Bridge Street on the west, Bonner Street on the east, 2nd Street on the North, and the federal channel of the Pamlico River on the south (private single-family residences within the outlined area are exempt from these restrictions); 
b.  Festival Park; 
c.  Haven's Garden; 
d.  Veterans Park; and 
e.  Boardwalk along Pamlico River. 
(4)  Certain individuals and/or groups may be exempt from the prohibitions of this section, provided they provide the following information to City Council and receive such exempt status from City Council on an annual basis. Exemption from the prohibitions may be withdrawn by City Council at any time and for any reason. 
a.  Overall program description and purpose of program; 
b.  Locations where animals are to be fed; 
c.  Times that feeding will occur-Times shall be limited to no more than one (1) hour per day; 
d.  List of individuals with up-to-date contact information that will be overseeing the feeding; 
e.  Disposition of animals fed and/or caught, including, but not limited to, number of animals, locations animals caught and released, and medical procedures or vaccines given; and 
f.  Any other information, plan, and/or requirement that City Council may impose or require from said individuals or groups. 
(j)  Violation, penalty. Any violation of section 22-97(i) shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). Offenders shall be issued a written citation for all such violations and shall pay the same within fourteen (14) calendar days from the issuance of the citation to the office of the Collector of Revenue. If the citation is not paid within fourteen (14) calendar days of issuance, the offender shall be liable for an additional civil penalty of the same amount for failure to pay within fourteen (14) days. The civil penalties imposed hereunder shall be the sole method of enforcing violations of section 22-97(i) and no citation issued for such violations shall be enforced through the application of G.S. 160A-175(b) or G.S. 14-4. It being the intent of this subsection that citations issued for such violations shall not be enforced through criminal misdemeanor prosecution. Said penalties may be collected by the city through Magistrate's Court, the cost for which will be assessed to the offender receiving the citation. 
(Code 1972, § 26-4; Code 1993, § 11-86; Ord. No. 01-11, 9-10-2001; Ord. No. 02-8, 6-24-2002; Ord. No. 02-14, 8-12-2002; Ord. No. 02-15, 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 06-10, § 1, 4-10-2006; Ord. No. 10-5, § 1, 6-14-2010; Ord. No. 12-1, §§ 1, 2, 2-13-2012; Ord. No. 12-2, § 1, 2-13-2012; Ord. No. 13-5, §§ 1, 2, 10-7-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-1, § 1, adopted Feb. 13, 2012, amended § 22-97 title to read as herein set out. Former § 22-97 title pertained to unlawful acts. 
Chapter 24 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch.2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1-24-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 24-21. - Purpose. 
    The city council hereby establishes a residency requirement for the rational purpose of enhancement of the quality of employee performance by greater personal knowledge of his or her scope of responsibility and existing city conditions. 
(Code 1993, § 12-1; Ord. No. 14-8, § 1, 11-24-2014) 
Sec. 24-22. - Requirements. 
    The City Manager and any employee hired or promoted at the department head level (Administrative Services Director, Community and Cultural Services Director, Electric Director, Police and Fire Services Director, Public Works Director) shall ordinarily be required to live within the corporate limits of the city within twelve (12) months of appointment and maintain such residency for the duration of employment in such capacity with the city. Any exception made to this article shall be consistent with the purpose of these requirements as stated in section 24-21 above and approved by city council. 
(Code 1993, § 12-2; Ord. No. 98-19, 11-9-1998; Ord. No. 01-9, 9-10-2001; Ord. No. 05-17, § 1, 9-12-2005; Ord. No. 14-8, § 1, 11-24-2014) 
Chapter 26 - POLICE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; Fire-Rescue-EMS Services, fire prevention, ch. 14; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 18; police and fire signals, § 20-10. 
State Law reference- Obstructing justice, G.S. 14-221 et seq.; arrest, G.S. 15A-401 et seq.; police processing and duties upon arrest, G.S. 15A-501 et seq.; reporting by physicians and hospitals of wounds, injuries and illnesses, G.S. 90-21.20; removal of unfit officers, G.S. 128-16 et seq.; policement appointed, G.S. 160A-281 et seq.; extraterritorial jurisdiction of policemen, G.S. 160A-286; delegation and exercise of the general police power, G.S. 160A-174 et seq. 

Sec. 26-1. - Composition. 
    The Police Department shall consist of a Chief and as many police officers as the City Council shall from time to time determine. 
(Code 1972, § 18-3; Code 1993, § 13-1) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; residency requirements, § 24-21 et seq. 
Sec. 26-2. - General supervision. 
    The City Manager shall have general control of the Police Department. 
(Code 1972, § 18-4; Code 1993, § 13-2) 
Sec. 26-3. - Chief of police. 
    The city Police Department shall be commanded by the Chief of Police who is directly responsible to the City Manager. His office shall administer all programs and functions for the protection of life and property through prevention and detection of crime and preservation of the public peace. His office shall see that the rules and regulations of the department are understood and enforced. The staff personnel assigned to the office of the Chief shall provide the Chief with current information to assist him in making decisions. The staff shall coordinate, manage, direct, plan, and staff functions under the direction of the Chief of Police. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3) 
Cross reference- Residency requirements, § 24-1 et seq. 
Sec. 26-4. - Use of police cars. 
    The police vehicles are in the complete charge of the Chief of Police at all times, and he shall be responsible for their maintenance and care and the assignment of the vehicles to officers. Police vehicles shall not be used for any purpose, except official business for the Police Department. The driver shall at all times obey the traffic laws, except when operating in emergency response or pursuit. 
(Code 1993, § 13-5; Ord. No. 01-15, 10-8-2001) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- When speed limit not applicable, G.S. 20-145; exceptions to the right-of-way rule, G.S. 20-156. 
Chapter 28 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; Fire-Rescue-EMS Services, fire prevention, ch. 14; licenses and business regulations, ch. 16; abandoned, nuisance and junked motor vehicles, § 18-242 et seq.; parks and recreation, ch. 22; streets and sidewalks, ch. 32; throwing or burning trash on street, trucks, wagons, etc., carrying trash, § 32-5; water and wastewater, ch. 38. 
State Law reference- Littering, G.S. 14-399; North Carolina Radiation Protection Act, G.S. 104E-1 et seq.; solid waste management, G.S. 130A-290 et seq.; location of garbage collection containers by counties and municipalities, G.S. 136-18.3; placing glass, injurious obstructions, etc., in road, G.S. 136-91; abatement of public health nuisances, G.S. 160A-193; regulation of the placing of trash, refuse and garbage within municipal limits, G.S. 160A-303.1; public enterprises, G.S. 160A-311 et seq.; municipal power to require use of solid waste services and to regulate accordingly, G.S. 160A-317(b); requirements for municipal solid waste landfill facilities, 15A NC Admin. Code. 13B.1601 et seq. 

Sec. 28-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bulk container means a steel container (dumpster) of four-cubic-yard or eight-cubic-yard capacity, and compatible with the city's solid waste equipment system. 
    Bulk residential container means a container (roll-out cart) of eighty- or ninety-gallon capacity, with lid, handle, and wheels, approved by the Director of Public Works and compatible with the city's solid waste equipment system. 
    Bulky trash means items too large to put in your bulk residential container; but does not include tires, hazardous materials, construction debris, or appliances that contain or did contain Freon. 
    Business means an establishment selling a product, manufacturing a product or providing a service or multifamily housing units. 
    Garbage means discarded animal or vegetable matter, food scraps, household trash, paper products, or other materials which may be attractive to and consumed by rodents, dogs, and birds. 
    Multifamily housing units means condominiums, townhouses, apartment complexes or other dwellings used as living quarters with shared common areas. 
    Residential means houses, apartments or other dwellings used as living quarters. 
    Residential recycling bin means an eighteen (18) to twenty (20) gallon bin, and compatible with the city's solid waste equipment system. 
    Solid waste means any discarded or used waste materials from residential households or commercial sources; such as, garbage, trash, construction material, yard waste, and tree trimmings. 
    Yard waste means leaves, grass, and shrubbery clippings, and other similar vegetation items. 
(Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 6-12-2006) 
Sec. 28-2. - Residential collection. 
(a)  Property owners shall be responsible for keeping their property clean by not permitting garbage or bulky trash to accumulate. Garbage and bulky trash shall be placed in proper containers, as described in this section. 
(b)  All garbage shall be placed in bulk residential containers as required in this chapter. Such containers shall be placed on the nearest grassed area behind the curb. 
(c)  All bulk residential containers shall be kept on the private premises of the owner, lessee, tenant or occupant, and shall be kept at some place behind the front line of the residence, except when the same is placed on the grassed area for collection. Containers may be placed at the curb the night before, but no later than 7:00 a.m., for collection on the scheduled collection days. Containers shall be retrieved from the curb on the day of pick up. 
(d)  All bulk residential containers required by this chapter shall be the property of the city, however, residents or tenants shall maintain all containers in as sanitary a condition as possible in view of the use. Containers shall be thoroughly cleaned as needed by washing or sterilizing. Residents or tenants shall be responsible for damage incurred by improper maintenance or misuse of containers. The cost of such damage shall be included in the user's utility bill entitled "replacement fee." 
(e)  In the event, a resident desires to have the city pick up the bulk residential container and/or the bulk recycling container from the backyard, a monthly fee as established from time to time shall be included in the user's utility bill. Any resident who furnishes proof that they are physically disabled and such resident has no one living in the residence to place the container at the curb will be exempt from the monthly fee for backyard collection. 
(f)  Any resident which requires services for more than one bulk residential container shall be charged an additional fee, as established from time to time, per additional city-issued or city-approved bulk residential container on the user's utility bill. 
(g)  Yard waste consisting of leaves, grass, shrubbery clippings, and other similar items shall be placed in strong plastic bags, or containers, provided by the resident weighing not more than seventy-five (75) pounds that can easily be handled by one (1) person. Such containers shall be placed beside the street. 
(h)  Bulky trash items are picked up four (4) times per year. The weeks of collection are the second full weeks of February, May, August, and November on the scheduled collection day. 
(Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 6-12-2006) 
Sec. 28-3. - Business collections. 
(a)  Solid waste collection service for businesses and all properties other than residential is provided through the use of bulk containers (dumpsters) in sizes of four-cubic yards or eight-cubic yards, which are approved by the Director of Public Works and are compatible with equipment used by the city. Each business desiring our services shall rent a bulk container or the city may service compatible bulk containers owned by the business. Only material placed in a bulk container shall be collected from a business; except in the commercial areas where residents may be residing. More than one (1) business may share the use of a container. Single businesses in residential sections may rent bulk residential containers; but not to exceed more than three (3) ninety-gallon containers serviced once each week on the residential scheduled collection days. A business requiring more than three (3) ninety-gallon containers shall be required to provide and use a bulk container. The city shall empty bulk containers when the following specifications are met: 
(1)  The users of containers shall be responsible for keeping the container and surrounding areas clean and sanitary. Users shall keep container doors closed, except when depositing solid waste. 
(2)  The location of the container and amount of garbage and refuse generated will determine the size of the container. The Director of Public Works shall determine the size of container needed and the pickup schedule, to provide adequate service. 
(3)  Each user providing a container they own shall keep it in good repair. If rust or deterioration causes holes in a container, doors are bent, or other repairs are needed, they shall be made when directed by the Director of Public Works or service may be discontinued. 
(4)  No element, compound or any material which is toxic, flammable, explosive, hazardous or injurious to public health, or yard waste or any item which will not be accepted at the county landfill, may be placed in any container serviced by the city. 
(5)  All users of containers shall flatten or compact boxes or bulky material. 
(b)  Only those businesses providing or renting a container may place solid waste in a container. All other persons placing material in bulk containers shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 6-12-2006) 
Sec. 28-4. - Bulk containers for businesses. 
(a)  Each business shall provide a bulk container for commercial services to be rendered by the city. For this section, residential developments/communities that desire to have bulk container collection, with the exception of individually owned and occupied residences, shall be considered as a business. The city shall empty containers according to the needs of the business. The city has containers available and a business may rent a container from the city. Rental and tipping fees are as established from time to time by ordinance. 
(b)  Each business which does not provide its own bulk container, and shares rental costs with another business, shall pay a monthly rental rate based on the volume of space used. The Director of Public Works shall determine the volume needed by any business. Businesses sharing containers shall pay the rates as established from time to time by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 6-12-2006) 
Sec. 28-5. - Collection of tree branches and stumps. 
    The city desires to assist citizens in disposing of debris derived from their normal landscape maintenance. The city will remove not more than one (1) standard dumptruck load per week when placed according to the following specifications: 
(a)  The pruning or trimming has been performed by the property owner or occupant (not a contractor) and placed beside the street. 
(b)  Tree trunks and branches shall not exceed six (6) inches in diameter, three (3) feet in length, or eighty (80) pounds in weight. 
(c)  Tree stumps shall not exceed one hundred and fifty (150) pounds, and picked up only on a call-per-need basis. 
(d)  Large volumes of tree branches, that exceed the criteria in subsections (1)-(3) of this section, can be picked up on a call-per-need basis for a fee, in an amount as established from time to time by ordinance per trip. 
(Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 6-12-2006) 
Sec. 28-6. - Leaf collection. 
    Leaves shall be considered as yard waste and shall be placed in strong plastic bags, or containers, and placed beside the street by the property owner or tenant; except during the period November 1 through February 15, leaves may be raked and left in piles beside the street in residential areas only. Leaves shall not be placed in the curb and gutter section of any residential street. Where sidewalks exist, leaves shall be placed on the nearest grassed area behind the curb. Loose leaves shall have no tree branches or any other material mixed with them. 
(Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 6-12-2006) 
Sec. 28-7. - Recycling. 
(a)  All residents are encouraged to recycle. Recycling not only conserves valuable natural resources, it reduces solid waste volumes and extends the life of our regional landfill. The following materials may be recycled: 
(1)  Paper items: newspaper, inserts, magazines and catalogs. 
(2)  Aluminum and metal cans: food and beverage containers only; no scrap metal, paint cans, aerosol cans, motor oil or antifreeze cans, aluminum foil, plates or pie tins. 
(3)  Plastic containers: PETE #1 and HDPE #2; items such as soft drink bottles, milk jugs, detergent, bleach and fabric softener bottles, and cooking oil bottles. 
(4)  Glass: brown, clear and green. Bottles and jars only permitted. No light bulbs, plate glass or mirrors. 
(b)  All recyclables shall be placed in recycling bins as required in this chapter. Such containers shall be placed on the nearest grassed area behind the curb. 
(c)  All recycling bins shall be kept on the private premises of the owner, lessee, tenant or occupant, and shall be kept at some place behind the front line of the residence; except, when the same is placed on the grassed area for collection. Bins may be placed at the curb the night before, but no later than 7:00 a.m., on the day of collection on the scheduled collection days. Bins shall be retrieved from the curb on the day of collection. 
(d)  All recycling bins required by this chapter shall be the property of the city; however, residents or tenants shall maintain all containers in as sanitary a condition as possible in view of the use. 
(e)  In the event, a resident desires to have the city pick up the recycling bin and/or residential bulk container from the backyard, a monthly fee as established from time to time shall be included in the user's utility bill. Any resident who furnishes proof that they are physically disabled and such resident has no one living in the residence to place the container at the curb will be exempt from the monthly fee for backyard collection. 
(Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 6-12-2006) 
Sec. 28-8. - Construction waste, appliances, and furniture. 
    All materials, containers, lumber, construction waste, and debris resulting from new construction, repair or renovation of any structure shall be disposed of by the property owner or his authorized contractor. No new, old, or waste material may be placed on the street right-of-way at any time. Any appliance, furniture or construction waste shall be disposed of by the property or business owner or authorized contractor. Any residential customer may contract with the city to dispose of their solid waste. A per-trip fee shall be charged to collect these items. As defined in section 28-1, the city will collect this material at no charge, once per quarter each year for residential customers. This collection will be scheduled the second work week in the months of February, May, August, and November on the regular solid waste collection day. No solid waste items shall be placed at the curb for pick up prior to the scheduled pickup week. 
(Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 6-12-2006) 
Sec. 28-9. - Depositing solid waste in streets unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful to place any garbage, tree limbs, furniture, appliances, building material waste or debris of any type in any portion of a paved street or upon any paved sidewalk or right-of-way area used as a sidewalk, or within a dirt street so as to cause an unsafe condition. The occupant, owner, or tenant shall be considered as the party who places items listed in this section when those items are found violating this section and are adjacent to the occupant's property. 
(Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 6-12-2006) 
Sec. 28-10. - Collection fee. 
    All residents of the city shall be charged a collection fee for the collection of solid waste. The collection fee and frequency shall be as established from time to time by ordinance. This fee will appear on the user's utility bill. 
(Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 6-12-2006; Ord. No. 07-05, § 1, 6-25-2007) 
Chapter 30 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Stormwater runoff rules and programs, G.S. 143-214.7(c); applicability of Tar-Pamlico River Basin nutrient sensitive waters management strategy to Washington, 15A NC Admin. Code 2B.0258(b)(1)(F). 

Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Best Management Practices (BMPs) means structural and/or nonstructural controls that temporarily store or treat stormwater runoff, which act to reduce flooding, remove pollutants and provide other amenities. 
    Board of Adjustment means the City of Washington's Board of Adjustment. 
    Built-upon area (BUA) means that portion of a development that is covered by impervious or partially impervious cover, including buildings, pavement, gravel areas (e.g., roads, parking lots, paths, etc.), recreation facilities (e.g., tennis courts), etc. (note: wooden slatted decks and the water area of a swimming pool are considered pervious.) 
    City means the City of Washington, North Carolina. 
    Developed land means any land which adds to or changes the amount of impervious or partially impervious cover. 
    Director means the Director of Public Works for the City of Washington. 
    Drainage easement means the land required for the installation of stormwater drainage facilities and/or along a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing access for maintenance and operation. 
    Drainage facilities means all ditches, channels, conduits, retention-detention systems, tiles, swales, sewers and other natural or artificial means of draining stormwater from land. 
    Drainage requirements means: 
(a)  Minimum drainage standards, as established by this article and the city's Stormwater Management Program for Nutrient Control. 
(b)  Obligation and requirements relating to drainage established in chapter 34, pertaining to subdivisions. 
(c)  Requirements stated in chapter 40, pertaining to zoning, including flood zoning requirements. 
(d)  Conditions relating to drainage attached to a grant of variance by the Board of Adjustments of the city. 
    Drainage swale means a natural or constructed waterway, usually broad and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses used to conduct surface water from a field, diversion or other site feature. 
    Drainage system means any combination of surface and/or subsurface drainage components fulfilling the drainage requirements of this article. 
    Dry detention facility means a facility constructed for the purpose of detaining stormwater runoff from a developed site to control the peak discharge rates that is normally maintained as a dry basin. 
    Easement means a grant by the property owner of the use of a strip of land by the public, a corporation or persons for specified purposes. 
    Illicit connection means any unlawful disposal, placement, emptying, dumping, spillage, leakage, pumping, pouring, emission or other discharge of any substance other than stormwater conveyance, the waters of the state or upon the land in such proximity to the same, such that the substance, or its residue, is likely to reach a stormwater conveyance or the waters of the state. 
    Impervious surfaces means those areas within the developed land which prevent or significantly impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, roads, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, brick or concrete pavers, compacted gravel surfaces (roads, driveways, parking and storage areas) and other surfaces which prevent or significantly impede the natural infiltration of stormwater into the soil. 
    Land preservation means the permanent dedication of development rights, for conservation purposes, to a third party on currently undeveloped property contained wholly within one parcel, as registered with Beaufort County or a portion of a developed parcel that is permanently dedicated to a third party for conservation purposes. 
    Maintenance means cleaning, spraying, removing obstructions from and making minor repairs to a drainage facility so it will perform the function for which it was designed and constructed. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means a stormwater conveyance or unified stormwater conveyance system, including without limitation roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catchbasins, stormwater detention facilities, curbs, gutters, ditches, natural or manmade channels or storm drains: 
(a)  Located within the corporate limits of Washington, North Carolina; 
(b)  Owned or operated by the state, county, city or other public body; and 
(c)  That discharge to waters of the state, excluding publicly owned treatment works and lawful connections thereto, which in turn discharge into the waters of the state. 
    NPDES means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, a federal Environmental Protection Agency program initiated to reduce and eliminate pollutants reaching water bodies of all types. 
    Open channel means a drainage channel which may or may not have a continuous water flow, intended to convey surface water, subsurface water and stormwater runoff. 
    Pollution means a manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, thermal and/or radiological integrity of water which causes it to exceed federal or state stormwater discharge standards. 
    Redevelopment means any rebuilding activity other than a rebuilding activity that results in no net increase in built-upon area; and provides equal or greater stormwater control than the previous development. 
    Riparian buffer means the fifty-foot area directly adjacent to surface waters in the Tar-Pamlico Basins (intermittent streams, perennial streams, lakes, ponds and estuaries), excluding wetlands. For the purpose of this definition, surface water shall be present if the feature is approximately shown on either the most recent version of the soil survey map by the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture or the most recent version of the 1:24,000 scale (7.5 minute) quadrangle topographic maps prepared by the United States Geologic Survey (USGS). 
    Stormwater means the runoff from the precipitation that travels over natural or developed surfaces to the nearest stream, other conduit or impoundment and appears in lakes, rivers, ponds or other bodies of water. 
    Stormwater and drainage systems means natural and structural channels, swales, ditches, swamps, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainageways, inlets, catchbasins, pipes, headwalls, storm sewers, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer control, convey or otherwise influence the movement of stormwater runoff. 
    Stormwater management programs means programs designed to protect water quality by controlling the level of pollutants in, and the quantity and flow of, stormwater. 
    Subsurface drainage means a system of pipes, tile, conduit or tubing installed beneath the ground surface used to collect underground water from individual parcels, lots, building footings or pavements. 
    Surface drainage means a system by which the stormwater runoff is conducted to an outlet. This would include the proper grading of parking lots, streets, driveways and yards so stormwater runoff is removed without ponding and flows to a drainage swale, open ditch or a storm sewer. 
    Undeveloped land means land that does not meet the definition of developed lands. 
    Waters of the state means surface waters within or flowing through the boundaries of the state including, but not limited to, the following: any intermittent or perennial stream, river, creek, brook, swamp, lake, sound, tidal estuary, bay, reservoir, wetland or any other surface water or any portion thereof that is mapped as solid or dashed blue lines on the most recent version of the 1:24,000 scale (7.5 minute) quadrangle topographic maps prepared by the United States Geologic Survey (USGS). Treatment systems, consisting of manmade bodies of water, which were not originally created in waters of the state and which are not the results of impoundment of waters of the state, are not waters of the state. 
    Wet detention facility means a facility, constructed for the purpose of detaining stormwater runoff from a developed site to control the peak discharge rates that is normally maintained with a permanent pool of water. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 19-2, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 30-2. - Purpose. 
(a)  The primary purpose of this chapter is to satisfy the requirements imposed upon the city under the Tar-Pamlico Stormwater Rule (15A NC Admin. Code 2B.0258). Meeting these requirements will result in the following: 
(1)  The public health, safety and welfare will be protected by controlling the discharge of pollutants into the stormwater conveyance system. 
(2)  The public health, safety and general welfare will be elevated and public and private losses due to flood conditions will be reduced in specific areas by regulations designed to control the rate of release of stormwater runoff of certain developments where the rate of runoff has been significantly increased. 
(3)  Activities directed toward the maintenance and improvement of surface water and groundwater quality will be promoted. 
(4)  The riparian buffer along all intermittent and perennial streams will be protected. 
(5)  Nitrogen and phosphorus from new development will be reduced. 
Finally, these requirements will establish administration and enforcement procedures through which these purposes can be fulfilled. 
(b)  The provisions of this regulation are supplemental to regulations administered by federal and state agencies. This chapter shall apply to properties within the city's corporate limits and shall be applicable to new development, as defined in section 30-3, pertaining to new development, as well as existing illicit connections, as defined in section 30-1. 
(c)  The city's governing body has the authority to amend this chapter, provided such amendments meet the requirements of the Tar-Pamlico Stormwater Rule (15A NC Admin. Code 2B.0258). Such amendments will also require the approval of the North Carolina Division of Water Quality. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 19-1, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 30-3. - New development. 
(a)  New development shall include the following: 
(1)  Any activity that disturbs greater than one acre of land to establish, expand or replace a single-family or duplex residential development or recreational facility. For individual single-family residential lots of record that are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale, the activity must also result in greater than ten (10) percent built-upon area. 
(2)  Any activity that disturbs greater than one-half (1/2) an acre of land to establish, expand or replace a multifamily residential development or a commercial, industrial or institutional facility. 
(3)  Projects meeting the criteria in subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section that replace or expand existing structures or improvements and that do not result in a net increase in built-upon area shall not be required to meet the basin-wide average nonurban loading levels. 
(4)  Projects meeting the criteria in subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section that replace or expand existing structures or improvements and that result in a net increase in built-upon area shall achieve a 30 percent reduction in nitrogen loading and no increase in phosphorus loading relative to the previous development. Such projects may achieve these loads through onsite or offsite measures or some combination thereof. 
(5)  New developments shall not include agriculture, mining or forestry activities. 
(b)  Plans for new development within the area covered by this chapter shall be submitted to the city for approval prior to construction. These plans shall include provisions showing how the developer/property owner intends to comply with the Tar-Pamlico Stormwater Rule and be designed, signed and sealed by a professional licensed and/or registered in the state, with an expertise in this field. 
(c)  Sealed as-built plans shall be submitted upon completion of the project, including, but not limited to, additions to the stormwater system and shall demonstrate that the project complies with the approved plans and this article. The Public Works Director, or his designee, shall periodically inspect the proposed site to insure compliance of the plan. 
(d)  Any person desiring to establish new development within the city's jurisdiction shall complete an official application and file it with the Public Works Director. Approval of the application shall be evidenced by written notification from the Director or his designated authorized representative and issuance of a stormwater permit. The applicant shall provide all data required by the current official application, copies of which can be obtained from the Public Works Office. Once the application has been reviewed and is deemed acceptable, a stormwater permit shall be issued to the property owner. This permit shall be recorded by the developer/owner with the Register of Deeds to ensure disclosure when the property is sold/transferred in the future. 
(e)  Review of applications will be overseen by a qualified professional capable of designing BMPs, where the term "qualified professional" is defined as a professional licensed and/or registered in the state to perform services only in their area of competence. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 19-3, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 30-4. - Vested rights; exemptions. 
    All development projects that have received approval from the city for a site-specific or phased development plan prior to April 11, 2006, and that have been implemented in accordance with the city's vesting provisions (see section 34-11) and any rebuilding activity, other than a rebuilding activity that results in no net increase in built-upon area, and provides equal or greater stormwater control than the previous development, shall be exempt from the requirements of the Tar-Pamlico Stormwater Rule and shall be considered existing developments. Any plats associated with such development must be recorded within a maximum of five years from the date of development approval. All new development projects that have not received such approval by April 10, 2006, or recorded any plats associated with such development within five years of the development's approval shall be subject to the requirements of the rule. Projects that require a state permit, such as, landfills, NPDES wastewater discharges, land application of residuals and road construction activities shall be considered exempt, if a state permit was issued prior to the effective date of the local stormwater program. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 19-4, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 30-5. - Protection of riparian areas. 
(a)  The Tar-Pamlico Riparian Buffer Protection Rule, 15A NC Admin. Code 2B.0259, requires that fifty-foot riparian buffers be maintained on all sides of the intermittent and perennial streams, ponds, lakes and estuarine waters in the basin. The buffer rule provides for certain allowable uses within the buffer with Division of Water Quality approval, such as, road and utility crossings. All construction plans shall show buffers on plans as well as maintenance procedures for diffuse flow to buffers. 
(b)  The city shall disapprove any new development activity proposed within the first fifty (50) feet adjacent to a water body that is shown on either the USGS 7.5 minute topographic map or the NRCS Soil Survey map, unless the owner can show that the activity has been approved by the Division of Water Quality. Division of Water Quality approval may consist of the following: 
(1)  An on-site determination that surface waters are not present. 
(2)  An authorization certificate from the Division of Water Quality for an allowable use, such as, a road crossing or utility line, or for a use that is allowable with mitigation along with a division-approved mitigation plan. A table delineating such uses is included in the buffer rule. 
(3)  An opinion from the Division of Water Quality that vested rights have been established for the proposed development activity. 
(4)  A letter from the Division of Water Quality documenting that a variance has been approved for the proposed development activity. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 19-5, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 30-6. - Calculating nitrogen and phosphorus export. 
(a)  The nitrogen and phosphorus export from each new development within the Tar-Pamlico Basin must be calculated by the applicant using worksheets provided by the city. These exports will be calculated in pounds per acre per year (lbs/ac/yr). Worksheets to carry out this method are provided in the city's Tar-Pamlico Stormwater Management Program for Nutrient Control, along with a description of their development. 
(b)  All new developments must achieve a nitrogen export of less than or equal to 4.0 pounds per acre per year and a phosphorus export of less than or equal to 0.4 pounds per acre per year. The applicant chooses BMPs that reduce the export rule mandated levels. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 19-6, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 30-7. - Best Management Practices (BMPs) and maintenance. 
(a)  The North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources, Division of Water Quality, Water Quality Section, Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, 1999, and all amendments thereto, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein. If any standard, requirement or procedure, as set forth in the manual, is in conflict with any standard, requirement or procedure, as set forth in this article, then the most stringent shall prevail. A copy of this manual shall be available for public review in the office of the Director. 
(b)  Best management practices in any new development shall be the entire and sole responsibility of the developer/property owner, except those natural streams, channels, ditches, branches and drainage outfall lines for which the city has accepted the responsibility for continuous maintenance. All new developments shall consider the issues of aesthetics, longterm maintenance, safety and reliability of the BMPs designed. All proposed BMPs must be approved by the city prior to their implementation. This will be accomplished through the permitting process. All BMPs will be designed or incorporated into plans sealed by a licensed and/or registered professional with expertise in stormwater management. The Certificate of Occupancy (CO) will not be issued for the development until the permit specifications are satisfactorily met. All BMPs require maintenance and a maintenance agreement will be required at the time of the site development review. The maintenance agreements shall indicate maintenance requirements for the BMPs utilized, who are responsible for maintenance and penalties for failure to adhere to the agreement. 
(c)  For residential or commercial or industrial development. 
(1)  If the computed nitrogen export is greater than 6.0 lb N/ac/yr for residential or 10.0 lb N/ac/yr for commercial/industrial, then the owner must either use on-site BMPs or take part in an approved regional or jurisdiction-wide stormwater strategy or some combination of these to lower the nitrogen export to at least 6.0 (or 10.0 for commercial or industrial) lb N/ac/yr. The owner may then use one of the options specified in subsection (c)(2)a or b of this sectionto reduce the nitrogen from 6.0 (or 10.0 for commercial or industrial) to 4.0 N/ac/yr. 
(2)  If the computed nitrogen export is greater than 4.0 lb/ac/yr but less than 6.0 (or 10.0 for commercial or industrial), N/ac/yr, then the owner may either: 
a.  Install BMPs onsite or take part in an approved regional or jurisdiction-wide stormwater strategy or some combination of these to remove nitrogen down to 4.0 lb N/ac/yr. 
b.  Provide treatment of an offsite developed area that drains to the same stream to achieve the same nitrogen mass loading reduction that would have occurred onsite. See section 30-8, pertaining to the offsite partial offset option. 
c.  Pay a one-time offset payment to the North Carolina Ecosystem Enhancement Program's Riparian Buffer Restoration Fund using the applicable nitrogen and phosphorous offset payment calculations specified in the Nutrient Offset Payments Rule (15A NC Admin. Code 02B.0240). 
1.  The formula to calculate nutrient offset payments will be adjusted by North Carolina Ecosystem Enhancement Program (NC EEP) on an annual basis (January of each year) based upon the construction cost index factor published every December in the Engineering News Record. 
2.  In cases where reductions are needed for both nitrogen and phosphorous and the offset option is sought, only the greater value of the two offset payments calculated is required to satisfy the offset reductions for both limits. 
3.  The city shall determine or verify the correct offset payment amount required and shall issue an approval letter to the NC EEP and the developer. The approval letter shall include the project name and location, including river basin, the offset payment calculations and the amount of the offset payment. 
4.  Prior to the city issuing a permit, the developer shall provide receipt from NC EEP. 
The owner must install BMPs that also achieve phosphorus export of less than or equal to 0.4 P/ac/yr, but may do so through any combination of onsite and offsite measures. 
(d)  The landowner, his successors and assigns, shall have the system inspected annually by a professional and submit a certified inspection report to the city. The purpose of the inspection is to ensure safe and proper functioning of the system. The inspection shall cover the entire system, including, but not limited to, berms, outlet structure, pond areas, access roads, etc. Deficiencies shall be noted in the inspection report. 
(e)  The landowner, his successors and assigns, hereby grant permission to the city, its authorized agents and employees, to enter upon the property and to inspect the stormwater system whenever the city deems necessary. The purpose of inspection is to follow-up on reported deficiencies and/or to respond to citizen complaints. The city shall provide the landowner, its successors and assigns, copies of the inspection findings and a directive to commence with the repairs if necessary. The city will inspect approximately 30 percent of the permitted BMPs annually. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 19-7, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 30-8. - Offsite partial offset option. 
    Developers/property owners shall have the option of partially offsetting their nitrogen and phosphorus loads by providing treatment of offsite developed areas. The offsite area must drain to the same classified surface water, as defined in the Schedule of Classifications, 15A NC Admin. Code 2B.0316, that the development site drains to most directly. The developer/property owner must provide legal assurance of the dedicated use of the offsite area for the purposes described here, including achievement of specified nutrient load reductions and provision for regular operation and maintenance activities, in perpetuity. The legal assurance shall include an instrument, such as, a conservation easement, that maintains this restriction upon change of ownership or modification of the offsite property. Only new residential developments with a nitrogen export between 4.0 and 6.0 lb/ac/yr, and nonresidential developments with a nitrogen export between 4.0 and 10.0 lb/ac/yr will be permitted to use the offsite partial offset treatment. The new development must attain a maximum nitrogen export of 6.0 pounds/acre/year for residential development and 10.0 pounds/acre/year for commercial or industrial development. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 19-8, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 30-9. - Peak flow requirements. 
(a)  At a minimum, new development and redevelopment, as described in section 30-3, shall not result in a net increase in peak flow leaving the site from predevelopment conditions for the one-year, twenty-four-hour storm event (3.5, as stated in 2-E of the city's Tar-Pamlico Stormwater Management Program for Nutrient Control). 
(b)  Peak flow leaving the site from predevelopment conditions for the one-year, twenty-four-hour storm event shall be calculated and the plan shall be prepared and approved using the standards set forth in the city's Tar-Pamlico Stormwater Management Program for Nutrient Control. 
(c)  The drainage plan as required, by this section, shall include but are not limited to a site plan showing existing and proposed buildings, storm drainage facilities, ground cover, site construction plans with grading plan and drainage system, drainage facility design data including area map, engineering calculations, area of impervious cover and total land area. 
(d)  In the event that literal interpretation of this section creates an undue hardship, the applicant may appeal to the Board of Adjustment for a variance in whole or in part from this section. 
(e)  No part of this section shall be applied to structures existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, nor shall existing impervious ground cover be used in the calculation of runoff. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 19-9, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 30-10. - Exceptions to peak flow control. 
    Peak flow control is not required for developments that meet one or more of the following requirements: 
(a)  The increase in peak flow between predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions does not exceed ten percent (note: this exemption makes it easier to conduct redevelopment activities). 
(b)  The development occurs in a part of a drainage basin where stormwater detention can aggravate local flooding problems. Such problems may include but are not limited to creation of tailwater problems on upstream reaches, development of concurrent peaks and creation of unusually erosive conditions. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 19-10, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 30-11. - Appeals. 
(a)  The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Public Works Director, pertaining to this chapter. 
(b)  An appeal may be taken by any person aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Public Works Director. An appeal made to the Board of Adjustment shall be made within ten (10) days of the order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Public Works Director. 
(c)  An appeal, specifying the grounds thereof, shall be filed with the Public Works Director on a form provided by the Public Works Director. Once an appeal is filed, the Public Works Director shall forthwith transmit all papers with reference to the case to the Board of Adjustment. 
(d)  The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination with reference to the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 19-11, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 30-12. - Variances. 
(a)  When practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships would result from carrying out the strict letter of this chapter, the Board of Adjustment shall have the power to vary or modify any of the regulations or provisions of this chapter so the spirit of the chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
(b)  Anyone requesting a variance shall file such with the Public Works Director on a form provided by the Public Works Director. Applications shall be filed at least ten (10) days prior to the Board of Adjustment meeting at which it will be heard. After filing, the request shall be heard at the next available Board of Adjustment meeting. 
(c)  The Board of Adjustment, in considering an application for a variance, shall not consider the following as grounds for granting a variance: 
(1)  The use of land or structures in the city that are not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter; 
(2)  The fact that the property may be used more profitably. 
(d)  The Board of Adjustment, before granting a variance, shall make all of the following findings: 
(1)  There are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this chapter. This shall be construed to mean: 
a.  If the property owner complies with the provisions of this chapter, he can secure no reasonable return from, nor make reasonable use of, his property; 
b.  The hardship results from the application of the requirements of this chapter; 
c.  The hardship is suffered by the applicant's property; 
d.  The hardship is not the result of the applicant's own actions; 
e.  The hardship is peculiar to the applicant's property. 
(2)  The variance is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter and preserves its spirit. 
(3)  In granting of the variance, the public safety and welfare have been ensured and substantial justice has been done. 
(4)  The reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of a variance, and that the variance is the minimum one that will make possible the reasonable use of land or structures. 
(e)  The Board of Adjustment, in granting a variance, may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which a variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 19-12, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 30-13. - Amendments. 
(a)  The City Council shall have the authority to amend the text of this chapter. However, under no circumstances shall the city amend, supplement or change these regulations so as to cause them to violate 15A NC Admin. Code 2B.0258, as adopted and amended by the state Environmental Management Commission. 
(b)  Any amendment to the text may be initiated by the City Council, the staff, and any citizen or agent thereof upon filing an official petition, including a complete application. 
(c)  A petition for amendment to the text of this chapter shall consist of: 
(1)  A completed application form. 
(2)  A written justification for the requested amendment including consistency of the proposal with the state rule. 
(3)  All appropriate fees. 
(4)  Any other information deemed necessary by the Public Works Director. 
(d)  NC DWQ review and approval. All text amendments shall be submitted to the North Carolina Division of Water Quality (NC DWQ) for formal review and approval. The effective date of any amendment to this chapter shall not be set earlier than the date such amendment is approved by the NC DWQ. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 19-13, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 30-14. - New subdivisions. 
    Storm drainage systems in any new subdivision shall be the entire and sole responsibility of the developer/property owner, except those natural streams, channels, ditches, branches and drainage outfall lines for which the city has accepted the responsibility for continuous maintenance. All new subdivisions shall have drainage systems installed by the developer/property owner in accordance with the city's Manual of Designs and Details. Any drainage ditch in a new subdivision which will require a 48-inch diameter or smaller pipe must be piped. Larger ditches and creeks may be left open. The required pipe size shall be determined by the engineer for the developer/property owner and approved by the Public Works Director. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 19-14, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 30-15. - Private property, other than new subdivisions. 
(a)  The city will participate with property owners in the installation of storm drains crossing private property in other than new subdivisions within the city's corporate limits under the following conditions: 
(1)  The storm drain to be installed will carry stormwater discharged from an existing city street dedicated for public purposes, including alleys, and accepted for maintenance by the city. 
(2)  The property owners will furnish the city, without cost therefor, a duly signed and good and sufficient statement of interest and petition, conveying to the city perpetual permission to enter and cross their property as necessary for the purpose of doing any and all types of work related to correcting and maintaining the storm drain, as the city sees fit. 
(3)  The shortest distance in which the city will participate in the installation of storm drainage will be one (1) city block; any shorter distances than one (1) block must be deemed feasible by the Public Works Director before city participation. Any application of storm drainage must be signed by one hundred (100) percent of the affected residents within the project proposed. 
(4)  All pipe sizes, structural accessories, discharge points and other specifications shall be as determined by the Public Works Director. 
(5)  The city will furnish all labor and equipment and the adjoining property owners will pay for all materials for construction. These materials shall be as determined necessary by the Public Works Director and shall include headwalls, manholes, catchbasins and all other structures normal to a complete storm drainage system. All monies for materials must be deposited by property owners before construction is started. 
(6)  Cost for each property owner shall be determined by dividing the total cost of materials by the total frontage of property owners adjoining the proposed pipe locations directly and multiplying the result by the footage of each individual owner to determine his share of the cost; or by dividing the cost of materials by the total square footage of land area directly served by the proposed pipe locations and multiplying the result by the square footage of each individual owner. The decision of the City Council, regarding which of the preceding formulas most equitably apportions cost, shall be final. 
(7)  All storm drainage construction on private property shall be on a low priority and shall be done on a scheduled basis so as not to interfere with other city projects and then only as budgeted funds of the city are available. 
(8)  The city will not participate in the construction of any storm drainage systems which will require a pipe size larger than eighteen (18) inches due to the greatly increased cost of labor, equipment and engineering and engineering required due to the use of box culverts, paved channels and other types of solutions. 
(b)  Storm drainage crossing private property, which does not carry storm drainage from any existing city street dedicated for public street purposes and accepted for maintenance by the city, is the responsibility of the property owners and the city will not participate in the installation of storm drains therefore. 
(c)  No action or inaction of the city, pursuant to the policy established by this section, shall impose upon the city, its agents, officers or employees any responsibility of liability of any kind, past or future, relating to any person or property. The petitioners shall agree to covenant to and hold the city harmless from any death, personal injury or property damage resulting from the work. No such action by the city shall be considered as a taking or appropriation of any stream, drain or ditch as a part of the city's drainage system. 
(d)  The conditions set forth in this section shall be binding on the heirs, successors, assigns and grantees of the petitioners. 
(e)  Nothing herein shall be construed, interpreted or applied in a manner to mean the city will participate in any way in the construction of any box culvert or other structure to be built or constructed in place. The applications of this resolution to the piping of streams shall be restricted, in all instances, to that drainage where precast or preassembled pipe will be of sufficient capacity, as calculated by the Public Works Director, for the piping and enclosing herein mentioned and contemplated. 
(f)  Nothing herein shall be construed, interpreted or applied in such manner as to aid or assist in the subdivision or development of property in the city. The policy set out herein shall be applicable only to those properties for which no new subdivision or development is anticipated as planned. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 19-15, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 30-16. - Illicit discharges and connections. 
(a)  No person shall cause or allow the discharge, emission, disposal, pouring or pumping directly or indirectly to any stormwater conveyance, the waters of the state or upon the land in such proximity to the same (such that the substance is likely to reach a stormwater conveyance or the waters of the state), any fluid, solid, gas or other substance, other than stormwater; provided that nonstormwater discharges associated with the following activities, provided that they do not significantly impact water quality: 
(1)  Filter backwash and drainage associated with swimming pools, providing that the water has been dechlorinated. 
(2)  Filter backwash and draining associated with raw water intake screening and filtering devices. 
(3)  Condensate from residential or commercial air conditioning. 
(4)  Residential vehicle cleaning. 
(5)  Flushing and hydrostatic testing water associated with utility distribution system. 
(6)  Discharges associated with emergency removal and treatment activities, for hazardous materials, authorized by federal, state or local government on-scene coordinator. 
(7)  Uncontaminated groundwater (including the collection or pumping of springs, wells or rising groundwater and groundwater generated by well construction or other construction activities). 
(8)  Collected infiltrated stormwater from foundation or footing drains. 
(9)  Collected groundwater and infiltrated stormwater from basement or crawlspace pumps. 
(10)  Irrigation water. 
(11)  Street washwater. 
(12)  Flow from firefighting. 
(13)  Discharges from the pumping or draining of natural watercourses or water bodies. 
(14)  Flushing and cleaning of stormwater conveyances with unmodified potable water. 
(15)  Washwater from the cleaning of exterior of buildings, including gutters; provided the discharge does not pose an environmental or health threat. 
(16)  Other nonstormwater discharges for which a valid NPDES discharge permit has been approved and issued by the Department of Environmental Management, and provided any such discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system shall be authorized by the city. 
(b)  Prohibited substances include but are not limited to: oil, antifreeze, chemicals, animal waste, paints, garbage and litter. 
(c)  Connections to a stormwater conveyance or stormwater conveyance system which allow the discharge of nonstormwater, other than the exclusions described in this section, are unlawful. Prohibited connections include but are not limited to: floor drains, wastewater from washing machines or sanitary sewers, washwater from commercial vehicle washing or steam cleaning and wastewater from septic systems. 
(d)  Where connections exist in violation of this chapter and said connections were made prior to the adoption of this provision or any other ordinance prohibiting such connections, the property owner or the person using said connection shall remove the connection within one (1) year following application of this regulation; provided this grace period shall not apply to connections which may result in the discharge of hazardous materials or other discharges which pose an immediate threat to health and natural resources, wildlife or habitat. 
(e)  Where it is determined that a connection: 
(1)  May result in the discharge of hazardous materials or may pose an immediate threat to health and safety or is likely to result in immediate injury and harm to real or personal property, natural resources, wildlife or habitat. 
(2)  Was made in violation of any applicable regulation or ordinance. 
(f)  The Public Works Director or his designee shall designate the time within which the connection shall be removed. In setting the time limit for compliance, the city shall take into consideration: 
(1)  The quantity and complexity of the work. 
(2)  The consequences of delay. 
(3)  The potential harm to the environment, to the public health and to public and private property. 
(4)  The cost of remedying the damage. 
(g)  Building permits are issued by the Inspections Department for connection to or modification of storm sewers located in city-owned rights-of-way. 
(h)  Spills or leaks of polluting substances discharged to or having the potential to be indirectly transported to the stormwater conveyance system shall be contained, collected and removed promptly. All affected areas shall be restored to their preexisting condition. 
(i)  Persons associated with the spill or leak shall immediately notify the city Fire Chief or his designee of all spills or leaks of polluting substances. Notification shall not relieve any person of any expenses related to restoration, loss, damage or any other liability which may be incurred as a result of said spill or leak, nor shall such notification relieve any person from other liability which may be imposed by state or other law. 
(j)  As the city's Operations Center operates 24 hours a day, it shall serve as the city's illegal discharge hotline. Individuals may also contact the Office of Public Works during normal working hours to report illegal discharges. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 19-16, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 30-17. - Authority to enter. 
(a)  Any authorized city personnel shall be permitted to enter upon public or private property for the purposes of observation, inspection, sampling, monitoring, testing, surveying and measuring compliance. Should the owner or occupant of any property refuse to permit such reasonable access, the Public Works Director or his designee shall proceed to obtain an administrative search warrant, pursuant to G.S. 15-27.2 or its successor. 
(b)  No person shall obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while carrying out his official duties. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 19-17, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 30-18. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  Any architect, engineer, contractor, agent or any other person who allows, acts in concert, participates, directs or assists directly or indirectly in the creation of a violation of this chapter shall be subject to civil penalties as follows: 
(1)  For first time offenders, if the quantity of the discharge is equal to or less than five (5) gallons and consist of domestic or household products in quantities considered ordinary for household purposes, said person shall be assessed a civil penalty not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation or per day for any continuing violation. If the quantity of the discharge is greater than five (5) gallons or contains nondomestic substances, including, but not limited to, process wastewater; or if said person cannot provide clear and convincing evidence of the volume and nature of the substance discharged, said person shall be assessed a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or per day for any continuing violation. 
(2)  For repeat offenders, the amount of the penalty shall be double the amount assessed for the previous penalty, not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per violation or per day for any continuing violation. 
(3)  In determining the amount of the penalty, the City Manager or his designee shall consider: 
a.  The degree and extent of harm to the environment, the public health and public and private property. 
b.  The cost of remedying the damage. 
c.  The duration of the violation. 
d.  Whether the violation was willful. 
e.  The prior record of the person responsible for the violation in complying or failing to comply with this chapter. 
f.  The cost of enforcement to the public. 
g.  The amount of money saved by the violator through his or its noncompliance. 
(b)  Any person found with an illicit connection in violation of this chapter and any designer, engineer, contractor, agent or any other person who allows, acts in concert, participates, directs or assists directly or indirectly in the establishment of an illicit connection in violation of this chapter, shall be subject to civil penalties as follows: 
(1)  First time offenders shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day of continuing violation. 
(2)  Repeat violators shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day of continuing violation. 
(3)  In determining the amount of the penalty, the City Manager or his designee shall consider: 
a.  The degree and extent of harm to the environment, the public health and public and private property. 
b.  The cost of remedying the damage. 
c.  The duration of the violation. 
d.  Whether the violation was willful. 
e.  The prior record of the person responsible for the violation in complying or failing to comply with this chapter. 
f.  The cost of enforcement to the public. 
g.  The amount of money saved by the violator through his or its noncompliance. 
(4)  Procedures for assessing penalties, pursuant to illicit connections. Said penalties shall be assessed by the City Manager or his designee. No penalty shall be assessed until the person alleged to be in violation is served written notice of the violation by registered mail, certified mail (return receipt requested), or personal service. Refusal to accept the notice shall not relieve the violator of the obligation to pay the penalty. The notice shall describe the violation with particularity and specify the measures needed to come into compliance. The notice shall designate the time within which such measures must be completed. In setting the time limit for compliance, the city shall take into consideration: 
a.  The quantity and complexity of the work. 
b.  The consequences of delay. 
c.  The potential harm to the environment, the public health and public and private property. 
d.  The cost of remedying the damage. 
(5)  The notice shall warn that failure to correct the violation within the specified time period will result in the assessment of a civil penalty and/or other enforcement action. If after the allotted time period has expired and the violation has not been corrected, the penalty shall be assessed from the date of receipt of notice and each day of continuing violation thereafter shall constitute a separate violation under this section. 
(c)  Whenever it is determined that work is proceeding without a valid stormwater permit, that work is proceeding in a manner inconsistent with a valid stormwater permit, or that work while proceeding according to a valid permit is insufficient to meet the requirements of this chapter, the Public Works Director or his designee may issue a stop work order. The order shall be in writing, directed to the person doing the work and shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reasons therefore, and the conditions under which the work may be resumed. An appeal from a stop work order may be filed with the Public Works Director as set out herein. 
(d)  Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the Public Works Director or his designee, at any time, for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to comply with an approved permit. 
(2)  The discovery of false, incomplete, or erroneous information submitted as part of the permit application. 
(3)  Failure to allow reasonable and timely access to the property for any and all inspections deemed by the city to be necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(4)  The discovery that a permit was mistakenly issued. 
(e)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, any order issued pursuant to this chapter, or any approved stormwater permit shall be, in addition to all other remedies, subject to site restoration. The Public Works Director or his designee shall take into consideration the nature and extent of the violation, the impact upon the land, public health and safety and any other factors he deems necessary in determining whether or not restoration shall be required. If the Public Works Director or his designee determines that restoration is required, the violator shall restore all land, water, and vegetation affected by the violation to its condition prior to the violation, except whenever the prior condition is unknown or disputed, the Public Works Director or his designee shall determine the extent of restoration required. Whenever trees are removed in violation of this chapter, new trees shall be planted at a rate of nine (9) inches of tree circumference for every one hundred (100) square feet of disturbed area. All replacement trees shall be native woodland species suited to the growing conditions of the planting area. In setting the time limits for restoration, the Public Works Director or his designee shall take into account the quantity of work required, planting seasons, and the consequences of delay. 
(f)  Whenever a violation of this chapter for which a notice of violation has been sent remains uncorrected after the appeal rights of the violator have been forfeited or exhausted and such violation has been determined by the Public Works Director or his designee to be dangerous or prejudicial to the public health, the city shall have the authority to remove, abate, or remedy the violation. The expense of this action including administrative costs shall be billed to the person in violation of this chapter and, if not paid, shall be a lien upon the land or premises where the violation occurred and shall be collected as unpaid taxes. 
(g)  Penalties for depositing solid waste in streets, as outlined in section 30-23, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any person found to be in violation of section 30-23, pertaining to depositing solid waste in streets, shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). Violators shall be issued a written citation which must be paid to the office of the revenue collections division of the Finance Department within five (5) days. 
(2)  For the purpose of enforcement, each and every day the violation continues may be considered a new violation. 
(3)  Any violations of section 30-23 may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor, in accordance with G.S. 160A-175. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 19-18, 4-10-2006; Ord. No. 06-20, § 2, 8-14-2006) 
Sec. 30-19. - Other violations. 
    Any person found in violation of other provisions of this chapter, not specifically enumerated elsewhere, shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation or per day for any violation. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 19-19, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 30-20. - Payment/collection procedures. 
    Penalties shall be assessed by the City Manager or his designee. No penalty shall be assessed until the person alleged to be in violation is served written notice of the violation by registered mail, certified mail (return receipt requested), or personal service. Refusal to accept the notice shall not relieve the violator of the obligation to pay the penalty. The City Manager or designee shall make written demand for payment upon the person in violation. If the payment is not received within thirty (30) days after demand for payment is made, the matter shall be referred to the City Attorney for institution of a civil action in the name of the city, in the appropriate division of the General Court of Justice in the county for recovering the penalty. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 19-20, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 30-21. - Injunctive relief. 
    Whenever the Public Works Director has a reasonable cause to believe that any person is violating or threatening to violate this chapter, rule, regulation, order duly adopted or issued pursuant to this chapter or making connection to a stormwater conveyance or stormwater conveyance system other than in accordance with the terms, conditions and provisions of approval, the city may, either before or after the institution of any other action or proceeding authorized by the Code, institute a civil action in the name of the city for injunctive relief to restrain and abate the violation or threatened violation. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 19-21, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 30-22. - Criminal penalties. 
    Any person who knowingly or willfully violates any provision of this chapter, rule, regulation, order duly adopted or issued pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not longer that thirty (30) days. Each violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 19-22, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 30-23. - Depositing solid waste in streets prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to place any garbage, tree limbs, furniture, appliances, building material waste, grass trimmings, mulched yard waste or debris of any type in any portion of a paved street, including the curb and gutter, or upon any paved sidewalk or right-of-way area used as a sidewalk, or within a dirt street so as to cause a drainage blockage and/or hinder the water quality of the stormwater being discharged to waters of the state. The occupant, owner, tenant and/or contractor shall be considered as the party who places items listed in this section when those items are found violating this section and are adjacent to the occupant's property. 
(Ord. No. 06-20, § 1(19-31), 8-14-2006) 
Chapter 32 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Street improvements, art. V; sidewalks, art. VI. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; master plan, § 2-219 et seq.; purchasing, § 2-551 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 18; playing on streets and sidewalks, § 20-9; parks and recreation, ch. 22; solid waste, ch. 28; subdivisions, ch. 34; water and wastewater, ch. 38. 
State Law reference- Public works, G.S. ch. 133; roads and highways, G.S. ch. 136; special assessments, G.S. 160A-216 et seq.; streets, traffic and parking, G.S. 160A-296 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Damaging streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drag or run or cause to be dragged or run any harrow or other implement, engine, machine or tool upon any paved street of the city, which could reasonably be expected in any way to injure or cut the surface thereof. It shall also be unlawful to injure any dirt street in the same manner. 
(b)  No person shall drive a tractor or other self-propelling vehicle with metal lugs or other metal projections on the supporting wheels or drag harrow, disc harrow or other heavy vehicle of any kind whatsoever with metal supporting wheels, except smooth-tread wheels, over any hard-surface street or sidewalk, nor drive nor use any article or substance which will scar, break, tear or unusually damage the surface of such street or sidewalk. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any type of equipment or vehicle across concrete curb and gutter or sidewalks. Vehicles shall be driven, within public right-of-way, only on the street carriageway or driveways approved by the Director of Public Works. 
(d)  Any person placing or causing to be placed any dirt, debris or any material within the curb and gutter or street, will remove same immediately when notified by the city. In the event the dirt, debris or material is not moved immediately by the person placing or causing it to be placed, the city shall move it and charge all costs against the person. 
(e)  Any dirt, debris or material placed in the curb and gutter, storm sewer system or street, which washes in storm sewers systems, shall be removed by the city, and all costs incurred in removal shall be charged to the person placing or causing it to be placed there. Costs incurred in removing dirt, debris or any material from curb and gutter, streets or storm sewer systems shall become a lien against the property from which the dirt, debris or material came. 
(Code 1972, § 20-1; Code 1993, § 16-1) 
Sec. 32-2. - Planting trees on street rights-of-way. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided for herein, no tree, shrub or bush shall be planted on any street right-of-way. 
(b)  When, because of street widening, utility construction, drainage or other good reason, it is necessary to clear the right-of-way of any planting, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to move any plant on the street right-of-way in advance of the work to be done. 
(c)  The city, under the supervision of the City Manager, shall maintain all plantings within the street right-of-way in a reasonably safe condition and shall remove dangerous plantings and limbs from such right-of-way. Any person desiring to plant, rearrange or remove any plantings upon or within any street right-of-way shall prior to such planting, rearranging or removing secure a written permit therefor from the City Manager. The written permit shall designate the location, character of proposed planting or removal, or the nature of the proposed works. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the occupant of any lot abutting any street right-of-way to keep the sidewalks, if any, and the area between the property line and the curbline clean and free from weeds and other growth. 
(Code 1972, § 20-2; Code 1993, § 16-2) 
Sec. 32-3. - Obstructing streets and sidewalks. 
    No brick, stone, wood or other substances obstructing the free passage of persons and vehicles shall be placed or suffered to lie in any of the alleyways, streets or other routes of the city, nor shall any person place on or in any of the streets, sidewalks or alleyways of the city any boxes, crates, casks or barrels of any description or any other obstruction of any kind; provided, that any person erecting a building may with permission of the Director of Public Works place building material for immediate use on the streets in such a way as to not interfere with the usual traffic. 
(Code 1972, § 20-3; Code 1993, § 16-3) 
State Law reference- Obstructing highways and roads misdemeanor, etc., G.S. 136-90; establishment and control of streets; center and edge lines, G.S. 160A-296(a)(2). 
Sec. 32-4. - Discharging water on streets. 
    No person shall throw or cause to be thrown or discharged from his premises any water or wet substance sufficient to damage any part of the streets or alleys. 
(Code 1972, § 20-4; Code 1993, § 16-4) 
Cross reference- Water and wastewater, ch. 38. 
Sec. 32-5. - Throwing or burning trash on street; trucks, wagons, etc., carrying trash. 
(a)  No paper, straw, lemon peel, banana peel, watermelon rind or any trash of any kind shall be thrown or swept upon any sidewalk or street of the city, nor shall any trash, refuse or rubbish be burned thereon. 
(b)  All trucks, trailers, wagons and other vehicles traveling the streets of the city shall be loaded in such fashion that no part of their contents or load will be discharged or scattered therefrom onto the public streets or rights-of-way of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 20-5; Code 1993, § 16-5) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 18; solid waste, ch. 28. 
Sec. 32-6. - Damaging lights, signs, etc. 
    No person shall injure, tamper with, remove or paint upon or deface any sign, signpost, streetlight, traffic signal or bulletin board or other municipal property upon the streets and sidewalks, except employees of the city in performance of their duties. 
(Code 1972, § 20-6; Code 1993, § 16-6) 
Sec. 32-7. - Obtaining dirt, gravel, etc., from streets. 
    No person shall dig, scrape up or carry away gravel, dirt, rocks or sand from any street or ground belonging to the city. 
(Code 1972, § 20-7; Code 1993, § 16-7) 
Sec. 32-8. - Damaging bridges, culverts, etc. 
    No person shall injure, deface or tamper with any part of any bridge, culvert, ditch and drain or other property belonging to or used by the city or shall place any obstruction in any culvert, ditch or drain to prevent the free flow of water on or over the streets of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 20-8; Code 1993, § 16-8) 
Sec. 32-9. - Playing ball on streets or sidewalks. 
    No person shall play ball on any of the streets or sidewalks of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 20-9; Code 1993, § 16-9) 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, ch. 22. 
Sec. 32-10. - Posting signs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to post any bill, poster or sign upon any of the city's utility poles, wherever located, or upon a tree located within the street rights-of-way. 
(Code 1972, § 20-10; Code 1993, § 16-10; Ord. No. 92-12, § 1, 8-31-1992; Ord. No. 97-13, 7-14-1997) 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, ch. 16. 
Sec. 32-11. - Distributing notices and posters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any written or printed notices or posters of any kind upon any public street or alley or in yards, automobiles or lots. 
(b)  All persons who shall carry or send out written or printed notices or posters shall be required to deliver them to the occupants of houses or else place them under the front door. 
(Code 1972, § 20-11; Code 1993, § 16-11) 
Sec. 32-12. - Street barricades-Driving through. 
    No person shall drive any motor vehicle or any vehicle of any kind into or upon any alley or street in the city when such street or alley has been barricaded by an employee of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 20-15; Code 1993, § 16-12) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 18. 
Sec. 32-13. - Street barricades-Removal. 
    No person other than a properly authorized employee of the city shall remove, tear down or destroy any barricade which has been erected by the city. 
(Code 1972, § 20-16; Code 1993, § 16-13) 
Sec. 32-14. - Parades. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Parade. 
(1)  The term "parade" means as an assemblage of more than five (5) vehicles or twenty-five (25) pedestrians in a public procession along the streets of the city. 
(2)  The term "parade" shall not include funeral processions, sightseeing groups or bands or marching groups proceeding to the assembly point to participate in a parade. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to inaugurate, promote or participate in any parade over the streets of the city, except as herein provided. Parades may be held in conformity with the following requirements: 
(1)  No parades or parts thereof may be upon the streets of the city between the hours of 5:30 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
(2)  No parades conducted in the city may last longer than one (1) hour from the time such parades actually begin. 
(3)  No more than one (1) parade may be conducted during any one (1) calendar day. 
(4)  Parade routes must be approved by the Chief of Police. 
(5)  Parades may not be conducted until a permit therefor has been secured from the Chief of Police, and the application for permit shall be made at least five (5) days before the date on which the parade is to be held. The Chief of Police shall issue a permit if it appears that the parade will be held in conformity herewith, but may stop and disperse a parade conducted in violation of this section even though a permit therefor has been issued by him. 
(6)  The Chief of Police, when expressly authorized and directed by the City Council or City Manager, shall have the authority and duty to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade or at the point of assembly or dispersal of a parade for a period of from three (3) hours before its commencement to one (1) hour after its dispersal. The Chief of Police shall post signs to such effect and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this section. 
(Code 1972, § 20-17; Code 1993, § 16-14) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 18; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 20. 
Sec. 32-15. - Sidewalk assemblies. 
    All persons are forbidden from assembling or collecting and standing so as to obstruct any sidewalk or street and all persons so collecting and standing shall disperse and move upon the demand of any police officer. All persons are forbidden from assembling or collecting and standing so as to obstruct the entrance, exit or fire escape of any building in the city whether privately or publicly owned. 
(Code 1972, § 20-18; Code 1993, § 16-15) 
Sec. 32-16. - Tree trimmings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or allow to be placed any tree trimmings or shrubbery on any street or sidewalk, except as provided in section 32-2. 
(Code 1972, § 20-19; Code 1993, § 16-16) 
Sec. 32-17. - Awnings. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or tenant of any building to allow framework of awnings to extend over any part of the sidewalk at less than eight (8) feet above the sidewalk. The flap shall be not less than seven (7) feet above the sidewalk. 
(Code 1972, § 20-20; Code 1993, § 16-17) 
Sec. 32-18. - Signs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hang or suspend any sign at less than eight (8) feet from the ground over or above the sidewalks or streets. Such sign shall be kept securely fastened at all times. 
(Code 1972, § 20-21; Code 1993, § 16-18) 
Sec. 32-19. - Maintenance and inspection of utility poles. 
    It shall be the duty of the owners of all poles supporting electric, telephone or telegraph wires to keep same in a safe condition and, for that purpose, to inspect the same once every five (5) years. 
(Code 1972, § 20-22; Code 1993, § 16-19) 
Sec. 32-20. - Snow and ice removal. 
    Every occupant of a store building, in front of which the sidewalk is paved with stone, brick, asphalt, cement or other permanent surfacing material, shall remove snow, ice or other obstruction from such sidewalk at the earliest possible time and as soon as the weather permits. 
(Code 1972, § 20-23; Code 1993, § 16-20) 
Sec. 32-21. - Demonstrations on city property. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Demonstration means a public assembly the primary purpose of which: 
(1)  Is expressive activity or the communication or expression of views. 
(2)  Is engaged in by more than 75 persons and the conduct of which has the effect, intent, or propensity to draw a crowd or onlookers. 
Demonstrations will occur upon any city street, sidewalk, or alley without compliance with the normal and customary traffic regulations or controls governing such places. 
(b)  No person or entity shall conduct or hold a demonstration on city property without first obtaining an application/permit from the city. A nonrefundable fee, in an amount as established from time to time by ordinance, must accompany the application. 
(Ord. No. 06-16, § 1(16-21), 6-19-2006) 
Sec. 32-22. - Sound amplification. 
    No person shall use or operate a sound amplification device that emits sounds audible within a public street or other outdoor place without a valid sound amplification application/permit. It is an exception to the requirements of this section that the sound amplification system does not produce a sound that is in violation of section 20-6. A nonrefundable fee, in an amount as established from time to time by ordinance, must accompany the application/permit. 
(Ord. No. 06-16, § 1(16-22), 6-19-2006) 
Sec. 32-23. - Street closing permits. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful to close any public street unless a street closing permit therefor has been issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Any street closing permit may be issued subject to terms and conditions as are determined to be necessary and proper for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Any street closed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall, at all times, have a fifteen-foot wide emergency vehicle lane, which lane shall extend throughout the closed area of the street and beyond to the next intersection in both direction. Said lane, shall be at all times kept clear of all obstructions to provide emergency vehicular access. A nonrefundable fee, in an amount as established from time to time by ordinance, must accompany the application/permit. 
(Ord. No. 06-16, § 1(16-23), 6-19-2006) 
Sec. 32-24. - Fees for parades, demonstrations, sound amplification, and street closings. 
(a)  Permit fees for parades, demonstrations, sound amplification, and street closings shall be as established from time to time by ordinance. 
(b)  The Chief of Police or his designee shall be authorized to issue permits for the following reasons: parades, demonstrations, amplification, and street closings. The Chief of Police or his designee shall issue the permit if it appears that such activity will be held in accordance with all state and local laws or ordinances. 
(c)  If a permit is issued for the combination of any two (2) or more activities specified in subsection (a) of this section; only one (1) fee, the highest of the combination shall be assessed. Applications of such permits must be made at least five (5) days before the event is to be held. All fees will be nonrefundable. 
(Ord. No. 06-15, § 4, 6-19-2006) 
Secs. 32-25-32-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Establishment and control of streets; center and edge lines, G.S. 160A-296. 

Sec. 32-50. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dig any hole, ditch or excavation of any kind whatsoever on any street, sidewalk and/or public right-of-way in the city without first securing a permit therefor in writing from the Director of Public Works or his designee. 
(Code 1972, § 20-24; Code 1993, § 16-36; Ord. No. 13-3, §§ 1, 2, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 32-51. - Sidewalk construction permit. 
    No sidewalk or street of any description shall be built by any individual, firm or corporation without a written permit from the Director of Public Works. Such construction shall be in accordance with plans and specifications established by the Director. 
(Code 1972, § 20-25; Code 1993, § 16-37) 
Sec. 32-52. - Restoration of surface. 
    All openings made in any street or sidewalk under the provisions herein contained shall immediately, upon the completion of the work, be filled in and the surface thereof made flush with the adjacent surfaces. Any hard surface, macadam or asphalt removed shall be replaced by the city at the expense of the applicant granted permission to open such street or sidewalk, unless such construction is authorized by the Director of Public Works under such standards as he may specify. 
(Code 1972, § 20-26; Code 1993, § 16-38) 
Sec. 32-53. - Compliance with safety, traffic regulations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person making an excavation for any purpose whatsoever to fail to comply with all federal occupational safety and health administration safety regulations and the federal manual on uniform traffic control. 
(Code 1972, § 20-27; Code 1993, § 16-39) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 18. 
Sec. 32-54. - Construction near sidewalks. 
    Before building or remodeling at any place where the same is in close proximity to the sidewalk, a passageway shall be constructed so as to leave the sidewalk unobstructed and provide safe and easy passage for pedestrians. Such passageway shall be covered if deemed necessary by the Director of Public Works for the protection of persons and property. 
(Code 1972, § 20-28; Code 1993, § 16-40) 
Secs. 32-55-32-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ACCEPTANCE OF NEW STREETS AND STREET NAMES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Building setback lines, G.S. 160A-306; curb cut regulations, G.S. 160A-307. 

Sec. 32-82. - General policy. 
    New streets accepted by the city for maintenance must be reasonably complete and usable before the city accepts them. The city's problem is one of maintenance and not one of construction or reconstruction. 
(Code 1972, § 20-29; Code 1993, § 16-56) 
Sec. 32-83. - Approval of development plan. 
    Owners or developers of any proposed new development must present to the city a complete plan thereof and secure the city's approval of the layout before the city will agree to take over the completed streets of the development for maintenance. 
(Code 1972, § 20-30; Code 1993, § 16-57) 
Sec. 32-84. - Grading and drainage. 
(a)  The plan must provide for the owners or developers to do proper grading and install adequate pipe culverts for surface drainage in the construction of the streets so that they will properly serve the area. 
(b)  The grading of the proposed streets must be sufficient to leave them reasonably smooth, to provide side ditches of proper size and grade and to provide a street cross section (commonly referred to as a crown) which will drain all water from the street into side ditches. The side ditches must be adequate to carry stormwater running off the adjacent property when this property slopes toward the street. 
(Code 1972, § 20-31; Code 1993, § 16-58) 
Sec. 32-85. - Storm sewers. 
    Any required drainage across proposed streets or at intersections to provide for streams or stormwater must have adequate pipe culverts of sufficient size installed to carry the expected flows based on the drainage area tributary to the pipe. 
(Code 1972, § 20-32; Code 1993, § 16-59) 
Sec. 32-86. - Street improvements. 
(a)  All future street paving projects shall include curbs and gutters; and under normal conditions, no streets will be paved, except upon petition signed by a majority of the abutting property owners owning a majority of the front footage abutting the paving project. On all streets which have previously been paved without curbs and gutters, the city will accept petitions calling for curbs and gutters only. 
(b)  The responsibility for the cost of the street improvements specified in subsection (a) of this section is as follows: The city will pay the entire cost of street intersections. 
(c)  All street improvements, except as provided in the city Charter, to all streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters will be accomplished under G.S. 160A-216 et seq. The city will not accept a petition under G.S. 160A-217 unless such petition shall provide that the abutting property owners will pay at least sixty (60) percent of the cost of the proposed improvements, excluding the cost of street intersection. 
(Code 1972, § 20-33; Code 1993, § 16-60) 
Sec. 32-87. - Naming of streets. 
    The City Council shall have power to designate the names of city streets. A record of such designations shall be made in the minutes of the meeting of the City Council. A copy of such minutes showing such designations shall be made available to the Director of Public Works, who shall be responsible for maintaining an official and up-to-date map of the city showing names of the city streets as so designated and who shall be responsible for maintaining a file of his copy of the minutes of the City Council showing such designations. 
(Code 1972, § 20-34; Code 1993, § 16-61) 
Sec. 32-88. - Renaming streets. 
(a)  Authority of City Council. Any petition seeking to rename any street, road, or portion thereof within the city limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city must first be approved by proper resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  Procedure. 
(1)  Filing of petition. A petition to rename a street, road, or portion thereof may be obtained from the City Clerk and must be completed and filed with the City Clerk not less than forty (40) working days, excluding holidays, prior to the next regular meeting date of the City Council, by any one of the following: 
a.  The Planning Board; 
b.  Any department of the city; 
c.  The City Council; or 
d.  The owner of sixty (60) percent or more of the lots, which directly abut the subject street, road, or portion thereof proposed for renaming. The term "owner," when used within this section, shall constitute the person, firm or corporation as the same is listed in the county tax records and referenced by deed description on the applicable parcel card. Where doubt exists as to the ownership of any individual lot, the owner of such lands shall provide evidence to the City Council. Where a lot is held jointly, in common with others, or in any other form of multiple ownership, all the owners having title or interest in such lot must sign the petition. 
(2)  Public Hearing. When the City Clerk finds a petition in compliance with minimum submission standards, a public hearing shall be scheduled and conducted at the next available regular City Council meeting following proper notice. 
(3)  Notice. The procedures for notice are as follows: 
a.  The city shall publish notice of the public hearing in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. Such notice shall be published twice, the first time not less than ten (10) days prior to the public hearing date. 
b.  In addition, the city shall notify by certified mail all the owner of lands which abut the subject street, road, or portion thereof proposed for renaming, except those owner who are party to the petition. The petition submission agent, as representative of the petitioners, shall also be notified in accordance with this subsection. Such notice shall be sent not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled public hearing date. Failure to notify all owner shall not affect the validity of any action taken, provided due diligence has been exercised in the attempt to provide this notice. 
c.  Lastly, the city shall post notice of the proposed renaming at two (2) locations within the right-of-way of the subject street, road, or portion thereof. Such notice shall be posted not less than ten (10) days prior to the public hearing date. 
(4)  Recordation. Upon adoption by the City Council of any resolution renaming any street, road, or portion thereof, the City Clerk shall record the resolution in the office of the Beaufort County Register of Deeds. The name so changed shall thereafter be the legal name of the street, road, or portion thereof. 
(c)  Evaluation criteria. The City Council shall consider the following criteria when evaluating any petition for the renaming of a street, road, or portion thereof. 
(1)  The ease of giving directions to persons seeking to locate addresses; 
(2)  Historical or other worthy significance; 
(3)  Pronunciation and spelling. Proposed street names which are longer than fourteen (14) characters should generally only be used to honor individuals, events, or locations of local, state, national, or international importance; 
(4)  The expense to abutting property owners and to affected governmental agencies, including, but not limited to, the city, the county, North Carolina Department of Transportation, and United States Postal Service; and 
(5)  Any other good and just reason. 
(d)  Extension. Upon annexation by the city or extension of the extraterritorial jurisdiction, city street names shall be extended to the new city limits and the appropriate action taken in accordance therewith. 
(Code 1993, § 16-62; Ord. No. 99-12, 9-13-1999) 
Sec. 32-89. - Authority of city; determination by Director of Public Works. 
    Any procedure or policy not outlined in this article shall be left to the discretion of the city, and the Director of Public Works shall determine when and whether the provisions for taking over any proposed street have been met. 
(Code 1972, § 20-35; Code 1993, § 16-63; Ord. No. 99-12, 9-13-1999) 
Chapter 34 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Corporate boundaries, § 1.3; extraterritorial powers, art. VIII. 
Cross reference- Planning Board, § 2-176 et seq.; master plan, § 2-219 et seq.; electric utility, ch. 10; licenses and business regulations, ch. 16; streets and sidewalks, ch. 32; water and wastewater, ch. 38; zoning, ch. 40. 
State Law reference- Plats and subdivisions; mapping requirements, G.S. 47-30 et seq.; Coastal Area Management Act of 1974, G.S. 113A-100 et seq.; general laws supplemental to city charters, G.S. 160A-3; territorial jurisdiction, G.S. 160A-360; planning boards, G.S. 160A-361 et seq.; subdivision regulation, G.S. 160A-371 et seq.; compliance of subdivision streets with minimum standards of board of transportation required of developers, G.S. 136-102.6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  Usage. 
(1)  The numbers, abbreviations, terms and words used in these regulations shall be used, interpreted, and defined as this article provides; words or terms not defined shall have their customary dictionary definition. Words or terms defined in other articles shall have the definitions provided in that article. 
(2)  Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the plural number include the singular; words used in the singular include the plural; the term "herein" means "in these regulations; "the term "regulations" means "these regulations." Words of any gender shall be applicable to all genders. 
(3)  The term "person" includes a corporation, a partnership, and an incorporated or unincorporated association of persons, such as, a club; The term "shall" is always mandatory; the term "may" is permissive; the term "building" includes a "structure;" a building or structure includes any part thereof. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a strip of land, owned publicly or privately, set aside primarily for utility service at the backside of properties, otherwise abutting a street. 
    Building setback line means the line on the front, rear, and sides of a lot which delineates the area within which a structure may be built and maintained. 
    City Planner means the individual designated by the City Manager as responsible for the development and implementation of this subdivision chapter. This individual is the person to whom the property owner or their agents submit subdivision plans for approval. This person is responsible for the coordination of the subdivision review process. The City Planner may designate a person in the department, with prior approval from the City Manager, for assistance in carrying out the duties and responsibilities of the subdivision process. 
    Common open space means land designated by plat for the use, benefit and enjoyment of all residents, and the developer or homeowners shall not place age, race, sex or unreasonable economic restrictions upon the use of said open space. 
    Construction plans means engineering details and specifications for the provision of necessary and/or required facilities and improvements. Such facilities and improvements may include, but not be limited to, public and private streets, water, sanitary sewer and storm drainage systems. 
    Corner lot means a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection. 
    Cul-de-sac means a street with one (1) end open to traffic, and the other end of which is permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
    Double frontage lots means a continuous (through) lot of the same depth as the width of a block and which is accessible from both of the streets upon which it fronts. 
    Drainage means the removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading or other means. 
    Drainage system means the system through which water flows from the land, including all watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands. 
    Driveway means a paved or unpaved area used for ingress or egress of vehicles and allowing access from a street to a building or other structure or facility. 
    Easement means a grant by the property owner for use by the public, a corporation or person of a strip of land for specific reasons. 
    Extraterritorial jurisdiction means the area beyond the corporate limits within which the planning, zoning, and building regulations of the City of Washington apply in accordance with state law. Such area is delineated on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Washington. 
    Final plat means the final map of all, or a portion, of a subdivision which is presented for final approval. 
    Group development means a development containing three (3) or more building sites where the total amount of the development area equals the zoning requirements, but where individual building sites within the development may be less than the standard zoning minimum lot size. 
    Homeowners association means a community association, other than a condominium association, which is organized in a development in which individual owners share common interests in open space or facilities. The association usually holds title to certain common property, manages and maintains the common property, and enforces certain covenants and restrictions. 
    Island means a raised area, usually curbed, placed to guide traffic and separate lanes, or used for landscaping, signing, or lighting. 
    Lot means a parcel of land under single ownership, occupied or capable of being occupied by a principal building together with its accessory buildings, including the open space required under the terms of this chapter. 
    Lot of record means a lot which is a part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of Beaufort County, prior to the adoption of this chapter, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
    Main means any system of continuous piping, the principal artery of the system to which branches may be connected. 
    Major thoroughfare means any street, road or highway so designated in the official thoroughfare plan of the city. 
    Manual of Standard Designs and Details means a supplement to this chapter. Such supplement contains engineering designs and details relative to plat layout, storm drainage design, sedimentation control, basins, pipes, manholes, ending walls and retaining walls, street standards, pavement design, ground cover, driveways, parking, stormwater detention and other uniform design standards. 
    Minor subdivision plat means subdivision plat classified in the following manner: 
(1)  Involving lots fronting on an existing and/or approved street. In interpretation of this definition, the term "lot fronting" shall be construed to include condominium and townhouse developments which share common areas; 
(2)  Not involving the dedication or extension of any public street; 
(3)  Not involving the extension of public sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or water lines; 
(4)  Not involving the creation of residual parcels or lots. 
The Subdivision Review Board has the authority to approve minor subdivision plats and final plats containing five (5) or less lots. 
    Minor thoroughfare means any street, road or highway so designated in the official thoroughfare plan of the city. 
    Official maps or plans means any maps, or plans, officially adopted by the City Council as a guide for the development of the city and surrounding area. The term "official maps or plans" also means any maps or plans officially adopted by the City of Washington as a guide for the development of the city, consisting of maps, charts, and/or other approved documents. 
    Planned unit development means a contiguous area to be planned and developed as a single entity containing one (1) or more residential clusters or planned unit residential developments and one or more public, quasi-public, commercial or industrial areas in such ranges of ratios of nonresidential uses to residential uses as shall be specified. 
    Planning Board means that body created by City Council and specified in chapter 2, article IX of the City of Washington Code, pursuant to G.S. 160A-361, to act as a planning agency for the City Council on planning and zoning matters within the City of Washington's extraterritorial planning and zoning jurisdiction. 
    Plat means a map or plan of a parcel of land which is to be, or has been, subdivided or any existing parcel of land. 
    Preliminary plat means a map indicating the proposed design of a development and related information that is submitted for preliminary approval. 
    Public or community sewage system means a single system of sewage collection, treatment, and disposal owned and operated by a sanitary district, a metropolitan sewage district, a water and sewer authority, a county or municipality, or a public utility. 
    Public water system means a system for the provision to the public of piped water for human consumption, if such system has at least fifteen (15) service connections or regularly serves at least twenty-five (25) yearround residents. 
    Restricted covenant means a restriction on the use of land usually set forth in the deed. The restrictive covenant usually runs with the land and is binding upon subsequent owners of the property, and not regulated by the city. 
    Septic system means an underground system with a septic tank used for the decomposition of domestic wastes. 
    Septic tank means a watertight receptacle that receives the discharge of sewage. 
    Setback line means the distance between the street right-of-way line and the front line of a building or any projection thereof, excluding uncovered steps. 
    Sewer means any pipe conduit used to collect and carry away sewage or stormwater runoff from the generating source to treatment plants or receiving streams. 
    Single-tier lot means a lot which backs upon a limited access highway, a railroad, a physical barrier, or a nonresidential use and to which vehicular access from the rear is usually prohibited. 
    Sketch plan means a preliminary design of a development project that contains rough approximations about what a developer intends to do with a property. This plan should include estimates about the square footage of a development, where utility easements are to be placed, street placement, and show the general plans of the project. The plan is to be submitted to the Subdivision Review Board for review and assistance in dealing with problems that could possibly arise. The sketch plan review process is designed to make the preliminary plat design easier, and make it less time consuming to be passed. 
    Street means those areas delineated by dedicated rights-of-way or common property easements designed and constructed, as required by this chapter, for the purpose of carrying vehicular traffic to and from abutting property. 
    Street, approved, means public or private streets that have been platted pursuant to this chapter and of which construction has been completed and accepted or guaranteed. 
    Street, private, means streets that have been designated by easement and as such constitute public vehicular areas, as provided and regulated by applicable law. Such streets shall be constructed in accordance with the standards of this chapter and shall be maintained by the property owner or pursuant to recorded agreement. 
    Street, public, means streets that have been accepted for permanent maintenance by either the State of North Carolina or the City of Washington. 
    Subdivider means any person who subdivides or develops any land deemed to be a subdivision, as herein defined. 
    Subdivision. 
(1)  The term "subdivision" means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, building sites, or other divisions when any one (1) or more of those divisions is created for the purpose of sale or building development (whether immediate or future) and shall include all divisions of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets. 
(2)  The term "subdivision" shall not include the following nor be subject to the regulations authorized by this article: 
a.  The combination or recombination of portions of previously subdivided and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the municipality, as shown in its subdivision regulations. 
b.  The division of land into parcels greater than ten (10) acres, where no street right-of-way dedication is involved. 
c.  The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets or for public transportation system corridors. 
d.  The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is no greater than two (2) acres into not more than three (3) lots, where no street right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the municipality, as shown in its subdivision regulations. 
State Law reference- G.S. 160A-376(a) 
    Subdivision Review Board means the Board designated to review all sketch plans, make recommendations to developers concerning how to develop their property, educate developers about development regulations, and report their findings and suggestions to the owner or their agent. The Board will consist of the department heads, or their designees, from the Department of Planning and Development, the Electric Department, the Public Works Department, the Police Department, the Fire/Rescue Department and the Department of Parks and Recreation. The Subdivision Review Board can take the following action: The Subdivision Review Board has the authority to approve minor subdivision plats and final plats containing five (5) or less lots. 
    Thoroughfares means public streets designed and intended to carry volumes of traffic. Such streets are designated as either major or minor thoroughfares, as shown on the city Thoroughfare Plan, as amended. 
(Code 1972, § 21-1; Code 1993, § 17-5; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996; Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
State Law reference- Definition, G.S. 160A-376. 
Sec. 34-2. - Chapter citation. 
    This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the "Subdivision Ordinance for the City of Washington, North Carolina," and may be referred to as the subdivision ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 17-1) 
Sec. 34-3. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures and standards for the development and division of land within the corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community. To continue this interest, regulation of land by the city has the following purposes, among others: 
(1)  To encourage economically sound and stable development in the city, and its surrounding environs; 
(2)  To ensure the timely provision of required streets, utilities and other facilities and services to new land development; 
(3)  To ensure adequate provision of safe, convenient, vehicular and pedestrian traffic access and circulation in and through new land developments; 
(4)  To ensure provisions of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational and other public purposes, or the provision of funds in lieu of dedication; 
(5)  To ensure, in general, the wise and timely development of new areas in harmony with comprehensive plans as prepared and adopted by the city; 
(6)  To ensure accurate public records of land ownership and title transfer, the effective conduct of public and private business and the protection of private property rights; 
(7)  To provide for and protect the option of the consumer to use alternative energy sources by such means as protecting solar access to promote site planning and design, which demonstrates a concern for increased energy conservation in buildings and increased use of alternative energy systems; 
(8)  To prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid undue concentration of population; 
(9)  To ensure proper monument placement into subdivided land; 
(10)  To provide adequate light and air; 
(11)  To facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewer, schools, parks, playgrounds, and other public requirements including electrical distribution, cable television and telephone installations. 
(b)  These regulations are intended to provide for the harmonious development of the city and its environs, and in particular: 
(1)  For coordinating streets within new subdivisions with other existing planned streets or official adopted thoroughfare plan streets; 
(2)  For appropriate shapes and sizes of blocks and lots; 
(3)  For providing land for streets, school sites, and recreational areas and providing easements for utilities, other public facilities and services; 
(4)  For distribution of population and traffic which will tend to create conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience, prosperity or general welfare; 
(5)  Coordination of land use development for compliance with other federal and state agencies such as the N.C. Department of Environment and Natural Resources Division of Coastal Management, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Federal Emergency Management Agency, N.C. Department of Transportation, and the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(Code 1972, § 21-4; Code 1993, § 17-2; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-4. - Authority. 
    This chapter is enacted by the City Council, pursuant to the authority granted by G.S. 160A, art. 19, pt. 2 (G.S. 160A-371 et seq.). 
(Code 1972, § 21-2; Code 1993, § 17-3; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-5. - Jurisdiction. 
    The regulations contained herein, as provided in G.S. 160A-360, shall govern each and every subdivision within the jurisdiction of the city, as defined in section 40-4. Furthermore, the extraterritorial planning jurisdiction is specified in an adopted ordinance and has been drawn on a map and set forth in a written description, as amended. 
(Code 1972, §§ 21-3, 21-21; Code 1993, § 17-4; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
State Law reference- Territorial jurisdiction, G.S. 160A-360; general laws supplemental to city charters, G.S. ch. 160A-3. 
Sec. 34-6. - Compliance with official plans. 
(a)  When a tract to be subdivided includes any part of a thoroughfare, parkway, or boulevard designated on official maps and plans, such part of such proposed public way shall be platted and dedicated by the subdivider in the location and at the width specified. 
(b)  A tract to be subdivided shall be reviewed to determine if the development is consistent with the Coastal Area Management Act. Thus, prior to the submission of the final plat, certification shall be provided by the local permit officer that the subdivision is either within or without a North Carolina Coastal Area Management Act of 1974 (G.S. 113A-100 et seq.), Area of Environmental Concern. The Area of Environmental Concern (AEC) will be noted on the final map. The certification will appear under the notes on the final plat, as follows: 
(1)  This subdivision conforms to the standards of the North Carolina Coastal Area Management Act of 1974 and is not located within any area of environmental concern; or 
(2)  This subdivision conforms to the standards of the North Carolina Coastal Area Management Act of 1974 and a portion or all of the subdivision located within any area of environmental concern is duly noted at the appropriate location on final plat. 
(Code 1972, § 21-5; Code 1993, § 17-6; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
State Law reference- Coastal area management planning process, G.S. 113A-106 et seq. 
Sec. 34-7. - Coordination of subdivision regulations with other land use regulations. 
(a)  Regulations established herein are part of a coordinated system of land use rules governing land development and their uses. The subdivision regulations are coordinated with other land use regulations for compliance. Additional land use controls include, but are not limited to, the following: Beaufort County Health Department, Coastal Area Management Act, Federal Emergency Management Act, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control, Storm Water Management, and North Carolina Department of Transportation. 
(b)  Because of the number of land use regulations in effect, conflicts may arise in the administration of these regulations. Therefore, the more stringent limitation shall govern, except where specific exceptions are set forth in such regulations. 
(Code 1993, § 17-7) 
Sec. 34-8. - Recording of plats. 
    A copy of the approved subdivision ordinance shall be filed with the Beaufort County Register of Deeds. After the date of recordation, the Register of Deeds shall not file or record a subdivision plat located in the city or its extraterritorial planning and zoning jurisdiction without approval by the city. The landowner or an approved agent shall sign a statement on the plat acknowledging that the land being subdivided is located within the city's jurisdiction. Thus, a subdivision map recorded without approval by the city is in violation of this chapter and shall be null and void. 
(Code 1993, § 17-8) 
Sec. 34-9. - Planning Board to act in lieu of City Council. 
    The Planning Board shall act in lieu of City Council, as provided in G.S. 160A-373(3), concerning the approval of all final subdivision maps when the preliminary subdivision plat has been approved by the Planning Board and City Council. 
(Code 1993, § 17-9) 
Sec. 34-10. - Subdivision Review Board to act in lieu of the Planning Board. 
    The Subdivision Review Board shall act in lieu of the Planning Board concerning the approval of all minor subdivision plats. When a preliminary plat has been approved, the Subdivision Review Board shall approve a final subdivision plat submission containing five (5) or less lots. 
(Code 1993, § 17-10; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-11. - Transition regulations for developing property brought into extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(a)  Final subdivision plats. An approved and recorded final subdivision plat shall constitute evidence of compliance under the terms of G.S. 160A-360(i) for the purpose of subdividing property and constructing improvements required to obtain final plat approval under county standards, and shall confer the right to complete the subdivision under the county regulations governing the approved final plat; provided, all future construction and/or use of lots in the subdivision shall be in compliance with the zoning regulations of the city. 
(b)  Preliminary subdivision plats. A preliminary subdivision plat shall not constitute evidence of compliance under the terms of G.S. 160A-360(i) for the purpose of obtaining approval for a final plat. However, an opportunity to complete a subdivision as proposed on a preliminary plat will be available if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  A final subdivision plat meeting the rules for submission has been submitted to the county for final consideration on or before the date the property becomes subject to the regulations of the city. 
(2)  In the absence of a pending final plat, in accordance with subsection (b)(1) of this section, the owner/developer must present to the city adequate evidence of substantial investment in reliance on the preliminary plat, or those portions of a preliminary plat which have not been approved as phases under final plats. The City Planner shall determine whether substantial investment has been made, taking into consideration: 
a.  The percentage of the preliminary plat which has been constructed under approved final plats or is subject to a pending or approved final plat; 
b.  The extent to which a unified design for the entire subdivision is evident in the preliminary plat and any pending or approved final plats for phases of the preliminary plat, 
c.  The installation of subdivision improvements (including water, sewer or waste disposal, drainage, lighting, common areas, streets or roads); or 
d.  The construction or work toward construction of any improvements or amenities in the area subject to the preliminary plat. 
If the City Planner determines that there is a substantial investment in the preliminary plat, or that portion of the preliminary plat which is not covered by pending or approved final plats, the City Planner shall issue a written notice to the owner/developer confirming an opportunity to complete the subdivision as proposed on the preliminary plat. The opportunity to complete the subdivision or portions thereof in accordance with the preliminary plat shall be afforded notwithstanding noncompliance with the requirements of the approved subdivision regulations. An appeal from the decision of the City Planner may be taken to the Planning Board. 
(3)  A preliminary plat approved for completion under subsection (b)(2) of this section shall be valid for the period set forth by the approving jurisdiction or five (5) years, whichever is less. 
(4)  Any change to a preliminary plat approved for completion under subsection (b)(2) of this section shall be in compliance with the requirement of the approved subdivision regulations. Minor deviations may be approved by the City Planner where the approval of the deviation is in keeping with the general policy of this subsection (b). 
(5)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt or exclude applicable restrictions or requirements of the zoning chapter currently in effect, including, but not limited to, lot width, lot area, or street frontage. 
In the interpretation of the conditions stated above, the City Planner shall be guided by the general policy underlying these transition regulations for developing property brought into the extraterritorial jurisdiction. The general policy is to allow the completion under county regulations of those subdivisions which have been started under county regulations. The greater the investment in construction under previous regulations, and the greater the percentage of units constructed in accordance with the original design of the subdivision, the stronger the policy justification for allowing completion under the original design and preliminary plat. 
(Code 1993, § 17-11; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Secs. 34-12-34-27. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLATS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-28. - General procedures. 
(a)  No plat of a subdivision within the jurisdiction of the city shall be submitted for recordation to the Beaufort County Register of Deeds until final approval has been given by the city. The subdivider shall follow the requirements in this article to obtain final plat approval. 
(b)  No street shall be accepted and maintained by the city, nor shall any streetlighting, water, or sewer be extended to or connected with any subdivision of land; nor shall any permit be issued by any administrative agent or department of the city for the construction of any building or other improvement requiring a permit upon any land concerning which a plat is required to be approved unless, and until, the requirements set forth in this article have been complied with and the same approved by the City Council of the city. 
(c)  Pursuant to G.S. 160A-373, no final subdivision plat within the jurisdiction of the city shall be recorded by the Register of Deeds of the county until it has been approved by the Planning Board and the Subdivision Review Board as provided herein. To secure final plat approval, the subdivider shall follow the procedures and requirements established in this article and the Manual of Standard Designs and Details which is incorporated herein by reference. Copies of the Manual of Standard Designs and Details may be purchased from the Department of Planning and Development. 
(d)  Preliminary subdivision plats shall be approved by the Planning Board and City Council. Final subdivision plats shall be approved by the Planning Board. Minor and final subdivisions plats containing five (5) or less lots shall be approved by the Subdivision Review Board. However, the final subdivision plat should conform substantially to the approved preliminary plat or section thereof. If the final plat differs substantially from the approved preliminary plat, the subdivider will be required to resubmit the preliminary plat to the Planning Board and City Council for approval. 
(e)  The Planning Board and Subdivision Review Board shall meet in accordance with their adopted rules of procedure and the North Carolina Open Meetings Law. 
(f)  Decisions on approval or denial of preliminary or final plats may be made only on the basis of standards explicitly set forth in this chapter, pertaining to subdivisions or unified development ordinance. Whenever the provisions includes criteria for decision that require application of judgment, those criteria must provide adequate guiding standards for the entity charged with plat approval. 
(g)  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit any owner or its agent from entering into contracts to sell or lease by reference to an approved preliminary plat for which a final plat has not yet been properly approved under this chapter or recorded with the Register of Deeds, provided the contract does all of the following: 
(1)  Incorporates as an attachment a copy of the preliminary plat referenced in the contract and obligates the owner to deliver to the buyer a copy of the recorded plat prior to closing and conveyance. 
(2)  Plainly and conspicuously notifies the prospective buyer or lessee that a final subdivision plat has not been approved or recorded at the time of the contract, that no governmental body will incur any obligation to the prospective buyer or lessee with respect to the approval of the final subdivision plat, that changes between the preliminary and final plats are possible, and that the contract or lease may be terminated without breach by the buyer or lessee, if the final recorded plat differs in any material respect from the preliminary plat. 
(3)  Provides that if the approved and recorded final plat does not differ in any material respect from the plat referred to in the contract, the buyer or lessee may not be required by the seller or lessor to close any earlier than five (5) days after the delivery of a copy of the final recorded plat. 
(4)  Provides that if the approved and recorded final plat differs in any material respect from the preliminary plat referred to in the contract, the buyer or lessee may not be required by the seller or lessor to close any earlier than fifteen (15) days after the delivery of the final recorded plat, during which 15-day period the buyer or lessee may terminate the contract without breach or any further obligation and may receive a refund of all earnest money or prepaid purchase price. 
(h)  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit any owner or its agent from entering into contracts to sell or lease land by reference to an approved preliminary plat for which a final plat has not been properly approved under this chapter or recorded with the Register of Deeds where the buyer or lessee is any person who has contracted to acquire or lease the land for the purpose of engaging in the business of construction of residential, commercial, or industrial buildings on the land, or for the purpose of resale or lease of the land to persons engaged in that kind of business; provided no conveyance of that land may occur and no contract to lease it may become effective until after the final plat has been properly approved under this chapter and recorded with the Register of Deeds. The city shall provide notice which reads as follows: 
CITY OF WASHINGTON 
LEGAL NOTICE REGARDING PRESALE BY REFERENCE TO AN 
APPROVED PRELIMINARY PLAT 
A FINAL PLAT HAS NOT BEEN APPROVED FOR THIS PROPERTY under the City of Washington Subdivision Ordinance. Changes between the preliminary and final plat are possible. This contract does not obligate the City of Washington with respect to approval of a final plat. A copy of the approved preliminary plat is attached hereto and a copy of the final recorded plat will be delivered to the buyer prior to closing. This contract may be terminated by the buyer or the lessee without breach if the final recorded plat differs in any material respect from the preliminary plat. 
If the approved and recorded final plat does not differ in any material respect from the preliminary plat attached hereto, the buyer or lessee is not required to close this transaction any sooner than five days after delivery of a copy of the recorded final plat. 
If the approved and recorded final plat does differ in any material respect from the preliminary plat attached hereto, the buyer or lessee is not required to close this transaction any sooner than fifteen days after the delivery of a copy of the recorded final plat, during which time the buyer or lessee may terminate this contract without breach or further obligation and will receive a full refund of all earnest money or prepaid purchase price. 
No conveyance of land or improvements will occur and no contract to lease will become effective until after the final plat has been properly approved by the City of Washington and recorded with the Beaufort County Register of Deeds. 
North Carolina General Statute 160A-375(b). City of Washington Ordinance 06-03 
(Code 1972, § 21-11; Code 1993, § 17-26; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996; Ord. No. 06-03, §§ 2, 3, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 34-29. - Preliminary and final plats required. 
    Preliminary and final plats shall be required for all subdivisions. Every plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer duly authorized and licensed under the laws of this state to prepare such plats. 
(Code 1993, § 17-27; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-30. - City not responsible. 
    The city shall, in no event, be required to open, operate, repair or maintain any street or other land or facility offered for dedication prior to the city's acceptance, by resolution of the City Council, of such dedication. 
(Code 1993, § 17-42; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-31. - Resubdivision procedure. 
    For any replatting or resubdivision of land, the same procedures, rules, relations and requirements shall apply as prescribed herein for an original subdivision. 
(Code 1993, § 17-43; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Secs. 34-32-34-42. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRELIMINARY PLATS 

Sec. 34-43. - Approval. 
    Preliminary plats shall be approved by the Planning Board and City Council. Approval shall be recorded in writing by the City Planner before final plats are submitted. Such approval shall confer upon the subdivider the right for a five-year period from the date of approval that the terms and conditions which the preliminary approval was granted will not be changed for such a plat. Such five-year period shall start from the Planning Board meeting date at which approval was granted. If the property as indicated on the preliminary plat is not platted, as provided herein, in its entirety within the five-year period, the preliminary plat or portion thereof not platted shall be subject to revision and compliance with the restrictions and requirements currently in effect. The five-year provision shall not be construed to exempt or exclude applicable restrictions and requirements of the zoning chapter currently in effect. 
(Code 1993, § 17-28; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-44. - Plat submission. 
    All preliminary plats shall be submitted to the City Planner, as agent for the city's Planning Board, no later than 5:00 p.m. twenty-one (21) working days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting date of the Planning Board. It is the intent of the city's staff and other agencies to review all properly submitted plats in a timely manner, which will afford the subdivider a reasonable period of time within which to respond to all comments and/or requested revisions. All plats submitted in accordance with the minimum requirements contained herein shall be available for revision not less than ten (10) working days prior to the scheduled meeting date. Plats revised pursuant to the initial review and as required shall be submitted to the City Planner, not less than six (6) working days prior to the scheduled meeting date. 
(Code 1993, § 17-29; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-45. - Required information for plat submission. 
    All applicants for preliminary plat approval shall be submitted in accordance with and contain the following information: 
(a)  Format. The following format is required for preliminary plat submission: 
(1)  Scale of one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet or larger. 
(2)  Drawn in ink or pencil on Mylar film. 
(3)  Mylar film size shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches and a maximum of thirty (30) inches by forty-two (42) inches. 
(4)  Boundary lines shall be distinctly and accurately represented, all bearings and distances shown, with an accuracy of closure of not less than one (1) in two thousand five hundred (2,500) and in accordance with the Standards of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina. 
(5)  Elevation and benchmarks shall be referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
(6)  Prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer. 
(7)  Multiple sheets shall be collated and stapled. Match lines shall be clearly indicated. 
(8)  Number of copies required: 
a.  Fifteen (15) blueline paper copies at the time of original submission for departmental review; 
b.  Two (2) blueline paper copies shall be submitted for each review department requesting revisions. The total number is to be specified by the City Planner; 
c.  Fifteen (15) blueline paper copies shall be submitted to the Planning Board following the initial review; 
d.  Three (3) Mylar film copies for disposition in accordance with section 34-48 upon request of the City Planner. 
(9)  List of all adjoining property owners within one hundred (100) feet and their current mailing addresses. Such list shall be obtained from the most current county tax records and shall display the signature of the person preparing such list. 
(10)  Conformance to the applicable provisions of the Manual of Standard Designs and Details. The following certificates shall be required: standard title block for preliminary plats; and standard approvals information block. 
(11)  A fee shall be paid to the city for each application for a preliminary plat, as set out in section 34-297. 
(b)  General information. The following general information is required for preliminary plat submission: 
(1)  The subdivision name. 
(2)  The name of the city, township, county and state in which the subdivision is located. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of landowner. 
(4)  The name, address and telephone number of the subdivider and/or developer. 
(5)  The name, address and telephone number of the professional engineer or registered land surveyor preparing the plat. 
(6)  The state registration number and seal as listed in subsection (2)e of this section. 
(7)  The locational vicinity map, at a scale of one (1) inch equals to one thousand (1,000) feet showing the subdivision in relation to major and minor roads or streets, natural features, existing city limit lines and other obvious references. 
(8)  The date of original survey, plat preparation and/or revision. 
(9)  The number of sheets. 
(10)  The scale denoted both graphically and numerically. 
(c)  Site information. The following site information is required for preliminary plat submission: 
(1)  North arrow and delineation as to whether true, grid or magnetic, including date. 
(2)  Existing, platted and proposed streets, their names and numbers (if state-maintained roads) shown and designated as either public or private, indicating right-of-way and/or easement widths, pavement widths, centerline curve and corner radius data, including sight distance triangles and typical cross sections. All streets indicated on the city thoroughfare plan shall indicate future right-of-way widths. 
(3)  Proposed and existing lot lines within the subdivision showing approximate dimensions. Plat references shall be indicated for existing lots. 
(4)  Location of all existing buildings with exterior dimensions, including heights, number of stories, distance to existing and proposed lot lines, private drives, public rights-of-way and easements. 
(5)  Existing and proposed property lines, public and private streets, right-of-way and/or easement widths, pavement widths, easements, utility lines, hydrants, recreation areas or open spaces on adjoining property. 
(6)  Ownership of all contiguous property indicated and referenced by deed book/map book and page number. 
(7)  Existing zoning classification boundaries of the tract to be subdivided and on adjoining property within one hundred (100) feet. 
(8)  Political subdivision, including city limit lines, township boundaries and county lines. 
(9)  Watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts, storm drains, wooded areas, marshes, swamps, rock outcrops, ponds or lakes, streams or streambeds, ditches or other natural or improved features which affect the site. 
(10)  Proposed pedestrian, riding, bicycle trails or easements, their location, width and purpose. 
(11)  Sites proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public or private purposes, including location, and expected future ownership and maintenance of such spaces. 
(12)  Recreation area as required and pursuant to this Code and comprehensive plan. If such subdivision is for residential purposes, indicate the location of all public parks or recreation areas within a one-half (1/2) mile radius. 
(13)  Statement of proposed ownership and maintenance or other agreements when private recreation areas are established. 
(14)  Topography (existing and proposed) at a contour interval of one (1) foot, based on mean sea level datum, with an accuracy of plus or minus five-tenths (5/10) of a foot and referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
(15)  Existing and proposed watercourses, their names, direction of flow, centerline elevations, cross sections, and any other pertinent datum. 
(16)  Existing flood zone boundaries of the tract and adjoining parcels, as shown on the flood insurance rate maps for the city and/or the county, indicating base flood elevations. 
(17)  Lot numbers and block numbers in consistent and logical sequence. 
(18)  Minimum building setback lines. 
(19)  Fire hydrant locations and connections. 
(20)  Water main locations, connections and anticipated sizes. 
(21)  Sanitary sewer main locations, connections, and anticipated sizes. 
(22)  Storm sewer main locations, connections, and anticipated sizes. 
(23)  Street and lot drainage correlated to the city drainage system, including break points and the direction of surface water flow on each lot, street and ditch. 
(24)  Easements, including, but not limited to, electric, water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage, private street, gas or other service delivery easements including their location, width and purpose. 
(25)  County Health Department approval attached if public water and sanitary sewer systems are not available. 
(26)  Distance to and location of public water and sanitary sewer systems, if such facilities are not available. 
(27)  The following in tabular form: 
a.  Lineal feet in streets. 
b.  Number of lots created. 
c.  Acreage in total tract. 
d.  Acreage in parks, recreation areas, common areas and the like. 
(28)  The name and location of any property within the proposed subdivision or within any contiguous property that is listed on the National Register of Historic Places, or that has been designated by ordinance as a local historic property and/or district. 
(29)  Environmental impact statement pursuant to chapter 113A of the North Carolina General Statutes (G.S. ch. 113A), if required by the Planning Board. The Planning Board may require the subdivider to submit an environmental impact statement with the preliminary plat if: the development exceeds two (2) acres in area; and if the Board deems it necessary due to the nature of the land to be subdivided or peculiarities in the proposed layout. 
(30)  Statements on the plat that: 
a.  Construction plan approval from the city Public Works Department shall be obtained prior to construction of any street, water and/or sanitary sewer and storm drainage system. 
b.  All required improvements shall conform to the City of Washington Manual of Standard Designs and Details. 
c.  All lots shall equal or exceed the minimum development standards of chapter 40, pertaining to zoning. 
(31)  Any other information considered by either the subdivider or the Planning Board to be pertinent to the review of the preliminary plat. 
(32)  A written statement addressing the reasons for being unable to meet the minimum requirements as listed in this section. 
The owner or agent of the owner shall submit a signed statement requesting Planning Board consideration of the preliminary plat as submitted and acknowledging that such approval is subject to approval of a construction plan as provided herein. Such statement shall be submitted on the preliminary plat approval procedure, format, mapping and application sheet as provided. 
(Code 1993, § 17-30; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-46. - Review procedure. 
    The Planning Board shall review and take action on each preliminary plat duly presented to the City Planner. Before taking final action on the plat, the Planning Board shall hear the report of the City Planner and other public officials and agencies concerning the proposed development. If the preliminary plat is disapproved by the Planning Board, the City Planner shall specify to the applicant the reasons for such action. 
(Code 1993, § 17-31; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-47. - Departmental findings. 
    The City Planner, Director of Public Works, Fire-Rescue-EMS Chief, Director of Recreation and Parks, Electric Director, and Police Chief, the Beaufort County Water District, and Beaufort County Health Department, if applicable, shall furnish in writing their approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat. 
(Code 1993, § 17-32; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-48. - Disposition of copies. 
    If the preliminary plat is approved, the subdivider shall transmit three (3) Mylar film copies of the plat to the City Planner for signature, reproduction and distribution to the following agencies: 
(a)  City Planner: two (2) paper copies and one (1) Mylar copy. 
(b)  Electric Department: one (1) Mylar copy. 
(c)  Public Works Department: one (1) paper copy. 
(d)  Fire-Rescue-EMS Department: one (1) paper copy. 
(e)  Recreation and Parks Department: one (1) paper copy. 
(f)  Police Department: one (1) paper copy. 
(g)  Telephone company: one (1) paper copy. 
(h)  Cable TV company: one (1) paper copy. 
(i)  County Planner: one (1) paper copy. 
(j)  U.S. Postal Service: one (1) paper copy. 
(k)  Person or firm preparing the plat: one (1) Mylar copy. 
(Code 1993, § 17-33; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-49. - Construction plan required; authority; contents. 
(a)  Following the preliminary plat approval, a construction plan for the entire development, not to exceed five (5) years, shall be submitted to the Public Works Director and the Electric Director. Such construction plan may be submitted in phases. 
(b)  The subdivider shall submit a construction plan to the city Director of Public Works for review and approval prior to the construction or improvement of any street, water line, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage facility, or other improvement. 
(c)  The Public Works Director and Electric Director or their respective designee shall have final joint approval authority of any construction plan. Such approval shall be noted in writing on said plan prior to construction of any public or private facility or structure. Grading and storm drainage improvements may be allowed following the approval of the Director of Public Works prior to state approval of proposed utility improvements. 
(d)  Submission requirements and review procedure for all construction plans shall be submitted in accordance with the Manual of Standard Designs and Details. 
(Code 1972, § 21-28; Code 1993, § 17-34; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-50. - Construction plan scope and application. 
(a)  The location, dimension and extent of all proposed improvements shown on the construction plan shall coincide with the preliminary plat as approved by the Planning Board. 
(b)  Minor alterations that, in the opinion of the City Planner, do not substantially deviate from the approved preliminary plat may be allowed. Such minor alterations may include but not be limited to the relocation, dimension and extent of proposed improvements due to engineering necessity. 
(c)  Major alterations that, in the opinion of the City Planner, do in fact involve substantial deviation from the approved preliminary plat shall not be allowed. Major alterations may include, but not be limited to, the relocation, deletion, addition, dimension and extent of proposed improvements which alter street alignment, interior arrangement, continuation and/or projection; lot and/or block dimensions inconsistent with applicable requirements; changes that increase the total number of lots, increase the volume and/or location of off-site drainage, or other condition found to be injurious to either surrounding properties or the city. Appeal from this section may be taken to the Subdivision Review Board. 
(d)  The subdivider shall revise the preliminary plat, as approved pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, to reflect all such minor alterations. Copies shall be submitted for disposition in accordance with section prior to obtaining construction plan approval as provided herein. 
(Code 1993, § 17-35; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Secs. 34-51-34-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FINAL PLATS 

Sec. 34-71. - Submission and approval. 
(a)  The final plat and all required materials shall be submitted to the City Planner as agent for the Planning Board not less than ten (10) working days prior to the scheduled Subdivision Review Board meeting. Working days shall not be construed to include city observed holidays or weekends. 
(b)  No final plat shall be submitted until the subdivider has obtained preliminary plat approval as required under this chapter. 
(c)  No final plat shall be approved until the subdivider has installed in the proposed subdivision or section thereof to be recorded all improvements required by this chapter or shall have guaranteed their installation as provided herein. 
(d)  The final plat shall substantially conform to the preliminary plat as approved. If the final plat does not substantially conform to the preliminary plat as approved, the Planning Board may consider appropriate revision to the previously approved preliminary plat as provided by this chapter. The Planning Board shall reserve the right to deny revision of any preliminary plat where it is found the revision, deletion or addition thereto would not be in the best interest of the adjoining or surrounding property owners or the city. 
(Code 1972, § 21-29; Code 1993, § 17-36; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-72. - Required information for plat submission. 
    All applications for final plat approval shall be submitted in accordance with and contain the following information: 
(a)  Format. The following format is required for final plat submission: 
(1)  Scale of one (1) inch equals to one hundred (100) feet or larger. 
(2)  Drawn in ink on Mylar film. 
(3)  Mylar film shall be eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches at 0.003 to 0.004 inch thickness. 
(4)  Boundary lines shall be fully dimensioned by lengths and bearing with an error of closure not less than one (1) in five thousand (5,000) and in accordance with the Standards of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina. All dimensions shall be measured to the nearest one-hundredth (1/100) of a foot and all angles to the nearest minute. A north arrow shall be shown, along with delineation as to whether related to true, magnetic median or the state grid coordinate system. 
(5)  Prepared by a surveyor or professional engineer licensed and registered in the state. 
(6)  Multiple sheets shall be collated and stapled (paper copies only). Match lines shall be clearly indicated. 
(7)  Number of copies required: 
a.  Twelve (12) blueline paper copies at the time of original submission for departmental review; 
b.  Two (2) blueline paper copies shall be submitted for each review department requesting revision, following the initial review. The total number is to be specified by the City Planner; and 
c.  The original drawing and three (3) Mylar film copies for disposition in accordance with section 34-75 upon request of the City Planner. 
(8)  One (1) copy of the declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions or otherwise as required, pursuant to the North Carolina General Statutes. Such agreements shall be approved by the city prior to final plat approval: 
a.  If utility, street or other improvements, as required, have not been installed and approved by the city at the time of submission of the final plat, the subdivider shall transmit one (1) copy of a written estimate, prepared by a professional engineer, of such necessary improvements to the City Planner for review and approval at the time of the original submission of the final plat. 
b.  A surety agreement duly executed shall be filed with the Director of Public Works not less than three (3) working days prior to the scheduled Subdivision Review Board meeting. Working days shall not be construed to include city observed holidays or weekends. 
c.  In cases where a payment in lieu of dedication of land is due, a certified check payable to the city in the full amount of such payment shall be required prior to approval. 
(9)  The plat shall be submitted in accordance with the Manual of Standard Designs and Details. The following certificates shall be required: 
a.  Standard title block. 
b.  Standard source of title information block. 
c.  Standard owners statement block. 
d.  Standard approvals information block. 
e.  Standard dedication information block. 
f.  Standard certification block. 
(10)  A filing fee shall be paid to the city for each application for a final plat and such fee shall be set out in section 34-297. 
(11)  Certified copy of the construction permit issued by the Beaufort County Health Department for water supply and sewerage system to serve the land included within the final plat, if not to be served by a public utility system. 
(12)  When property outside the existing city limits is subdivided and city water or sanitary sewer service is requested or required, an annexation petition and required maps shall be submitted to the City Planner. Pursuant to this requirement, no final plat shall be recorded until the property contained within the plat has been annexed into the city. A delay of the effective date of annexation as established by an ordinance of the City Council shall not delay recordation of such plat. 
(b)  Format. The following information is required for final plat submission: 
(1)  Subdivision name. 
(2)  Name of the city, township, county and state in which the subdivision is located. 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of landowner or legal agent. 
(4)  Name, address and telephone number of the registered land surveyor or professional engineer preparing the plat. 
(5)  North Carolina registration number and seal as listed in subsection (2)d of this section. 
(6)  Locational vicinity map, at a scale of one (1) inch equals to one thousand (1,000) feet showing the subdivision in relation to major and minor roads or streets, adjacent subdivision sections, political divisions, landmarks or other obvious references. 
(7)  Date of original survey plat preparation and/or revision. 
(8)  Number of sheets. 
(9)  Scale denoted both graphically and numerically. 
(c)  Site information. The following site information is required for final plat submission: 
(1)  North arrow and delineation as to whether true, grid or magnetic including date. 
(2)  Street names and designation as to whether public or private. 
(3)  Right-of-way and/or easement widths and pavement widths, and sight distance triangles of all streets within the subdivision. 
(4)  Right-of-way and/or easement widths and pavement widths of all adjacent streets. 
(5)  Location of all points of curvature and tangency. 
(6)  Location of all points of intersection where circular curves are not used. 
(7)  Property lines with bearings or deflection angles, arc lengths, and chord lengths (indicated by dashed lines) as appropriate. 
(8)  The delta angle, degree of curve, tangent distance, radius and method (arc or chord) for each curve. 
(9)  Sufficient surveying data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground every straight or curved boundary line, street line, lot line, right-of-way line, easement line and setback line. 
(10)  Accurate location and description of all monuments, markers and control points. 
(11)  Location, description and use of all existing and proposed easements. 
(12)  Location, description and use of any sites proposed for dedication or reservation for public purposes. 
(13)  Location, description and use of all pedestrian, riding, bicycle trials or natural buffers to be dedicated or reserved for public purposes. 
(14)  Location, description and use of areas to be used for purposes other than residential. 
(15)  Property lines and ownership of all contiguous property indicated and referenced by deed book/map book and page number. 
(16)  Location of existing buildings or structures, watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts, storm drains, corporate limits, township boundaries, county lines and easements both on the land to be subdivided and immediately adjoining thereto. 
(17)  When the subdivision consists of land acquired from more than one (1) source of title, the outlines of the various tracts shall be indicated by dashed lines and identification of the respective tracts shall be shown on the plat. 
(18)  Existing flood zone boundaries of the tract and adjoining parcels, as shown on the flood insurance rate maps for the city and/or the county, indicating base flood elevations. 
(19)  Minimum building setback lines. 
(20)  The area in square feet of each proposed lot and common area within the subdivision. 
(21)  Block and lot numbers in consistent and logical sequence. 
(22)  The following in tabular form: 
a.  Number of lots created. 
b.  Acreage in total tract. 
c.  Acreage in common area. 
d.  Acreage in parks, recreation areas and the like. 
(23)  The name and location of any property within the proposed subdivision or within any contiguous property that is listed on the National Register of Historic Places, or that has been designated by ordinance as a local historic property and/or district. 
(24)  Any other information considered by either the subdivider or the Planning Board to be pertinent to the review of the final plat. 
(25)  Written statement addressing the reasons for being unable to meet the minimum requirements as listed in this section. 
(Code 1972, § 21-29; Code 1993, § 17-37; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-73. - Review procedure. 
    The Subdivision Review Board shall review and take action on each final plat duly presented to the City Planner. Before taking action on the plat, the Subdivision Review Board shall hear the report of the City Planner and other public officials and agencies concerning the proposed final plat. 
(Code 1993, § 17-38; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-74. - Departmental findings. 
    The city and the county Health Department, if applicable, shall furnish in writing their approval or disapproval of the plat. 
(Code 1993, § 17-39; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-75. - Disposition of copies. 
    If the final plat is approved, the subdivider shall transmit the original drawing, and three (3) Mylar film copies as required to the City Planner for signature, recordation and distribution as follows: 
(a)  Beaufort County Register of Deeds: original drawing. 
(b)  City Planner: one (1) Mylar copy. 
(c)  Public Works Department: one (1) Mylar copy. 
(Code 1993, § 17-40; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-76. - Recordation. 
    The City Planner shall record the original drawing of the final map in the office of the county Register of Deeds together with all applicable documents not more than five (5) working days following final approval, unless as further provided herein. 
(Code 1993, § 17-41; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Secs. 34-77-34-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PLATS 

Sec. 34-90. - Relation to thoroughfare plan. 
    The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the thoroughfare plan of the city and elements thereof officially adopted. 
(Code 1993, § 17-60; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-91. - Street design standards. 
    The following design standards shall apply to all streets in proposed subdivisions: 
(a)  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical and soil conditions, to public convenience and safety and in their appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets. 
(b)  Where there exists a conflict between city and state street standards, the more restrictive shall apply. 
(c)  The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the continuation of the existing streets in adjoining areas. 
(d)  Where a new subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land susceptible to being subdivided, than the new streets shall be carried to the boundaries of the tract proposed to be subdivided; and such arrangement shall make provision for the logical and proper projection of such streets. 
(e)  Where a new subdivision adjoins unsubdivided lands that do not have direct and adequate access to an approved public street, then the new streets shall be carried to the boundaries of the tract proposed to be subdivided to ensure the adjoining lands of direct and adequate access. Private streets shall not constitute direct and adequate access for purposes of this section. 
(f)  In cases where a subdivider is required to carry a new street to the boundary of the tract to be subdivided and such boundary line is a ditch, canal or other drainage facility, the subdivider shall dedicate the appropriate land to the boundary of the tract to be subdivided and construct or guarantee the required improvements to such boundary or to a further point, as provided by private agreement. 
(g)  Reserve strips controlling access to public streets shall be prohibited, except under conditions approved by the Planning Board. 
(h)  The street arrangement within new subdivisions shall not be such as to cause hardship to owners of adjoining property in platting their own land and providing convenient access to it or affect the health, safety and welfare of property owners and residences in the surrounding area. Streets within or adjacent to subdivisions intended for residential purposes shall be so designed that their use by through traffic shall be discouraged, except, however, where such streets are existing or proposed thoroughfares. 
(i)  Street right-of-way and/or easement and paving widths shall be based upon the volume of traffic generated by the area served by such street and the future traffic circulation pattern of the surrounding area and the city as a whole. The traffic generation factors used to determine the required street sections are contained in the Manual of Standard Designs and Details in conjunction with the adopted thoroughfare plan for the city. 
(j)  Half-streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations and where the Planning Board finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever a half-street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted and improved within such tract. 
(k)  Names of new streets shall not duplicate existing or platted street names, unless a new street is a continuation of or in alignment with the existing or platted street. Addresses shall be assigned in accordance with the address numbering system in effect in the city. 
(l)  The vacation of any street or part of a street dedicated for public use, if such vacation interferes with the uniformity of the existing street pattern or any future street plans prepared for the areas, shall not be permitted. 
(m)  Where a tract is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow the opening of future streets and logical further resubdivision. 
(n)  All buildings shall be located within the proximity of an approved street in accordance with chapter 40, pertaining to zoning and within an acceptable distance to a fire hydrant, which has been connected to a public water supply system, approved by the city. Such hydrant shall be installed within the right-of-way or easement of a street or as otherwise approved by the Chief of Fire and Rescue and the Director of the Department of Public Works. Hydrant locations and requirements shall be in accordance with the Manual of Standard Designs and Details. 
(o)  Each lot created within a subdivision shall have direct access to an approved street, in accordance with chapter 40, pertaining to zoning, or as provided in this article. 
(p)  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet shall not be allowed. 
(q)  Streets shall be designed to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street shall intersect another at less than sixty (60) degrees. 
(r)  Loop/connecting streets which begin and terminate without intersecting another street system shall not exceed two thousand (2,000) feet as measured along the centerline of such street. 
(s)  Cul-de-sac/terminal streets shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet as measured along the centerline of such street from the right-of-way, as projected from the intersecting street, which provides direct access to the general street system (existing or proposed) to their furthermost point. 
(t)  Private streets may be allowed to provide access to and from individual property, in accordance with the following: 
(1)  To provide access to two (2) or more individual units or lots within developments approved, pursuant to the requirements of chapter 40, pertaining to zoning. 
(2)  Design, location and improvement shall provide for safe intersection with public streets, safe passage of service and emergency vehicles and protection of adjoining property. 
(3)  Where private streets are allowed, an appropriate association shall provide and perpetually maintain such private streets in suitable condition and state of repair for the city to provide normal delivery of services including, but not limited to, solid waste collection, police and fire protection, and electric, water or sewer service or installation. If at any time such private streets are not maintained by the association and travel upon them becomes or will be hazardous or inaccessible to the city service or emergency vehicles, the city may cause such repairs to be made after a reasonable period of notification to the property owner and/or association. In order to remove safety hazards and ensure safety and protection for the development the city may assess the cost of such repairs to the property owner and/or association. 
(4)  The city shall have no obligation or responsibility for maintenance or repair of such private streets as a result of the normal delivery of services or otherwise by the city or others using such streets. 
(5)  No private street shall be allowed unless an appropriate association is established for the purpose of providing for and perpetually maintaining such street. 
(6)  All private street easements shall be dedicated to the city as general utility easements. 
(u)  Curve radius standards, property line radius standards, tangent distances between reverse curves, right-of-way widths, easement widths, pavement widths, pavement design and storm drainage system design provisions shall conform with and be in compliance with the standards found in the Manual of Standard Designs and Details and the adopted thoroughfare plan for the city. 
(v)  Planned unoffensive industry (PUI) and planned industry (PI) districts street standards; exemptions. 
(1)  PUI and PI districts shall be exempt from the maximum loop-connecting and cul-de-sac-terminal street standards listed above under subsections (18) and (19) of this section. 
(2)  PUI or PI districts shall comply with all other provisions of this section. 
(w)  The installation of curbs and gutters are required on all streets located within the city limits. Outside the city limits, curbs and gutters are required on all streets, unless all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The street is designated as a minor residential street with marginal access; 
(2)  Public water and sewer is not available; and, 
(3)  The land to be subdivided is ten (10) acres or less in size. 
If a subdivider is not required to install curbs and gutters under this section and subsequently subdivides adjoining property so the total land subdivided is ten (10) acres or more, then the entire subdivision, including land previously subdivided, shall be provided with curb and gutter. 
(Code 1972, § 21-22; Code 1993, § 17-61; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996; Ord. No. 97-7, 5-19-1997) 
Sec. 34-92. - Utility easements. 
    Easements for utilities shall be provided where necessary along front, rear or side lot lines, but shall not be required to center on such lines. Such easements shall be sufficiently wide to provide for installation of such utilities and access for maintenance and operation. The minimum width of the easements shall be as follows: 
(a)  Water lines: ten (10) feet. 
(b)  Gas lines: ten (10) feet. 
(c)  Electrical lines: ten (10) feet. 
(d)  Storm sewer: as necessary on determination of the Public Works Director. 
(e)  Sanitary sewer shall be in accordance with the following table: 
Depth of Cover Minimum Easement Width (feet) Force main All 10 Gravity Sewers 0-10 
10-15 
Greater than 15 20 
30 
35  
(f)  Multipurpose: see section 34-95. 
(g)  Hydrant: five (5) feet as measured on the horizontal in all directions from the center of the hydrant. 
(Code 1972, § 21-25; Code 1993, § 17-62; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-93. - Lot lines and utility easements. 
    Lot lines shall be so arranged with respect to utility easements as to permit efficient installation of utilities without unnecessary irregularities in alignment. 
(Code 1993, § 17-63; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-94. - Projection of easements to adjacent undeveloped property. 
    Where a new subdivision is adjacent to undeveloped property that does not have direct access to public utility lines or facilities, adequate easements may be reserved on each side of all rear lot lines and along certain side lot lines, where necessary, for future extension of utilities to such undeveloped property. 
(Code 1993, § 17-64; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-95. - Multipurpose easements. 
    Easements designated as general utility easements which contain multiple utility lines, structures or facilities shall be permitted only upon specific authorization of the Director of Public Works. The minimum acceptable width of such general utility easements shall be subject to approval on an individual case-by-case basis. 
(Code 1993, § 17-65; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-96. - Minor drainage easements. 
    Minor drainage easements providing for drainage of surface waters from four (4) or less lots and not involving regulated flood areas may be permitted to cross lots at points where such arrangements are found by the Director of Public Works to be necessary as a result of topography or soil conditions, and where suitable building sites are reserved. Such minor drainage easements may be required and designated to be maintained by the property owner. 
(Code 1972, § 21-25; Code 1993, § 17-66; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-97. - Major utilities, substation sites, etc. 
    Where major utility substations, pumping stations, pressure-regulating stations and the like are required, adequate provision to provide screening, consisting of local plant material and fence material or combination thereof, shall be required. 
(Code 1993, § 17-67; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-98. - Preservation of significant water areas-Intent. 
    It is the intent of these regulations both to safeguard existing and potential development in appropriate locations and to preserve and promote a desirable ecological balance. Therefore, insofar as it is reasonably practicable, subdivisions shall be located, designed and improved to preserve important natural water areas, related vegetation and wildlife habits; to avoid creation of upstream impoundments or downstream runoff which would be harmful to such complexes or to existing or potential development in appropriate locations; and to maintain desirable groundwater levels. 
(Code 1993, § 17-68; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-99. - Preservation of significant water areas-Maintenance of natural waterways and water areas; greenway plan. 
(a)  Where a proposed subdivision is traversed by or includes, in whole or in part, a natural watercourse, marsh, pond or lake of substantial significance in the ecology of the general area, the water body shall, to the maximum extent reasonably feasible, be maintained in its natural state, together with bordering lands and other suitable protective strip or buffer, as required by the Planning Board. The minimum width of any protective strip or other buffer required, pursuant to this section, shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet from the top of the bank as determined by the Director of Public Works. 
(b)  Relationship to greenway plan. If any portion of the area proposed for subdivision lies within an area designated in the officially adopted greenway plan as a greenway corridor, the area so designated shall be dedicated and/or reserved to the public at the option of the city. 
(c)  The city shall have right of access onto all designated and/or dedicated areas within all easements as required for the construction and/or maintenance of public facilities. 
(Code 1993, § 17-69; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-100. - Changes in location or extent of natural waterways and water areas. 
    The Director of Public Works may permit changes in the location or extent of significant natural waterways and water areas only after making findings that such changes will not adversely affect desirable ecological conditions, drainage or water retention, or result in undesirable location or amount of upstream impoundment or downstream discharge. 
(Code 1993, § 17-70; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-101. - Drainage. 
    Adequate storm drainage shall be provided by means of storm drainage pipes and appurtenances thereto or by open or unenclosed drainage channels, all of which shall be installed in accordance with the Manual of Standard Designs and Details. The Director of Public Works shall determine what type of storm drainage shall be required and what improvements shall be installed. In the consideration of storm drain pipe size to be installed, the Director of Public Works shall take into consideration the existing drainage conditions, the effect upon those conditions by the proposed development and the future needs within the immediate area of the proposed development. 
(Code 1993, § 17-71; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-102. - Protection from flooding and other adverse water conditions. 
(a)  No subdivision shall be so located or improvement to create impoundments of surface water on developable upstream land outside the subdivision, to increase surface drainageways, to cause erosion onto neighboring property or into water areas, or to raise or lower groundwater levels in a manner which creates adverse effects within the subdivision or in surrounding areas. Where locations or improvements appear likely to have such effects, plats shall not be approved until suitable remedial measures have been provided. 
(b)  As appropriate to the circumstances, such measures may include requiring the subdivider to make provision for the necessary enlargements or improvements in off-site drainageways, establishing water retention and recharge areas, and mechanical and vegetative means to control runoff and erosion from the subdivision. 
(Code 1993, § 17-72; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-103. - Sedimentation and erosion control. 
    All subdivisions shall conform to the sedimentation and erosion control regulations as established by state law. 
(Code 1993, § 17-73; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
State Law reference- NC Admin. Code, title 15A, DHNR, ch. 4. 
Sec. 34-104. - Floodprone or flood hazard areas. 
    All subdivisions shall conform to the flood zoning regulations as set forth in chapter 40, pertaining to zoning. 
(Code 1993, § 17-74; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-105. - Block requirements. 
    Block lengths, widths and areas within bounding streets shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Adequate building sites, suitable for the contemplated or probable use of the property, are provided. 
(b)  Zoning requirements regarding minimum lot dimensions and area are met. 
(c)  Lengths between intersecting streets do not exceed one thousand four hundred (1,400) feet and are not less than three hundred (300) feet. 
(d)  Sufficient widths are provided to allow two (2) tiers of lots where single-tier lots are required to separate development from traffic arteries, water areas, common areas or public property. Where double frontage lots are allowed, a nonaccess easement shall be provided as specified herein. 
(e)  Planned unoffensive industry (PUI) and planned industry (PI) districts shall be exempt from the maximum block length listed under subsection (3) of this section. 
(Code 1972, § 21-23; Code 1993, § 17-75; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-106. - Pedestrian crosswalks within blocks. 
    Where orientation or length of blocks or other considerations justify such action, the Planning Board may require pedestrian circulation and the provision of access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other facilities. Where such crosswalks are provided, they shall be located, dimensioned, fenced, screened, or otherwise improved by the subdivider in such a manner as to provide security, tranquility, privacy, and safe use for occupants of adjoining property. Such pedestrian ways, if suitably improved, may be used by emergency vehicles but shall not be used by other motor vehicles. 
(Code 1993, § 17-76; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-107. - Lots design. 
(a)  Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the applicable requirements of chapter 40, pertaining to zoning. 
(b)  All lots shall abut on their full frontage on an approved public street, or private street where applicable. 
(c)  Where public water and/or sewer service is not available, all lots shall be subject to the applicable requirements of the county Health Department and the city. 
(d)  Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to straight streets or radial to curved street lines. 
(e)  Corner lots for residential purposes shall have extra width to permit appropriate building setback from the orientation to both streets. 
(f)  Lots abutting a pedestrian crosswalk or alley within a block shall not be considered corner lots. 
(g)  All lots shall contain an adequate building site. 
(h)  Lots subject to flooding and lots deemed to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property, or which may aggravate the flood hazard, but such land within the plat shall be set aside for such uses which shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or which shall not produce unsatisfactory living conditions. 
(i)  All remnants of lots or residual parcels of a larger tract shall be added to adjacent lots rather than allowed to remain as a substandard lot or as unusable parcels. 
(Code 1972, § 21-24; Code 1993, § 17-77; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-108. - Double frontage lots. 
    Double frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide residential separation from traffic arteries or other incompatible uses. Where double frontage lots are allowed, a ten (10) foot nonaccess easement shall be provided along the street line outside any existing or future rights-of-way. 
(Code 1993, § 17-78; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-109. - Driveways, conditions of lot access. 
    Driveways providing ingress and/or egress to all lots within new subdivisions platted pursuant to these regulations shall conform to the Manual of Standard Designs and Details and the driveway standards of the city. However, in situations where, in the interest of public health, safety and welfare, the Planning Board finds that greater restrictions on the location and/or total number of driveways is necessary to insure said interests, such greater restriction shall be noted on the plat as a condition of approval. Where such conditions apply to all or several lots shown upon the plat, the Director of Public Works shall enforce the noted condition in addition to other applicable regulations in effect at the time of driveway permit application. 
(Code 1993, § 17-79; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-110. - Intent of provisions toward open space network. 
(a)  To provide for efficiency, economy and amenity, it is the intent of these regulations to encourage and promote the development and maintenance of public open space systems. 
(b)  It is intended that, to the maximum extent reasonably feasible, there shall be a continuous network of public lands adapted to multiple purposes, including preservation and maintenance of natural waterways and water areas, protection of watersheds, neighborhood or community service areas and other public uses requiring open space. 
(c)  It is further intended that these regulations shall encourage and promote consolidation, combination and coordination of quasi-public and private common open space with the public land network where appropriate. The purposes of such action shall include the following, applied generally or under particular sets of circumstances: 
(1)  To increase the extent, effectiveness and amenity of the total open space network; 
(2)  To provide protection for areas of substantial ecological importance; and 
(3)  To minimize conflicts among automotive traffic, pedestrians and cyclists, and to provide safe, convenient movement systems for pedestrians and cyclists through open spaces not generally open to automotive traffic, in a pattern connecting their principal origins with destinations such as schools, parks and recreational facilities; and otherwise to ensure the advantages arising from an open space network with multiple potentials for public use and reuse, as contrasted with scattered open spaces serving only limited functions. 
(Code 1993, § 17-80; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-111. - Recreation areas-Reserved. 
    All subdivisions shall indicate recreation areas at the time of submission of the preliminary plat. If such subdivision is developed in sections, such recreation area shall be contained within the first section, unless as otherwise approved by the Planning Board, upon recommendation of the Director of Parks and Recreation. At the time of submission of the final plat, the owner shall give the city a valid option on the land provided for as recreation area. The total development area shall be used as the basis for computation of the area reserved for recreation purposes. 
(Code 1993, § 17-81; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-112. - Recreation areas-Minimum area. 
    The minimum amount of land which shall be reserved for a recreation area in the subdivision plan shall be one (1) acre for each subdivision and in addition, for all subdivisions over twenty-five (25) acres in area, reservation of recreation space shall include one (1) acre plus four (4) percent of the gross total area over twenty-five (25) acres or four hundred (400) square feet for each lot over one hundred ten (110), whichever is greater. 
(Code 1993, § 17-82; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-113. - Recreation areas-Waiver provisions. 
    Any subdivision owner may submit a map to the Planning Board of the area which is intended to be developed as a subdivision and request advice as to whether or not a recreation area shall be required in the proposed subdivision. Within thirty (30) days, the Planning Board shall make a decision as to whether a recreation area should be included in the subdivision plan. It is the intent of this section to permit an early determination regarding recreation areas, especially of small subdivisions which, because of their proximity to other recreation areas or other good reasons, may not need recreation areas for the orderly development of the proposed subdivision. The owner or developer shall consider final any decision made pursuant to this section only if the final subdivision plat is approved under the overall subdivision regulations within one (1) year from the date of any determination, pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1993, § 17-83; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-114. - Recreation areas-Authority of Planning Board to seek advice. 
    The Planning Board may, from time to time, request opinions from the Recreation Advisory Committee and other competent authorities. 
(Code 1993, § 17-84; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-115. - Recreation areas-Owner to give option to city; provisions of option. 
    At the time of submission of the final plat, the owner shall give to the city a valid option on the land provided for as recreation area. This option shall be a separate agreement to be drawn by the owner and approved by the City Attorney as to form and effect. This option may contain such terms as shall be mutually agreed to by the owner and the city, but shall contain the following: 
(a)  Provision for payment of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to the owner upon execution of the option, which shall be applied to the purchase price if the option is exercised. 
(b)  Provision that the owner shall sell the land at an agreed raw land value. The raw land value is the fair market value of the recreation area before improvements or development. Should the city and the owner fail to agree on the raw land value, they shall choose one MAI appraiser to appraise the recreation area. The sum per acre determined by the MAI appraiser shall constitute the price per acre for the land. Cost of this process shall be equally divided between the city and the owner. 
(c)  Provision that the option shall have a term of at least four (4) years, unless terminated by exercise of the option to purchase by the city, or unless sooner terminated by the city by an instrument in writing. 
(d)  Provision that in addition to the stipulated purchase price, if the option is exercised, the owner shall be entitled to interest on the purchase price from the date of execution of the option at six (6) percent per year. 
(e)  Provision that the option shall become effective upon recordation of the final subdivision plat containing such recreation area in the office of the county Register of Deeds. 
(Code 1993, § 17-85; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-116. - Recreation areas-Relation to bikeway plan. 
    The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of the bikeway system for the city and the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) shall conform to the bikeway plan of the city and elements thereof officially adopted. 
(Code 1993, § 17-86; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Secs. 34-117-34-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 34-146. - Conformance standards. 
    In addition to the requirements set forth herein, required improvements shall conform to any applicable specifications set forth in the Manual of Standard Designs and Details, published by the city and the Manual for the Design and Construction of Water and Waste Water System Extensions for the Public Works Department. In case of extraordinary subsurface conditions, terrain, the general pattern in the area, existing or probable development in the vicinity, or other circumstances, the Public Works Director, upon making supporting written findings, may establish greater or lesser requirements in particular cases. 
(Code 1993, § 17-115; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-147. - Permanent monuments and markers. 
    Permanent monuments and markers shall be placed in accordance with the Standards of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina and the state General Statutes which apply to the subdivision of land. The registered land surveyor preparing the final plat shall be responsible for the placement of all required monuments and markers. Such monuments and markers shall be in place at the time the city accepts the improvements within the subdivision. 
(Code 1972, § 21-19; Code 1993, § 17-116; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-148. - Streets and alleys-Grading and surfacing. 
    All streets and alleys within the jurisdiction of the city shall be graded and surfaced in accordance with the design standards set out in this article and as specified in the Manual of Standard Designs and Details. 
(Code 1993, § 17-117; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-149. - Streets and alleys-Curbs and gutters. 
    Minimum requirements shall apply as to use of curbs and gutters or open ditches and shall be constructed in accordance with the Manual of Standard Designs and Details. 
(Code 1993, § 17-118; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-150. - Street signs. 
    Street name signs shall be installed in locations and according to specifications set forth in the Manual of Standard Designs and Details. 
(Code 1993, § 17-119; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-151. - Streetlights. 
    Streetlights shall be provided at such locations as approved by the city and shall be installed and maintained by the city Electric Department in accordance with current policy. 
(Code 1993, § 17-120; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-152. - Street trees. 
    In all residential subdivisions, street trees shall be preserved where possible; where they do not exist, appropriate trees may be provided, planted and serviced in accordance with the Manual of Standard Designs and Details. Such trees shall be species which are resistant to damage and disease and which do not cause interference with utilities, streetlighting or visibility at street intersections or at intersections of driveways or walkways with streets, and which do not cause heaving of pavements when planted in specified locations. 
(Code 1993, § 17-121; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-153. - Ground cover. 
    All land within the right-of-way which is not used for structures, vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or for other approved landscaping shall be provided with grass or other ground cover of a nature approved by the Manual of Standard Designs and Details. Such ground cover may include appropriate plant materials preserved in place. 
(Code 1993, § 17-122; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-154. - Determination of necessity; conformance to sidewalk installation standards. 
(a)  Sidewalks shall be provided by the subdivider, as deemed necessary by the City Planner and installed in accordance with the Manual of Standard Designs and Details. 
(b)  In such case where the necessity of sidewalks cannot be determined by the City Planner, the Planning Board shall reserve the right to determine the necessity of said sidewalk. 
(Code 1993, § 17-123; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-155. - Conformance to drainage system installation standards. 
    All required storm drainage and surface water drainage systems shall be installed in accordance with the Manual of Standard Designs and Details. 
(Code 1993, § 17-124; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-156. - Subdivisions to be adequately drained. 
    All subdivided land shall be served by a stormwater and surface water drainage system located, designed and installed in such a manner as to preserve the public and private land from inundation during a storm of ten-year frequency. 
(Code 1993, § 17-1; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-157. - Public water supply required; exceptions. 
(a)  Each lot intended for a use requiring public water shall be served by the city or the count and approved by the state, except where infeasibility is documented and such documentation is accepted by the Planning Board. 
(b)  Where the Planning Board has accepted the infeasibility of service by a public system, it shall require approval of the lot by the county Health Department. Such approval shall be based upon the studies and conclusions as specified by applicable law. 
(c)  Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit installation of private systems where water is not used for human consumption. 
(Code 1993, § 17-126; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-158. - Public sanitary sewerage required; exceptions. 
(a)  Each lot intended for a use requiring sanitary sewerage shall be served by the city and approved by the state, except where infeasibility is documented and such documentation is accepted by the Planning Board. 
(b)  Where the Planning Board has accepted the infeasibility of service by a public system, it shall require approval of the lot by the county Health Department. Such approval shall be based upon the studies and conclusions as specified by applicable law. 
(c)  Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit installation of private systems where water is not used for human consumption. 
(Code 1993, § 17-127; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-159. - Erosion protection; topsoil conservation; vegetation preservation. 
    In general, in preparation of the subdivision and installation of improvements, appropriate measures shall be taken to prevent erosion and damaging situations on the property and on adjoining land or water areas in accordance with the soil erosion and sedimentation control regulations as set forth by this Code, and in compliance with the regulations of the state. In any grading or filling operations, described topsoil shall be conserved and redistributed as such, particularly to cover exposed subsoils. Trees, shrubs and ground cover existing at the beginning of development operations shall be preserved to the maximum extent reasonably feasible where they are of species and in locations likely to add amenity to the completed development. The Planning Board may require preservation of specified trees or other vegetation in connection with a particular development except upon findings that such preservation is infeasible in view of the requirements for the installation of public utilities and facilities. 
(Code 1993, § 17-128; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
State Law reference- NC Admin. Code, title 15A, DHNR, chapter 4. 
Sec. 34-160. - Fire protection facilities. 
    All lots served by public water supply systems shall also be afforded fire protection by means of hydrants installed in accordance with the requirements and specifications of the Manual of Standard Designs and Details. 
(Code 1993, § 17-129; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-161. - Wire installation to be underground; exceptions. 
    Electrical distribution (defined for the purposes of these regulations as facilities for delivering electrical energy from a substation to a customer's meter), telephone and any other wire installation shall be underground unless the infeasibility of such installation has been documented and the documentation accepted as satisfactory by the Planning Board. In making its decision on the adequacy of the documentation, the Board shall consider the terrain, load characteristics, reliability, accessibility, system flexibility, equipment availability, cost, safety, trimming, and customer desires. 
(Code 1993, § 17-130; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Secs. 34-162-34-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS; MAINTENANCE GUARANTEES 

Sec. 34-191. - Requirements prior to approval of final plats. 
    Except as hereinafter provided concerning performance guarantees, before final plats are approved: 
(a)  All required improvements shall be completed by the owner or his agent, and inspected and approved by appropriate public officials or agencies; and 
(b)  All required offers to dedicate, or to reserve for future dedication, shall be made, clear of all liens and encumbrances on the property and public improvements thus dedicated. 
(Code 1993, § 17-141; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-192. - Performance guarantee. 
    In lieu of completion of all or part of required improvements prior to approval of final plats, the applicant may post a performance guarantee in an amount sufficient to secure to the city the satisfactory construction and installation of the uncompleted portion of the required improvements. 
(Code 1993, § 17-142; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-193. - Type of guarantee. 
    The performance guarantee may be in the form of a performance bond, a certified check, a first deed of trust, an irrevocable letter of credit, or an escrow deposit. All performance guarantees shall not be accepted unless the City Attorney has made a review thereof and provided a written opinion that the interests of the city are fully protected. 
(Code 1993, § 17-143; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-194. - Plans and construction programs. 
    Plans, specifications, quantities, unit costs and estimated total costs shall be provided by the applicant to the Director of Public Works together with a schedule indicating time of initiation and completion of the work, as a whole or in stages. Number of copies shall be as required for records and processing in the particular case. 
(Code 1993, § 17-144; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-195. - Amount and terms of performance guarantee; time limitations. 
(a)  Following receipt of the required estimate, the Director of Public Works shall prepare recommendations as to the terms of the performance guarantee, including time of initiation and completion of the work, as a whole or in stages, and provisions for release of portions of the guarantee upon completion of portions or stages of the work. The life of a performance guarantee shall not be less than six (6) months or greater than two (2) years, unless otherwise provided. The time between initiation and completion of development shall not exceed four (4) years, except as provided under subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  Based on such estimate, with such changes as deemed necessary, the Director of Public Works shall set the amount and terms of the performance guarantee, subject to necessary legal review of form as provided in section 34-193. 
(c)  When, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, the required improvements or portions thereof cannot be completed within the specified time frame due to a physical condition and/or lack of an approved final plat on an adjoining property, the performance guarantee or portion thereof for such improvements may be extended beyond the maximum time stated in subsection (a) of this section. Following approval of a final plat on an adjoining property, the required improvements or portion thereof shall be installed within the life of the current performance guarantee or twelve (12) months, whichever is greater. 
(d)  The Director of Public Works may accept a substitute performance guarantee from any party to cover the cost of all or a portion of the remaining improvements shown on an approved final plat. When a substitute performance guarantee is offered, the Director of Public Works shall give ten (10) days' notice by certified mail to the party posting the original surety that the Director of Public Works intends to issue a notice to proceed for construction of the guaranteed improvements to the party offering the substitute surety. The notice to proceed will be issued to the party offering and posting the substitute surety unless the party posting the original surety makes a written request that the notice to proceed be issued to him, and has in place or offers a surety meeting the requirements of a substitute surety. 
(e)  When a substitute performance guarantee is accepted, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  The work covered by a substitute performance guarantee shall be completed within twelve (12) months. 
(2)  The original performance guarantee shall be released, reduced or returned to the party posting the original performance guarantee. 
(3)  The work performed under a notice to proceed shall conform to the original plans, in accordance with the approved final plat. 
(4)  No extensions or substitutions of a substitute performance guarantee will be allowed. 
(Code 1993, § 17-145; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-196. - Inspections and inspection reports. 
(a)  The Director of Public Works shall make inspections to determine whether work has started as scheduled, shall make inspections as are necessary during the course of work, and shall make final inspections. 
(b)  Within five (5) days of such inspections, copies of reports of the results thereof shall be provided to the file for public inspection. 
(Code 1993, § 17-146; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-197. - Inspection action reports-Satisfying requirements. 
    Where such reports indicate satisfactory completion of work within the time limit set and in accord with other terms of the performance guarantee for agreed upon stages or for the entire work, the Director of Public Works shall so indicate to the applicant, any surety company involved, and the City Manager. The City Manager, upon such notification and any further assurance he may require from the City Attorney, shall then release all or portions of the performance guarantee in accordance with the terms thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 17-147; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-198. - Inspection action reports-Failure to satisfy requirements. 
(a)  Where such reports indicate failure to initiate work on schedule or to complete work on schedule in full compliance with the terms of the performance guarantee, the Director of Public Works shall so indicate to the applicant, any surety company involved and the City Manager. Such notice shall indicate that unless action required under the terms of the performance guarantee is completed within thirty (30) days of the date of such notification, the performance guarantee or portions thereof set forth in its terms shall be called. 
(b)  Unless such action is completed, as evidenced by inspections and reports of the Director of Public Works, the City Manager shall call the performance guarantee or affected portions thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 17-148; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-199. - Inspection action reports-Unsatisfactory progress. 
    Where such reports indicate that work initiated appears likely not to be completed on schedule, and where the performance guarantee provides for extension of time for cause, the Director of Public Works shall notify the applicant and any surety company involved concerning potential need for an application for such extension. Where such notice has been given, no application for extension shall be considered after expiration of the original schedule date. 
(Code 1993, § 17-149; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-200. - Actions following failure to complete work under performance guarantee. 
    When work required under the terms of any performance guarantee is not completed by the applicant as specified therein, the City Manager, following the call of the guarantee, shall take such action as is appropriate in the circumstances of the case to procure the completion of the required improvements at the earliest reasonable time, according to the plans and specifications and staging of construction approved in connection therewith. 
(Code 1993, § 17-150; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-201. - Acceptance of guarantee of other governmental agency or utility. 
    Where all or part of required improvements are to be completed by another governmental agency or utility, the City Manager may accept the written guarantee of such agency to complete such improvements within a time to be mutually agreed upon. 
(Code 1993, § 17-151; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-202. - Building permits and certificates of occupancy prior to completion of improvements. 
(a)  Building permits may be issued for construction of buildings in subdivisions which have been given final approval and properly recorded prior to completion of the required improvements. 
(b)  Certificates of occupancy may be issued and buildings occupied only when all of the following improvements are available and as further provided: 
(1)  Streets, passable for private, service and emergency vehicles under normal weather conditions, provided that distance along such streets shall not exceed one-fourth (1/4) mile by normal routes; 
(2)  Driveways passable under normal weather conditions; 
(3)  Drainage ensuring that under normal weather conditions there will be no flooding of the building site or access ways to the site; 
(4)  Erosion protection acceptable under normal weather conditions; and 
(5)  Domestic water supply and sanitary sewerage. 
(c)  No such permits or certificates shall be issued unless improvements are guaranteed and the applicant accepts tort liability pending completion of all required improvements. 
(Code 1993, § 17-152; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Secs. 34-203-34-227. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 34-228. - Planning Board review; recommendation. 
    All proposed amendments to these regulations, except those initiated by the Planning Board, shall be submitted to the Planning Board for its recommendations as to approval, approval with specified alterations, or denial. Unless such recommendation is forthcoming within sixty (60) days of submittal, or a longer period is agreed upon in writing by the person or agency initiating the proposal, the City Council may proceed to act without a recommendation. 
(Code 1972, § 21-14; Code 1993, § 17-161; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-229. - Public notice and hearing. 
    No such proposed amendment shall be acted upon by the City Council until after a public hearing thereon, at least fifteen (15) days' notice of which shall have been published in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(Code 1993, § 17-162; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-230. - Limitation on resubmittal. 
    Except when initiated by City Council or the Planning Board, no proposed amendment failing of passage shall be considered in substantially the same form within one (1) year of rejection. 
Code 1993, § 17-163; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Secs. 34-231-34-253. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND REMEDIES 

Sec. 34-254. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Any violation of this chapter shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). Violators shall be issued a written citation which must be paid within seventy-two (72) hours. 
(b)  Each day of continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct offense. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, provisions of this chapter may be enforced through equitable remedies issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  In addition to or in lieu of remedies authorized in subsections (a) and (c) of this section, violations of this chapter may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor in accordance with applicable law. 
(e)  When the subdivision of land is authorized herein, any person who, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located within the jurisdiction of the city, thereafter subdivides his land in violation of this chapter or transfers or sells land by reference to, exhibition of, or any other use of a plat showing a subdivision of the land before the plat has been properly approved under this chapter and recorded in the office of the appropriate Register of Deeds, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring land shall not exempt the transaction from this penalty. The city may bring an action for injunction of any illegal subdivision, transfer, conveyance, or sale of land, and the court shall, upon appropriate findings, issue an injunction and order requiring the offending party to comply with this chapter. Building permits required pursuant to G.S. 160A-417 may be denied for lots that have been illegally subdivided. In addition to other remedies, a city may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the unlawful subdivision of land, to restrain, correct, or abate the violation, or to prevent any illegal act or conduct. 
(Code 1993, § 17-171; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996; Ord. No. 06-03, § 4, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 34-255. - Remedies. 
    Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by law or in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations; to prevent unlawful construction; to recover damages; to restrain, correct or abate violation; and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. 
(Code 1993, § 17-172; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Secs. 34-256-34-273. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 34-274. - Authorized; procedure. 
(a)  The City Council may vary the requirements of this chapter where, because of the size of the tract to be subdivided, its topography, the condition or nature of adjoining areas, or the existence of other unusual physical conditions, strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter could cause an unusual and unnecessary hardship on the subdivider. 
(b)  In granting variances, the City Council may require such conditions as will secure, insofar as practicable, the objectives of the requirement varied. Any variance thus recommended is required to be entered in writing in the minutes of the City Council and the findings upon which departure was justified set forth. 
(Code 1993, § 17-181; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Secs. 34-275-34-296. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - FEES 

Sec. 34-297. - Fees for subdivision requests. 
(a)  The fees for subdivision requests are as established from time to time by ordinance. 
(b)  All fees are due at the time the requests are made. No request will be considered until the applicable fee is paid. 
(Code 1993, § 17-191; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Secs. 34-298-34-327. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - LEGAL STATUS AND EFFECTIVE DATE 

Sec. 34-328. - Severability. 
    If any part or provision of these regulations or application thereof to any person or circumstances is adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part, provisions or application directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations or the application thereof to other persons or circumstances. 
(Code 1993, § 17-200; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-329. - Repeal. 
    Previous subdivision regulations in effect, up to the effective date of these regulations, are repealed as of the effective date of these regulations and shall be superseded thereby except insofar as actions remain pending under prior regulations. 
(Code 1993, § 17-201; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Sec. 34-330. - Effective date. 
    These regulations shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage by the City Council. 
(Code 1993, § 17-202; Ord. No. 96-2, 2-12-1996) 
Chapter 36 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, ch. 16. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 36-1-36-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Transporting fortified wine or spirituous liquor in a for-hire passenger vehicle, G.S. 18B-401; age limits for drivers of public passenger-carrying vehicles, G.S. 20-10; general municipal powers as to taxicabs, G.S. 20-37, 160A-304; passenger vehicle registration fees, G.S. 20-87; for-hire vehicles to be marked, G.S. 20-101; financial responsibility, G.S. 20-280. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Taxicab means any motor vehicle seating nine (9) or fewer passengers operated upon any street or highway on call or demand, accepting or soliciting passengers indiscriminately for hire between such points along the streets or highways as may be directed by the passenger so being transported. 
(Code 1972, § 24-1; Code 1993, § 8-51) 
State Law reference- For hire passenger vehicles defined, G.S. 20-4.01(27)(b). 
Sec. 36-20. - Rates of fares. 
    The City Council shall from time to time adopt a schedule of rates to be charged by taxicabs for hauling passengers. The schedule of rates so fixed shall remain in effect until changed by the City Council. The schedule of rates so fixed shall be at all times prominently posted and displayed in such taxicab so as to be visible to the passengers therein, and a copy shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Code 1972, § 24-9; Code 1993, § 8-52) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to establish rates that may be changed by taxicab operators, G.S. 160A-304. 
Sec. 36-21. - Office and base required. 
    Every person operating any taxicab within the corporate limits of the city shall have an office or base with the name of such operator prominently displayed. 
(Code 1972, § 24-10; Code 1993, § 8-53) 
Sec. 36-22. - Limits on taxicabs and drivers' permits issued by City Council. 
    The City Council may from time to time limit the number of taxicabs to be operated on the streets of the city and may limit the number of drivers' permits to be issued. 
(Code 1972, § 24-11; Code 1993, § 8-54) 
Sec. 36-23. - Insurance required. 
    Owners and operators of taxicabs within the city shall have insurance with any insurance carrier duly authorized to do business in the state on each taxicab operated by them in the sum of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) because of bodily injury to or death of one (1) person in any one accident and subject to said limit for one person, sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00) because of bodily injury to or death of two (2) or more persons in any one (1) accident, and twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one accident. 
(Code 1972, § 24-12; Code 1993, § 8-55; Ord. No. 00-5, 6-19-2000) 
Sec. 36-24. - Tax. 
    Taxicab operators or owners shall pay to the city a sum as established from time to time for each taxicab operated in the city. Such tax shall be due and payable July 1 of each year. 
(Code 1972, § 24-13; Code 1993, § 8-56) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to levy not more than fifteen dollars upon each vehicle operated as a taxicab, G.S. 20-97(d). 
Sec. 36-25. - Identification of vehicles. 
(a)  A name identifying the owner (taxicab company), taxicab and telephone number shall be painted with permanent paint on both sides and the rear of each cab with letters and numbers at least four (4) inches high on the sides and with a cab number on the rear at least four (4) inches high at a location to be designated by the Chief of Police. In lieu of painting the company name on the sides and rear of the taxicabs, a lighted globe may be placed on top of the taxicab identifying company, taxicab number and telephone number. An advertising billboard on the back of taxicab with company name, taxicab number and telephone number is also allowed, but cannot interfere with vision. 
(b)  Colors of paint to be used for lettering and numbering shall be of sharp contrast with the color of surface paint to which this is applied so as to be evenly visible at a reasonable distance, especially at nighttime with streetlights. No lettering or numbers shall be acceptable which have been painted upon a sheet or other material which in turn can be removed or detached to conceal the identification of such cab company and cab number. 
(c)  No vehicle covered by the terms of this article shall be licensed nor shall a permit be issued for any vehicle whose identifying design, monogram or insignia to be used thereon shall conflict with or imitate any identifying design, monogram or insignia used on a vehicle already operating under a permit issued pursuant to this article in such a manner as to be misleading or tending to deceive the public. After a license or permit has been issued for a taxicab hereunder, if the identifying design, monogram or insignia thereof is changed so as to be in conflict with or imitate any existing approved identifying design, monogram or insignia used by any other owner in such a manner as to be misleading or tending to deceive the public, the license of or permit covering such taxicab shall be suspended or revoked. 
(Code 1993, § 8-57; Ord. No. 89-5, § 1(24-14), 6-12-1989) 
Secs. 36-26-36-53. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE OF CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY 

Sec. 36-54. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab upon and over the streets of the city or at any point not incorporated within a radius of five (5) miles thereof without first having applied for and secured from the City Council a certificate of convenience and necessity as hereinafter set forth. 
(Code 1972, § 24-2; Code 1993, § 8-76) 
Sec. 36-55. - Duration. 
    A certificate shall constitute a franchise from the city for the operation of taxicabs within the city subject to the provisions of this division. Such certificate is valid until revoked by action of City Council. 
(Code 1972, § 24-3; Code 1993, § 8-77) 
Sec. 36-56. - Application. 
(a)  Every person desiring to operate a taxicab upon and over the streets of the city shall file on forms supplied by the City Clerk an application for a certificate of convenience and necessity. 
(b)  Each application for a certificate of convenience and necessity shall be scheduled for a hearing not later than thirty-five (35) days after the same is filed, and the applicant shall be notified by the City Clerk by mail sent to the business address set forth in the application of the date and time of such hearing. Such notification shall be sent at least ten (10) days before the date set for the hearing. The City Clerk shall also within the same time notify all persons who at that time hold certificates of convenience and necessity for the operation of taxicabs within the municipality of the date, time and place of such hearing and the name of the applicant. In addition, the City Clerk shall cause to be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation or posted in three (3) public places at least ten (10) days before such hearing a notice setting forth the name of the applicant and the date, time and place of hearing. The cost of such publication is to be paid by the applicant. 
(c)  The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish the existence of public convenience and necessity for the operation of the taxicab specified in his application and all other facts required for the granting of a certificate. 
(Code 1972, § 24-4; Code 1993, § 8-78) 
Sec. 36-57. - Issuance. 
(a)  The City Council shall have power and it shall be its duty to order certain certificates issued or to refuse to issue certain certificates or to issue certificates for a partial exercise of the privileges sought, and the Council may attach to the exercise of the rights granted by such certificates such terms and conditions as in their judgment the public convenience and necessity may require. 
(b)  In determining whether the public convenience and necessity require the franchising of such taxicab, the City Council shall, among other things, take into consideration the following factors: 
(1)  Whether or not the public convenience and necessity require such proposed or additional taxicab service with the city. 
(2)  The financial responsibility of the applicant and the likelihood of the proposed service being permanent, responsible and satisfactory. 
(3)  The number of cabs and condition of equipment for initial operation. 
(4)  The number of taxicabs now operated, the demand for increased service, if any, whether or not the safe use of the streets by the public, both vehicular and pedestrian, will be preserved and whether or not adequate provision has been made for off-street parking of such taxicabs. 
(5)  The experience of the applicant in the taxicab business. 
(6)  Such other relative facts as may be deemed necessary and advisable. 
(c)  Before making any decision with respect to the issuance of a certificate of convenience and necessity, the City Council or a committee thereof shall make a full and complete investigation of all facts and may, if it so desires, subpoena witnesses and utilize the services of the Chief of Police or any other officer or employee of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 24-5; Code 1993, § 8-79) 
Sec. 36-58. - When null and void. 
    If a certificate is granted under this division to an applicant and such applicant shall fail to begin operations within sixty (60) days after the date of such certificate, such certificate shall become null and void. 
(Code 1972, § 24-6; Code 1993, § 8-80) 
Sec. 36-59. - Transfer. 
    A certificate required by this division is not transferable without the consent of the City Council. Applications for a permit to transfer shall be filed in the same manner as an application for a certificate of convenience and necessity. The proceeding upon such application for transfer shall be the same as those described for the issuance of a certificate; except the question of public convenience and necessity need not be proved. 
(Code 1972, § 24-7; Code 1993, § 8-81) 
Sec. 36-60. - Revocation. 
    The City Council may at any time after a public hearing revoke any certificate issued under this division for any one (1) or more of the following causes: 
(a)  Failure to operate the taxicabs specified in the certificate in such manner as to serve the public adequately and efficiently. 
(b)  Failure to maintain motor equipment in good repair. 
(c)  Failure to carry liability insurance or bond as required by this article. 
(d)  Repeated and persistent violation by the taxicab drivers of traffic and safety ordinances or state laws relating to alcoholic beverages or prostitution. 
(e)  Failure to pay any of the city taxes or license fees imposed upon such taxicabs. 
(f)  Failure to report accidents. 
(g)  Willful failure to comply with any provision of this article or other ordinance or state laws relating to the operation of taxicabs. 
No certificate shall be revoked until the owner has had at least five (5) days' notice by personal service or registered mail of the charges against him and the time and place of hearing. If after the hearing it is found that the owner is guilty of one (1) or more of the offenses listed herein, the City Council shall have the power to revoke the certificate or to condition a revocation upon compliance of its order within any time fixed by it. 
(Code 1972, § 24-8; Code 1993, § 8-82) 
Secs. 36-61-36-78. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRIVER'S PERMIT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to require taxicab drivers to have a city permit, and establishing conditions for issuance and revocation of permits, G.S. 160A-304. 

Sec. 36-79. - Required. 
    No person shall drive any taxicab carrying passengers for hire from place to place within the corporate limits or at any point not incorporated within a distance of five (5) miles thereof unless that person shall have first applied to and secured from the City Manager a driver's permit to operate a taxicab. 
(Code 1972, § 24-15; Code 1993, § 8-101) 
Sec. 36-80. - Application. 
(a)  The application required of applicants to drive a taxicab as provided in this division shall be made upon form furnished by the city for such purposes. The application form shall, among other things, contain a place for the applicant to place his name, address, physical condition, physical description, former employers, court records and state chauffeur's license and number. The application must be signed by a licensed and practicing physician of the state. The applicant shall have his fingerprints taken and photograph made at the office of the city Police Department, and the fingerprints and photograph shall constitute and be a part of his application. 
(b)  Application for a reissue permit shall state the name, address and permit number of the preceding permit issued; provided that such prior permit has not been revoked or has not expired more than twelve (12) months prior thereto. 
(Code 1972, § 24-16; Code 1993, § 8-102) 
State Law reference- Uniform Driver's License Act, G.S. 20-5 et seq. 
Sec. 36-81. - Investigation of application. 
    The Chief of Police is hereby charged with the duty of investigating the facts stated in such application and shall report his findings and recommendations to the City Manager. 
(Code 1972, § 24-17; Code 1993, § 8-103) 
Sec. 36-82. - Grounds for disqualification of applicant. 
    A finding by the City Manager that any applicant has been guilty of any one (1) of the following acts shall constitute adequate grounds for the disqualification of such applicant: 
(a)  Physical unfitness. 
(b)  Conviction of a felony. 
(c)  Conviction of any crime relating to the use, possession or sale of intoxicating liquors. 
(d)  Conviction of any crime relating to prostitution. 
(e)  Conviction of any crime relating to the use, possession or sale of narcotic drugs. 
(f)  Habitual violation of traffic laws. 
(g)  Habitual use of intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs. 
(h)  Any other grounds which would be clearly injurious to the health, safety or morals of the community. 
(Code 1972, § 24-18; Code 1993, § 8-104) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. 160A-304. 
Sec. 36-83. - Issuance. 
    The permits referred to in this division shall be issued upon authorization of the City Manager following his determination that the applicant therefor is duly qualified to hold such permit and after payment of the required fees. A holder of a valid existing permit or a prior holder of a valid existing permit that has not been revoked and that has not lapsed for failure to renew for a period not exceeding twelve (12) months shall be prima facie deemed to be qualified for a reissue permit. 
(Code 1972, § 24-19; Code 1993, § 8-105) 
Sec. 36-84. - Duration. 
    The original permit issued under this division to any applicant shall be valid from the date of issuance until July 1 following. A reissue permit shall be procured prior to the expiration date of a valid existing permit and such reissue permit shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from July 1 following the issuance thereof or until revoked or until and during such period such permit is suspended. 
(Code 1972, § 24-20; Code 1993, § 8-106) 
Sec. 36-85. - Fees and refunds. 
    Each person seeking an original permit under this division shall pay to the city Tax Collector a fee for such permit with the application therefor. In the event that such application is denied, a refund of such fee shall be made. A person seeking a reissue license shall pay a fee for such reissue license. Fee and refund amounts shall be as established from time to time by ordinance. 
(Code 1972, § 24-21; Code 1993, § 8-107) 
Sec. 36-86. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  At any time after the issuance of a permit under this division to any person, the City Manager may suspend or revoke such permit upon his determination that the person to whom the permit was issued has been guilty of any act or ceased to qualify under any of the standards which would constitute grounds for denying the permit as set forth in section 36-83. 
(b)  Any action instituted to revoke or suspend a permit shall be initiated by formal notice in writing to such party concerned and shall be subject to appeal, as provided in section 2-39. 
(Code 1972, § 24-22; Code 1993, § 8-108) 
Sec. 36-87. - Display of permit, photograph, zone map and fee structure. 
    The driver of every taxicab shall, at all times while operating such taxicab, prominently post and display in such taxicab so as to be visible to the passengers therein his permit to drive a taxicab and his photograph made when such permit was issued, zone map, and fee structure. 
(Code 1972, § 24-23; Code 1993, § 8-109) 
Secs. 36-88-36-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES 

Sec. 36-111. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City means the City of Washington. 
    Driver means and includes every person who is permitted to drive or is in charge of a horse-drawn carriage. 
    Historic District means the area as designated as such by the official City of Washington Zoning Map. 
    Horse means horse, donkey, mule, or other equine. 
    Horse-drawn carriage means any vehicle for hire designed to be pulled by one or more horses and to carry passengers. 
    Permittee means any person to whom a horse-drawn carriage permit is issued pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 1(a), 8-8-2005) 
Sec. 36-112. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated for hire any vehicle, of whatever nature, drawn by animals for the purpose of conducting tours or rides within the Historic District, except animal-drawn vehicles as provided in this article, without a permit first having been obtained. Any person desiring a permit to operate a horse-drawn carriage shall file an application with the city. 
(b)  A business license shall be obtained and the fee therefore shall be paid, as prescribed by the business license provision of this Code, by every person to whom a horse-drawn carriage permit has been granted. 
(c)  A permit fee shall be required to be paid by each applicant whose application for a permit has been granted. 
(d)  No person granted a permit under this section shall conduct any operation or give any service other than the service authorized by the permit granted. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 1(b), 8-8-2005) 
Sec. 36-113. - Operating regulations. 
    Every person conducting the business of horse-drawn carriages in the city and any person driving such a carriage for such a business shall comply with each and all of the following provisions and restrictions: 
(a)  All persons operating a horse-drawn carriage shall be at least 18 years old or older. 
(b)  There shall be no operation along any street in the Historic District which has a speed limit over thirty (30) miles per hour, unless such operation has prior written approval from the city. 
(c)  No person shall operate a horse-drawn carriage in any manner which impedes or blocks normal or reasonable movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic unless such operation is necessary for the safe operation of such service. 
(d)  Horse and carriage standing areas (while awaiting a fare) must be in a location which does not impede free flow of motor vehicles and/or access to designated parking stalls as approved by the city as a part of the permit application process. 
(e)  Horse-drawn carriage services in the Historic District shall not be operated prior to 6:00 p.m., except on Saturdays, Sundays and on any day of the week, which is a nationally observed holiday. Horse-drawn carriage service may also be operated prior to 6:00 p.m., during any annual or special event approved by the city. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize any animal for the purpose of pulling any vehicle on city streets, unless such animal is equipped with a diapering apparatus that prevents the droppings of such animal from being deposited or otherwise left on city streets. The driver shall be responsible for cleaning up any spillage immediately. Failure to clean up spillage could result in revocation of permit. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 1(c), 8-8-2005) 
Sec. 36-114. - Insurance. 
(a)  It is expressly understood and agreed by and between the permittee and the city that the permittee shall save, hold and keep harmless from all loss sustained by the city on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever, resulting from the permittee's operation under the terms of this section. 
(b)  The permittee shall at all times during the term of this service obtain and maintain liability insurance whereby the city is named as additionally insured. Said insurance shall be in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage. The permittee shall provide proof of insurance to the city prior to the commencement of operations. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 1(d), 8-8-2005) 
Sec. 36-115. - Enforcement. 
    Failure to abide by the provisions of this article or any of the ordinances of the city or laws of the state in any manner affecting or regulating the operation of the vehicle for which the permit is issued shall be grounds for the suspension of said permit. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 1(e), 8-8-2005) 
Chapter 38 - WATER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, adopted May 2, 2011, repealed former Ch. 38, §§ 38-1-38-411, and enacted a new Ch. 38 as set out herein. Former Ch. 38 pertained to water and wastewater and derived from various ordinances of which can be found on the Code Comparative Table. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 38-1. - Purpose and policy. 
    This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the water distribution and treatment system for the City of Washington, hereafter referred to as the city, and enables the city to comply with all applicable State and Federal laws. This policy provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of expenditures and the cost of the water. This chapter shall apply to the city and to persons who are, by permit or agreement with the city; except as otherwise provided herein, the Director shall administer the provisions of this chapter. 
    The objectives of this chapter are: 
(a)  To ensure that the municipality complies with all Federal and State laws to which the municipal water system is subject, and 
(b)  To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the municipal water system. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 38-2. - Definitions and abbreviations. 
(a)  Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
(1)  City. The City of Washington or, where the context so indicates, the City Council. 
(2)  Color. This represents the true color due to the substances in solution. 
(3)  Customer. The person that contracts with the city for provision of water service. 
(4)  Director. The Director of Public Works or his/her authorized representative. 
(5)  Operation and maintenance. All costs, direct and indirect, not including debt service and capital related expenditures, but inclusive of expenditures attributable to administration, monitoring, inspections, reviewing applications, maintenance of equipment, and treatment and distribution of water, necessary to assure adequate water distribution and treatment on a continuing basis which conforms to applicable regulations and assures optimal long-term facility management. 
(6)  Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all Federal, State, and local government entities. 
(7)  pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed as standard units, and calculated as the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
(8)  Pollution. This means any material that causes the alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water. 
(9)  Public water system. A system for the provision to the public of water for human consumption through pipes or other constructed conveyances serving fifteen (15) or more service connections or which regularly serves twenty-five (25) or more individuals. Plans and specifications must be approved by the DENR. 
(10)  Qualified laboratory. Laboratories currently certified by the state to perform water and wastewater analyses. 
(11)  Standard methods. The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association, and Water Pollution Control Federation or another procedures recognized by the DWQ, DPH, and EPA. 
(12)  State. Refers to the State of North Carolina. 
(b)  This chapter is gender neutral and the masculine gender shall include the feminine and vice-versa. 
(c)  Shall is mandatory; may is permissive or discretionary. 
(d)  The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its use. 
(e)  The following abbreviations when used in this chapter shall have the designated meanings: 
(1)  CFR-Code of Federal Regulations 
(2)  CWA-Clean Water Act 
(3)  DENR-NC Department of Environment and Natural Resources 
(4)  DPH-NC Division of Public Health 
(5)  DWQ-NC Division of Water Quality 
(6)  EPA-Environmental Protection Agency 
(7)  gpd-Gallons per day 
(8)  l-Liter 
(9)  mg-Milligrams 
(10)  mg/l-Milligrams per liter 
(11)  N.C.G.S.-North Carolina General Statutes 
(12)  NCAC-North Carolina Administrative Code 
(13)  O & M-Operation and Maintenance 
(14)  USC-United States Code. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 38-3. - Authority. 
    All utilities owned, leased or used by the city, whether inside or outside the corporate limits, shall be under the full control of the city pursuant to authorization in Session Laws of 1953, Chapter 300. The duty of enacting and enforcing rules and regulations governing the management and control of city properties shall be vested in the city, and the duty of enforcing such rules and regulations may be delegated. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 38-4. - Visiting utility stations. 
    No visitor shall be permitted to enter the water treatment plant or any worksite unless accompanied by the Director or his designee, and under no circumstances shall any visitor handle or in any way come in contact with any part of the machinery. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 38-5. - Connections and meters. 
(a)  Connections. All meters, meter boxes, pipes and other equipment furnished and used by the city in installing any water connection shall be and remain the property of the city. 
(b)  Maintenance of meters. All meters, except such as are required to be furnished by specified users of water, shall be kept in good repair and working order by and at the expense of the city. 
(c)  Connections-Work to be done by the city. The construction of taps for the connection of the public water lines on any lot with public water lines in any street and the necessary excavation thereof shall be done only by the city. 
(d)  Connections-Application. 
(1)  No connection shall be made to any public water line except after approval of the written application therefor. 
(2)  Every application for a water connection shall state the name of the owner of the lot, the name of the street on which lot is situated, the number of the house, if there is one (1) on the lot or, if not, a description of the location of the lot, the number and kind of connections required and the character of surface of the abutting street. Every such application shall be signed by the person making the application and shall be accompanied by the proper fee for making the connection applied for. 
(e)  Connections-Separate connections required; exceptions. Every house or building abutting any public water line shall have a separate connection. The city may construct a single water line of sufficient size to the curbline; provided each house or business is connected through a separate water meter. Approved projects may be served with a single master water meter if approved by the city. 
(f)  Connections-Where connection inside. Water connections shall be made into existing connections constructed by the city to serve a lot. If a connection does not exist, one (1) shall be provided as close as possible to the location requested by the customer. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 38-6. - Standards and provisions for water systems. 
(a)  Provisions of water service. 
(1)  Area outside city. 
a.  With adequate public water existing. Upon receipt of a request for water service and payment of all fees and charges, the city may construct a water connection to serve the property. The property owner shall pay the then existing connection fee and capital investment fee prior to receiving a tap. 
b.  Public water not existing. 
1.  Upon receipt of a request for water service, the city may approve the request and authorize construction of a line to serve the property. When a water line is constructed, it shall extend across the entire frontage of the property to be serviced. 
2.  The owner or developer shall bear the cost of all materials and right-of-way to construct a water line from the nearest adequately sized line to serve the property, and to construct all distribution lines required and approved by the city to serve the property to be developed. The city may bear the cost of labor and equipment to construct the line. The city may order that the construction be accomplished by a contractor, in which case the party requesting such service shall pay the full cost. 
3.  If the city determines that sufficient advantages exist, it may choose to bear the cost of materials, labor and equipment to construct a line from the nearest adequately sized water line to the property to be served. 
4.  Each property requesting service and abutting a water line constructed according to subsection 38-6(a)(1)b.1. or 2. of this section shall comply with subsection 38-6(a)(1)a. of this section. 
c.  Charges after annexation into city. After annexation into the city, property which is not already connected and abuts an existing water line shall pay the then existing inside capital investment fee and water connection fee prior to receiving a tap. 
d.  Fire hydrants. The city shall not install fire hydrants outside the corporate limits, except where arrangements are made to pay for construction of the hydrant, pay an annual fee, measure water flow and pay for water used. 
e.  Water rates. Customers outside the city shall be charged the regular outside rate. 
(2)  Area inside city. 
a.  With adequate water lines existing. The city shall construct a water tap after receipt of the then existing water connection fee. 
b.  Water lines not existing. When a property owner within the city requests water service, the city may order the extension of a water main to serve the property and assess all abutting property owners, who do not already have access to a water line, an amount equal to the cost of materials, but such assessments shall not exceed an amount as established from time to time by ordinance. 
c.  Other conditions. When a subdivision or developer requests water service and conditions in subsection (1) or (2) of this section do not apply, or if an unusually large amount of construction is required, the conditions of payment shall be determined through negotiations and established in a contract between the property owner and city. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 38-7. - Taking water from public fire hydrants and inspection of fire hydrants. 
    No person, except the Director or Chief of the Fire-Rescue-EMS Department or a person in charge of street cleaning, shall take or in any way use water for private use from public fire hydrants, unless such person pay for a hydrant meter, as stated in section 38-16, for the privilege and receive the usual permit to do so. 
    It shall be the duty of the Director to examine, or cause to be examined, all fire hydrants in the city at least once every six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 38-8. - Tampering with equipment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, remove or otherwise interfere with the water meters or any other water utility equipment, apparatus or materials belonging to the distribution system of the city, with the exception of those licensed plumbing contractors so designated to do so by the city, and then only in the event of necessary repairs or emergency service to the property of the water consumers of the city, and with proper notification to the city by such licensed plumbing contractor. It shall be unlawful for any reason to remove or damage property of any kind belonging to the city. 
(b)  A reward of up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be offered to any person furnishing information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person violating this section. 
(c)  A fee, in an amount established from time to time by ordinance, shall be charged for the city's cost in investigating customers who tamper with their water service without permission of the city. Service may be discontinued if this fee is not paid. 
(d)  For customers who tamper with the water meters, fees shall be charged, in amounts and according to criteria as established from time to time by ordinance, to cover the additional costs to the city. Service may be discontinued if these fees are not paid. 
(e)  Water utility customers shall protect water meters and related equipment on their premises from vandalism or being tampered with in any way, and shall promptly report to the city's Public Works Department any such vandalism or tampering. If any such vandalism or tampering is not so reported, the same shall constitute prima facie evidence that such vandalism or tampering was by the customer. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 38-9. - Right to shut off water for repairs and no claim for damages on account of accident. 
    The city reserves the right at any time to shut off the water, in case of an accident, for the purpose of making connections or repairs. 
    It is expressly agreed between the city, users, and customers that no claim for damages shall be made against the city on account of accidental failure to supply water, whether by quantity or quality. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL WATER USE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 38-10. - Public water system defined; approval of plans and specifications. 
    A public water system is a system for the provision to the public of water for human consumption through pipes or other constructed conveyances serving fifteen (15) or more service connections or which regularly serves twenty-five (25) or more individuals. Plans and specifications must be approved by the State Department of Environment, Division of Environmental Health, and Public Water Supply Section. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 38-11. - Water system. 
(a)  The water system shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts: the city water system and the customer's system. 
(b)  The city system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system and shall include all those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the city, up to and including the water meter; at which point, the customer's system customarily begins. 
(c)  The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the distribution system. 
(d)  The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the customer's system. 
(e)  The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the city's distribution system which are utilized in conveying potable water to points of use. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
DIVISION 2. - OPERATION OF SYSTEM 

Sec. 38-12. - Cross-connections. 
(a)  No potable water supply shall be connected, by any means whatever to another source of water supply or to a storage facility unless such connection has been previously approved by the Public Water Supply Section and the Director. 
(b)  No person shall introduce any water into the distribution system or the potable water supply through any means other than from a source of supply duly approved by the Public Water Supply Section and the Director, or make a physical connection between an approved supply and unapproved supply unless authorized in an emergency by the State Division of Environmental Health, and Public Water Supply Section and the Director. 
(c)  All cross-connections between potable water supplies and nonpotable or unprotected supplies which are not specifically covered in the categories in this section shall be considered as special problems and the protective devices required shall be determined by the Public Water Supply Section and the Director on the basis of the degree of health hazard involved. 
(d)  No person shall fill special tanks or tankers containing pesticides, fertilizers, other toxic chemicals, or their residues from the potable water system; except at a location with an over-the-rim free discharge of water or an approved reduced pressure backflow preventer properly installed on the potable water supply. The city shall not permit the filling of such special use containers except at locations so equipped. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 38-13. - Facilities that require assemblies. 
(a)  Any customer either operating or planning to operate facilities identified by the city as having a potential for backflow into the city's public water supply system, shall install an approved backflow prevention assembly on all such service connections according to the degree of hazard present. The following facilities have been identified by the city as having a potential for backflow and require backflow prevention assemblies as indicated: These guidelines are supplemental to section 1006(b) of the Rules Governing Public Water Supplies. 
(b)  Degree of hazard. 
(1)  Severe: Actual or potential threat of contamination that presents an imminent danger to the public health with consequence of serious illness or death. 
(2)  Moderate: One that presents foreseeable and significant potential for pollution, nuisance, aesthetically objectionable or other undesirable alterations of the drinking water supply. 
(c)  Backflow prevention assembly requirements. 
Degree of Hazard RPZ 
Reduced Pressure Zone DCVA 
Double Check Valve Assembly Air gap Severe X --- X Moderate --- X ---  
    Facilities that require installation of Backflow Preventer and this list is not intended to be an exhaustive list. 
(1)  Automotive service station, dealerships. 
a.  Moderate hazard: DCVA 
b.  Severe hazard (e.g. wash pits, hydraulic equipment): RP 
(2)  Bakeries: DCVA 
(3)  Beauty shops/barber. 
a.  Moderate hazard (e.g. hair cuts): DCVA 
b.  Severe hazard (e.g. washing hair, chemical treatment): RP 
(4)  Beverage bottling plants or breweries: RP 
(5)  Canneries, packing houses or rendering plants: RP 
(6)  Chemical processing plants: RP 
(7)  Church baptismal: DCVA 
(8)  Commercial car wash facilities: RP 
(9)  Commercial establishments using processed water: 
a.  Moderate hazard: DCVA 
b.  Severe hazard: RP 
(10)  Commercial greenhouses: RP 
(11)  Concrete/asphalt plants: RP 
(12)  Dairies or cold storage plants: RP 
(13)  Dentist or orthodontist: RP 
(14)  Dye works: RP 
(15)  Film laboratories or photo processing: RP 
(16)  Fire systems: 
a.  Moderate hazard: DCVA 
b.  Severe hazard (e.g. foam, antifreeze, booster pump): RP 
(17)  Funeral homes: RP 
(18)  Hospital, medical buildings or medical clinics: RP 
(19)  Laboratories: RP 
(20)  Laundries: 
a.  Moderate hazard: DCVA 
b.  Severe hazard: (e.g. dry cleaners): RP 
(21)  Lawn irrigation systems: 
a.  Moderate hazard: RP 
b.  Severe hazard: (e.g. booster pump, chemical system): RP 
(22)  Metal manufacturing, cleaning, processing or fabricating plants: RP 
(23)  Morgues, mortuaries, or autopsy facilities: RP 
(24)  Multi-story buildings: 
a.  (Three (3) or four (4) stories) moderate hazard: DCVA 
b.  (Five (5) or more stories) severe hazard: RP 
(25)  Nursing and convalescent homes: RP 
(26)  Oil and gas production, storage or transmission properties: RP 
(27)  Pest control (exterminating or fumigating): RP 
(28)  Power plants: RP 
(29)  Restaurants: DCVA 
(30)  Restricted, classified or other closed facilities: RP 
(31)  Sand or Gravel Plants: RP 
(32)  Schools: 
a.  Moderate hazard: DCVA 
b.  Severe hazard: RP 
(33)  Sewage or storm drain facilities: RP 
(34)  Swimming pools: RP 
(35)  Veterinary hospitals or clinics: RP 
(36)  Wastewater treatment plants: RP 
(37)  Water treatment plants: RP 
(38)  Waterfront commercial facilities and industries: RP 
(d)  Other types of facilities not listed may also be required to install approved backflow prevention assemblies if determined necessary by the city. 
(e)  Approved backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed on the customer's system at the point of service to any facility that the city identifies as having a potential for backflow. 
(f)  Approved backflow preventer assemblies. Meets American Society of Sanitary Engineering (ASSE) standard and carries an ASSE seal or is on the University of Southern California approval list or is an assembly approved by the city. 
(g)  Backflow prevention assembly installation. Backflow prevention must be located in a place where it is readily accessible for regular testing, maintenance and inspection. Bypass lines parallel to a backflow prevention assembly shall have an approved backflow prevention assembly installed that is equal to that on the main line. 
(1)  Reduced pressure zone. 
a.  Above ground installation preferred. 
b.  Below ground vault shall have positive drainage with adequate gravity drainage to atmosphere. 
c.  Twelve (12) inches minimum clearance with manufacturer's recommendations. 
(2)  Double check valve assembly. 
a.  Vertical or horizontal installation acceptable. 
b.  Adequate drainage shall be provided if installed below ground. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 38-14. - Policy. 
(a)  When it has been determined by the city, that a requested service requires the installation of a backflow prevention assembly, the customer shall, prior to receiving such service, submit for review and approval, plans and specifications of the proposed facilities. The submittal shall include a description of proposed facilities. The submittal shall include a description of proposed processes, operations, etc., in such detail as needed to evaluate potential effects on the city's system. Proposed assemblies shall be identified by size, manufacturer and model number or by specification. 
(b)  When it has been determined by the city, that an existing service may require the installation of a backflow prevention assembly, the customer shall submit for review such information as may be necessary to permit the city to evaluate the potential for undesirable effects on its system. Upon notification of the customer by the city that a backflow prevention assembly(ies) is necessary, the customer shall submit plans and specifications for approval and install or cause to be installed entirely at the customer's expense such assemblies as may be necessary. 
(c)  If it has been determined by the city that an imminent health hazard exist, then the water service to the facility causing the imminent health hazard may be terminated. 
(d)  All existing facilities which pose a potential severe hazard to the public water system shall install a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly at the point of service within sixty (60) days of notification by the city at the customer's expense. 
(e)  All existing industrial and commercial facilities that have or may have an actual or potential cross-connection, that are not identified as a "severe hazard" shall be considered moderate hazard facilities. All existing moderate hazard facilities shall install a double-check valve assembly at the point of service within ninety (90) days of notification by the city at the customer's expense. 
(f)  When required, an approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on each service line to a customer's water system in accordance with the requirements of the city at the customer's expense. 
(g)  Reduced pressure principle assemblies shall be installed at the point of service in a horizontal position and in a location in which no portion of the assembly will become submerged under any circumstance or be subjected to temperatures below freezing. Pit and/or below grade installations are prohibited. An RP shall be installed in accordance with detailed specifications provided by the city's manual of water system details. 
(h)  All double-check valve assemblies shall be installed at the point of service in drainable pits wherever below ground installation is necessary, in accordance with detailed specifications provided by the city's manual of water system details. Double-check valve assemblies may be installed in a vertical position with prior approval from the city, provided the flow of water is in an upward direction. 
(i)  Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed such that periodic testing and necessary repairs can be conveniently performed by city approved backflow testers. 
(j)  No water service shall be provided to any facility or service that requires the installation of a backflow prevention assembly until the installed assembly has passed the test performed by a certified tester, and the test results have been received by the city. 
(k)  No new or existing water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the city unless the water supply is protected by an approved backflow prevention assembly(ies) as required by Federal and State Laws and Regulations, and this city ordinance. 
(l)  Water mains served by the city but not maintained by the city shall be considered cross-connections. The degree of protection required shall be based upon the degree of hazard, as determined by the city. 
(m)  No person shall fill special use tanks or tankers from the public water system except at a city approved location equipped with an air gap or an approved reduced pressure backflow prevention assembly properly installed on the city's water supply. 
(n)  Ownership, testing, and maintenance of the assembly shall be the responsibility of the customer. 
(o)  It shall be the customer's responsibility to notify the city if the customer's water system becomes contaminated or polluted or if there is reason to believe that a backflow incident has occurred from the customer's water system into the public water system. 
(p)  Upon notification to the customer by the city that the existing backflow prevention assembly is not in compliance with these regulations, the customer shall replace the existing backflow prevention assembly with an approved backflow prevention assembly in accordance with the requirements of the city. 
(q)  Removal of an approved backflow prevention assembly from a service connection that has been deemed a hazard by the city may result in immediate disconnection from the city's public water system. 
(r)  No person shall connect a hose to a fire hydrant unless an approved backflow prevention assembly is connected to the hydrant, unless otherwise approved by the city. 
(s)  The customer's system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to city personnel to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the city may deny or immediately discontinue service to the premise. The city shall bear no liability for direct or indirect damages caused by discontinuance of service. Should an inspection of the premise be refused, the city reserves the right to discontinue service until the customer has granted access to the premise. The customer may be subject to civil penalties outlined in item (v) of this section for refusing access or being in noncompliance of this chapter. 
(t)  Backflow prevention assemblies that shall be connected to the city's public water system shall be limited to those assemblies approved by the city, or the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California, or meets the American Society of Sanitary Engineering (ASSE) Standard and carries an ASSE seal. 
(u)  Installation of all backflow assemblies shall be the customer's responsibility unless otherwise stated by the city. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be located downstream of the meter, at the point of service or at a location approved by the city. 
(v)  Any facility or customer found to be in noncompliance with the provisions of these regulations will receive a notice of violation by certified mail with a time limit addressed to correct any deficiencies. If the customer neglects to correct a violation, they will be charged a civil penalty that shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day of each continuous day of violation for moderate hazards. The civil penalty for willful neglect of moderate and severe hazard violations of any provision in this section shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each day of continuous violation. The civil penalty will be assessed by the director of public works upon recommendation of the operator in responsible charge (ORC) of the water distribution system. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 38-15. - Testing and repair of assemblies. 
(a)  Testing of backflow prevention assemblies shall be performed by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester. Such tests shall be conducted upon installation, prior to receiving service, and annually thereafter. A record of all testing and repairs is to be retained by the customer. Copies of the records shall be provided to the city within ten (10) business days after the completion of any testing, and/or repair work. 
(b)  Any time that repairs to backflow prevention assemblies are deemed necessary, whether through annual or required testing, or routine inspection by the consumer or by the city, these repairs shall be completed within a specified time in accordance with the degree of hazard. In no case shall this time period exceed: 
(1)  Moderate hazard facilities-Fifteen (15) business days. 
(2)  Severe hazard facilities-Ten (10) business days. 
(c)  Submission of falsified test results or material that is incomplete in any manner by a certified tester may result in the tester being removed from the city's tester list. 
(d)  Only original manufactured parts may be used to repair an assembly. 
(e)  All backflow prevention assembly testers shall submit a copy of their tester's certification to the city prior to testing any backflow prevention assembly(s) connected to the city's public water system. 
(f)  All equipment used to test backflow prevention assemblies within the city's public water system shall be properly maintained and calibrated annually in accordance to the manufacturer's guidelines. A copy of the calibration certificate shall be submitted to the city. 
(g)  Backflow prevention must be located in a place where it is readily accessible for regular testing, maintenance and inspection. By pass lines parallel to a backflow prevention assembly shall have an approved backflow prevention assembly installed that is equal to that on the main line. 
(1)  Reduced pressure zone. 
a.  Above ground installation preferred. 
b.  Below ground vault shall have positive drainage with adequate gravity drainage to atmosphere. 
c.  Twelve (12) inches minimum clearance with manufacturer's recommendations. 
(2)  Double check valve assembly. 
a.  Vertical or horizontal installation acceptable. 
b.  Adequate drainage shall be provided if installed below ground. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 38-16. - Temporary water service. 
    Persons needing temporary water service for construction purposes only may apply for a hydrant meter. If hydrants and hydrant meters are available, temporary service will be provided under the following conditions: 
(a)  The application fee for a hydrant meter shall be in an amount established from time to time by ordinance, for each ninety (90) days of usage or portion thereof plus the cost of the water used. 
(b)  The customer shall be responsible for all damages to the meter and hydrant which occur as a result of their being used to provide a temporary water service. 
(c)  The city will remove the hydrant meter at the end of the ninety (90) days unless requested to do so earlier. Hydrant meters will not be reinstalled in the same location if permanent water service is available. 
(d)  City personnel shall install the hydrant meter with the fire hydrant valve left open. The customer shall not operate the fire hydrant. Unauthorized operation of a fire hydrant shall be cause for removal of the hydrant meter. 
(e)  Only city personnel shall be allowed to move a hydrant meter. Unauthorized relocation of a hydrant meter shall be cause for removal of the hydrant meter. 
(f)  A request to relocate a hydrant meter will be handled the same as a new application. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Secs. 38-17-38-41. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FEES 

Sec. 38-42. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the water system of the city for the implementation of the program established herein. A schedule of water rates shall be adopted by the City Council and made a part of the minutes of the meeting in which the action was taken. Certified copies of the rates will be on file in the office of the City Clerk and the office of the Public Works Director, and copies shall be made available to the customers of the city's water system. The rates shall be reviewed and adjusted by the City Council, as needed. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 38-43. - General requirements within city. 
(a)  Water extensions shall be made upon order of the city as it deems necessary, and in accordance with provisions of state law the cost of such extensions shall be shared jointly by city and owners of property abutting the water extension improvements, according to this policy. 
(b)  Corner lots are exempt from front water improvement assessments for a maximum of one hundred fifty (150) feet on one (1) side of corner lot. In the event a water line is constructed across only one (1) side of a corner lot, that side shall be assessed at the then existing rate for its full distance. At such time in the future that a water line is extended across the other side of that corner lot, that side will be assessed at the then existing rate; except, that a corner lot exemption up to one hundred fifty (150) feet, but not exceeding the distance along that side, shall be allowed, provided an assessment has been paid for the first side. Lots having a double frontage shall be assessed for water improvements on both sides if both sides can be developed according to the zoning ordinance. If a double frontage lot is also a corner lot, one (1) corner lot exemption shall be allowed, unless both frontages can be developed according to the zoning ordinance and both frontages have been assessed. In such case the property shall be entitled to two (2) corner lot exemptions. 
(c)  The city shall not assess any of the cost of enlarging water lines in use. 
(d)  An assessment for water extensions made under this policy may be spread over a period of ten (10) years if requested by the property owner. Such assessments shall bear interest at the highest rate provided by state law per annum on the unpaid balance, with the first assessment becoming due in October next succeeding the date of improvements within the city limits only. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 38-44. - Water connection fees and capital investment fees. 
(a)  Water connection fees are minimum fees for the installation of a tap at the right-of-way. These minimum fees shall be adopted by the City Council and made a part of the minutes of the meeting in which the action was taken. Certified copies of the fee schedule will be on file in the office of the City Clerk and the office of the Public Works Director, and copies shall be made available to the customers of the city's water system. The fees shall be reviewed and adjusted by the City Council, as needed. Minimum fees shall be paid prior to construction of the tap. If the city anticipates that the total actual construction cost will exceed the minimum fee, the city shall provide the customer with a written estimate of such cost as well as associated work, and receive written approval from the customer, prior to commencing such work. Any additional fees to equal the total actual construction cost shall be paid prior to customer making tie-in to the tap. For any tap larger than listed on the fee schedule, the Director shall provide the customer with a written estimate therefor, and receive written approval thereof from the customer, prior to commencing such work. Any additional cost to equal the total actual construction costs shall be paid prior to customer making tie-in to the tap. For taps requiring more than the usual construction work, the city may require customer to employ an outside contractor to make the tap. Contractors shall obtain a permit for the public works department and all work shall be in accordance to city specifications. 
(b)  Capital investment fees are charges for the construction of water lines which, at the time of construction, abut property outside the corporate limits. Fees shall be charged as established from time to time by ordinance. Property which is annexed into the city and abuts an existing water line, and has not previously paid a capital investment fee, shall pay the capital investment fee before service is provided. Property owners within the corporate limits may pay their capital investment fees in ten (10) equal annual installments, if requested by the property owners. Such capital investment fees will bear interest at the highest rate provided by state law per annum on the unpaid balance, with the first payment coming due and payable ninety (90) days after the date the capital investment fee charge is made and subsequent installments shall be due and payable annually on the same day of each subsequent year until paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 38-45. - Service fees-New customers. 
    New customers to the water system will be charged a service fee in the amount as established from time to time by ordinance and any deposit which is required of all customers. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 38-46. - Service fees-Transfers. 
    Customers moving from one location to another within the water system shall be charged a service fee in the amount established from time to time by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 38-47. - Water rates and bills. 
    A schedule of water rates shall be adopted by the City Council and made a part of the minutes of the meeting in which the action was taken. Certified copies of the rates will be on file in the office of the City Clerk and the office of the Director, and copies shall be made available to the customers of the city's water system. The rates shall be reviewed and adjusted by the City Council, as needed, or upon recommendations of the City Manager. 
(a)  Residential service. 
(1)  This service is available for the supply of drinking water to single-family residences within the city and outside the city limits where the city's water supply facilities are extended. 
(2)  Service is not available under this schedule for any nondomestic use; such as from business operated in the residence, for commercial for multifamily use, such as, master metered apartments, motels, inns, and mobile home parks; or for resale. 
(3)  This service is applicable when the customer's residence is served by a water service tap up to one (1) inch in diameter. 
(4)  The minimum monthly charge for city customers will be determined by the current rate schedule. 
(5)  Commodity charges will be based on an assumed minimum consumption or the customer's total water consumption, whichever is greater, during the billing period. Water consumption will be metered and rounded to nearest cubic foot for billing, except when the amount of water used is not registered because of a defective meter, the method described in section 38-50 will be used. 
(6)  The water service charge shall be billed to each customer at the same time the sewer bills are rendered and shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as sewer accounts. 
(b)  General service. 
(1)  This service is available for the supply of drinking water to commercial, industrial, institutional and other customers within the city and outside the city limits where the city's water facilities are extended. Service is not available for resale service. 
(2)  The minimum monthly charge for inside city customers will be determined by the current rate schedule. 
(3)  Commodity charges will be based on the customer's total water consumption during the billing period, except when the amount of water used is not registered because of a defective meter; the method described in section 38-50 will be used. 
(4)  Water consumption will be metered and rounded to the nearest cubic foot for billing. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 38-48. - Billing, payments, and late payment penalties. 
(a)  All water meters shall be read monthly, and bills shall be mailed on a cycle basis. 
(b)  Every bill shall be due when mailed to the customer at the last address provided by the customer. A bill shall reflect a due date of fifteen (15) days from the billing date shown on the bill. The same notice will serve as a notice of possible disconnect if payment is not received within thirty-two (32) days of the billing date, allowing greater than the statutory minimum 
(c)  A late payment penalty in the amount of five (5) percent per month shall be imposed upon any outstanding unpaid balance twenty-five (25) days after the billing date shown on the bill. The late payment penalty will be reflected on the bill rendered the following month. 
(d)  An automated telephone remainder system will attempt to contact all delinquent accounts prior to disconnection as a courtesy if the customer has provided a phone number. 
(e)  If payment has not been received within thirty-two (32) days from the original billing date, services will be disconnected on the thirty-third (33rd) day. After payments in the night deposit are posted and the cutoff person has left the office for the purpose of disconnecting a delinquent customer, a service fee in an amount as established from time to time by ordinance will be charged on that date, whether services are disconnected or not. 
(f)  A customer whose services are disconnected for such delinquency may have services restored during regular working hours by the payment of the bill in full plus the twenty-five dollar ($25.00) service fee. If a customer requests that services be reconnected after regular working hours, their service fee shall be in an amount as established from time to time by ordinance. Payment must be received by 11:00 a.m. the following day or services will be disconnected. 
(g)  The customer shall pay all billed utility charges before transferring service from one location to another. The final bill shall be mailed to the customer's new billing address. If a customer fails to pay his utility bills for any account where he is listed as the customer and such account becomes delinquent, the city may transfer the amount owed to any other account where the customer is a primary recipient of utilities and cutoff utilities to such account for nonpayment. The city may also refuse to transfer an account to a new customer's name or connect services to a new account where the delinquent customer will be a primary recipient of utilities. A customer is a primary recipient of utilities wherever he is listed as a customer, resides as a head of household or conducts a trade or business. The city's determination that a customer is primary recipient of utilities shall be effective until the customer proves otherwise. 
(h)  Any customer who has a check or draft returned from a financial institution because of insufficient funds or closed account shall be charged a service fee in accordance with G.S. 25-3-506. 
(i)  Customers requesting alternate payment due dates must make such request of the city and utilize the city's bank draft service. The customer may choose one (1) of the following periods of the month for their bill to be drafted: 
(1)  Between the 7th and 16th of the month; 
(2)  Between the 14th and 24th of the month; 
(3)  Between the 22nd and 31st of the month; 
(4)  Between the 28th and 9th of the month. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 38-49. - Meter testing; protested bills. 
    If a water customer has an excessive bill and thinks that it is caused by a faulty meter, he may, by making a deposit with the city, request that the meter be removed and checked. If the meter is found to be in error, the deposit will be refunded and the bill adjusted for the three (3) preceding months. The adjustment will be based on the percentage of error in the meter. If the meter is found to be accurate, the deposit will be retained by the city. The deposit amount shall be as established from time to time by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 38-50. - Adjustment of water bills. 
(a)  If the city determines that it has overcharged or undercharged a customer on account of its error, the city shall refund or recover the difference, subject to the following: 
(1)  The adjustment period shall be limited to the lesser of the actual period during which the error occurred or thirty-six (36) months; 
(2)  The amount of adjustment shall be determined by the director based upon such evidence as deemed appropriate; and 
(3)  Any overcharge may be either refunded or credited to the customer and any undercharge shall be billed to the customer. 
(b)  If the city determines that it has undercharged a customer on account of any unlawful or materially misleading act of such customer, the undercharge shall be determined and collected as set out in subsection (a) of this section, except the adjustment period shall be twelve (12) months if the adjustment period cannot be determined. The city shall, in addition to collecting such undercharge, have the right to take such other action against such customer as is permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 15-5, § 1, 5-11-2015) 
Sec. 38-51. - Water facilities impact fee. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Capital equipment means equipment with an expected use life of three (3) years or more. 
(2)  Connection to the water system means the physical connect of a building, structure or use of land to the city's water lines, no matter if such connection is made through or by intermediate lines. 
(3)  Development order means a regulatory approval by the city. 
(4)  Fee payer means a person applying for connection to the city's water system. 
(5)  Water system means the physical public distribution and plant facilities of the city, administrative adjuncts to such system and the planned future improvements to such system. 
(6)  Water facilities means physical public distribution and plant facilities of the city. 
(b)  Legislative findings. The city finds, determines and declares that: 
(1)  The city has expanded and must further expand and upgrade its water facilities in order to maintain current and meet anticipated future standards of public health if new development is to be accommodated without decreasing current standards of health. 
(2)  The imposition of impact fees is one of the preferred methods of ensuring that development bears a proportionate share of the cost of water facilities necessary to accommodate such development. This must be done in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(3)  Connecting to the city water system will create a need for the construction, equipping, expansion, and upgrading of water facilities. 
(4)  The fees established by this section are derived from, are based upon, and do not exceed the costs of providing additional and/or upgraded water facilities necessitated by the connection to the city's water system. 
(c)  Short title, authority, and applicability. 
(1)  The ordinance from which this article is derived shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Washington Water Facilities Impact Fee Ordinance." 
(2)  The City Council has the authority to adopt the ordinance from which this article is derived pursuant to its general police powers and its obligation to protect the health, welfare, safety of its residents. 
(3)  This article shall apply in the incorporated and extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) areas of city served by its water system. 
(d)  Intent and purposes. 
(1)  This article is intended to assist in the implementation of the city comprehensive plan. 
(2)  The purpose of this article is to regulate the use and development of land to ensure that new development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide water facilities in the incorporated and extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) areas of city served by its water system. 
(e)  Rules of construction. 
(1)  The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(2)  For the purposes of administration and enforcement of this article, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this article: 
a.  In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this article and any caption, illustration, summary table, or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
b.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
c.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
d.  The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for", "designed for", "maintained for", or "occupied for". 
e.  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity. 
f.  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and", "or", either or", the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
1.  The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events or events shall apply. 
2.  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
3.  The term "either or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
g.  The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
h.  The term "City Manager" means the Washington City Manager or municipal officials he may designate to carry out the administration of this article. 
(f)  Imposition of water facilities impact fee. Any person who, after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived seeks to connect to the city water system is hereby required to pay a water facilities impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this article. 
(g)  Computation of the amount of water facilities impact fee. 
(1)  Water facilities impact fees shall be established from time to time by ordinance. A schedule of these fees shall be adopted by the City Council and made a part of the minutes of the meeting in which the action was taken. Certified copies of the rates will be on file in the office of the City Clerk and the office of the Director, and copies shall be made available to the customers of the city's water system. The rates shall be reviewed and adjusted by the City Council, as needed, or upon the recommendation of the City Manager. 
(2)  If a fee payer opts not to have the impact fee determined according to subsection (b) of this section, then the fee payer shall prepare and submit to the City Manager an independent fee calculation study for the land development activity for which a connection to the city's water system is sought. The independent fee calculation study shall follow the prescribed methodologies and formats for water demand prescribed by the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR). The documentation submitted shall show the basis upon which the independent fee calculation was made. The City Manager shall consider the documentation submitted by the fee payer but is not required to accept such documentation as he shall reasonably deem to be inaccurate or not reliable and may, in the alternative, require the fee payer to submit additional or different documentation for consideration. If an acceptable independent fee calculation study is not presented, the fee payer shall pay water facilities impact fees based upon the current fee schedule. If an acceptable independent fee calculation study is presented, the City Manager may adjust the fee to that appropriate to the particular development. Determination made by the City Manager pursuant to this subsection may be appealed to the Washington City Council by filing a written request with the City Manager within ten (10) days of the City Manager's determination. 
(h)  Payment of fee. 
(1)  The fee payer shall pay the water facilities impact fee required by this article to the city division of Revenue Collections prior to the connection to the city's water system. 
(2)  All fines collected shall be properly identified by and promptly transferred for deposit in the appropriate Water Facilities Impact Fee Trust Fund to be held in separate accounts as determined in this article and used solely for the purposes specified in this article. 
(i)  Water Facilities Impact Fee Trust Funds established. 
(1)  There are hereby established two (2) separate Water and Sewer Facilities Impact Fee Trust Funds: 
a.  The Water Facilities Impact Fee Trust Fund; and 
b.  The Sewer Facilities Impact Fee Trust Fund. 
(2)  Funds withdrawn from these accounts must be used in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(j)  Use of funds. 
(1)  Funds collected from water facility impact fees shall be used solely for the purpose of acquiring, equipping, and/or making capital improvements to water facilities under the jurisdiction of the city, and shall not be used for maintenance or operations. 
(2)  Funds from the Water Facilities Impact Fee Trust Fund may only be used for water facilities purposes. Funds shall be expended in the order in which they are collected. 
(3)  In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for advanced provision of capital facilities for which water facilities impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities provided are of the type described in subsection (b) of this section. 
(4)  At least once each fiscal period the City Manager shall present to the City Council a proposed capital improvement program for water facilities, assigning funds, including any accrued interest, from the several Water Facilities Impact Fee Trust Fund to specific water facilities improvements projects and related expenses, monies, including any accrued interest, not assigned in any fiscal period shall be retained in the same Water Facilities Impact Fee Trust Fund until the next fiscal period, except, as provided by the refund provisions of this article. 
(5)  Funds may be used to provide refunds as described in subsection (k) of this section. 
(6)  Funds may be funded to rebate developer costs for providing water capital facilities to excess of the capacity required to the individual developer making the provision. Any rebates must be pursuant to a refunding agreement between the developer and the city after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Prior refunding agreements may be renegotiated in order to bring such agreements into accord with the provisions of this article. 
(k)  Refund of fees paid. Any funds not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following six (6) years from the date the water facilities impact fee was paid shall, upon application of the then current landowner, be returned to such landowner with interest at the rate of five (5) percent per annun, provided that the landowner submits an application for a refund to the City Clerk within one hundred eighty (180) days of the expiration of the six-year period. 
(l)  Exemptions and credits. 
(1)  The following shall be exempted from payment of the impact fee: 
a.  Alterations or expansions of an existing building where no additional; or larger water connections are requested and where the use is not changed. 
b.  The replacement of a building or structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use where no additional or larger water connections are requested and where the use is not changed. 
c.  The installations of a replacement mobile home on a lot or other such site when water capital facilities impact fee for such mobile home site has previously been paid pursuant to this article or where a mobile home legally existed on such cite on or prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
d.  Any claim of exemption must be made no later than the time of application for connection to the city's water system. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived. 
(2)  Credits. 
a.  Water facilities capital improvements may be offered by the fee payer as total or partial payment of the required impact fee. The offeror must request a water facilities impact fee credit. If the City Manager accepts such an offer, whether the acceptance is before or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the credit shall be determined and provided in the following manner: 
1.  Credit for the dedication of land shall be valued at: 
(i)  One hundred ten (110) percent of the most recent assessed value by the county tax assessor; 
(ii)  By such other appropriate method as the City Council may have accepted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived for particular water facilities improvements; or 
(iii)  By fair market value established by private appraisers acceptable to the city. Credit for the dedication of water facilities land shall be provided when the property has been conveyed at no charge to; and accepted by, the city in a manner satisfactory to the City Council. 
2.  Applicants for credit for construction of water facilities improvements shall submit acceptable engineering drawings and specification and construction cost estimates to the City Manager. The City Manager shall determine credit for construction based upon either these cost estimates or upon alternated engineering criteria and construction cost estimates if the City Manager determines that such estimates submitted by the applicant are either unreliable or inaccurate. The City Manager shall provide the applicant with a letter or certificate setting forth the dollar amount of the credit, the water facilities impact fee component to which the credit will apply the reason for the credit, and the legal description or other adequate description of the project or development to which the credit may be applied. The applicant must sign and date a duplicate copy of a duplicate copy of such letter or certificate and return such signed document to the City Manager before credit will be given. Failure of the applicant to sign, date and return such document within sixty (60) days shall nullify the credit. 
3.  Except as provided in subsection (1) of this section, credit against impact fees otherwise due will not be provided until: 
(i)  The construction is completed and accepted by the city; or 
(ii)  A suitable maintenance and warranty bond is received and approved by the City Clerk, when applicable. 
4.  Credit may be provided before completion of specified water facilities improvements if adequate assurances are given by the applicant that the standards set out in this section will be met and if the fee payer posts security, as provided in this subsection, for the costs of such construction. Security in the form of a performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit or escrow agreement shall be posted with and approved by the City Clerk in an amount determined by the City Manager. If the water facilities construction project will not be constructed in one (1) year of acceptance of the offer by the City Manager, the amount of the security shall be increased by ten (10) percent compounded, for each year of the life of the security. The security shall be reviewed and approved by the City Clerk of the City Council prior to acceptance of the security by the City Clerk. If water facilities construction project is not to be completed within five (5) years of the date of the fee payer's offer, the City Council must approve the water facilities construction project and its scheduled completion date prior to the acceptance of the offer by the City Manager. 
(i)  Any claim for credit must be made no later than the time of application for connection. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived. 
(ii)  Credits shall not be transferable from one project or development to another without the approval of the City Council. 
(iii)  Credits shall not be transferable from one (1) component of the water and sewer facilities impact to another component of this fee. 
(iv)  Determination made by the City Manager, pursuant to the credit provisions of this section, may be appealed to the City Council by filing a written request with the City Manager within ten (10) days of the City Manager's determination. 
(m)  Review. The fees contained in this section shall be reviewed by City Council at least once each fiscal biennium at the time of adoption of the city budget. 
(n)  Penalty provision. A violation of this section 38-52 of this chapter shall be prosecuted in the same manner as misdemeanors are prosecuted and, upon conviction, the violator shall be punishable according to law. However, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal prosecution city shall have the power to sue in civil court to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Secs. 38-52-38-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONFLICT 

Sec. 38-61. - Conflict. 
    All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Secs. 38-62-38-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - EFFECTIVE DATE 

Sec. 38-81. - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Secs. 38-82-38-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER SHORTAGE RESPONSE PLAN ("PLAN")[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Water conservation measures for drought, G.S. 143-355.2; Publicly and Privately Owned Water System Water Shortage Response Planning Requirements, 15A NCAC 02E .0607. 

Sec. 38-130. - Purpose and policy. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for reducing potable water use during times of water shortage whenever existing water supply sources are inadequate to meet the then current demands for potable water. 
    A water shortage condition will exist whenever it is predicted that the water level in the Castle Hayne Aquifer will decline to the extent that continued availability of water for human consumption, sanitation, health, fire protection, and commercial usage is at risk after considering aquifer levels, demands, long-term precipitation forecasts, and availability of water from other sources. In the event a water shortage condition exists, it shall become necessary to declare a water shortage and implement the conservation requirements under the standards set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 11-7, § 2, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 38-131. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning subscribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Customer's average usage means water usage, measured in gallons, during the corresponding billing period of the most recent twelve-month period ending June 30th in which no water use restriction pursuant to this Plan was in effect. 
(Ord. No. 11-7, § 2, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 38-132. - Authorization. 
    Whenever the trigger conditions outlined in section 38-134 are met, the City Manager or their designee shall declare a water shortage condition and implement the water shortage response provisions contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 11-7, § 2, 6-13-2011; Ord. No. 18-7, §§ 1, 2, 7-9-2018) 
Sec. 38-133. - Notification. 
    Upon declaration of a water shortage condition by the City Manager or their designee, city employees shall be informed of the declaration and the response measures that are required via a citywide departmental meeting and e-mail notification. The residential, commercial, institutional, and industrial water customers shall be notified of the declaration and the response measures that are required by the following means of communication: 
(a)  Connect CTY mass notification service; 
(b)  City's website http://www.washingtonnc.gov ; 
(c)  City's cable channel 9; 
(d)  Local newspaper(s); 
(e)  Local television stations-WITN, WNCT and WCTI; and 
(f)  Local radio stations. 
(Ord. No. 11-7, § 2, 6-13-2011; Ord. No. 18-7, §§ 3, 4, 7-9-2018) 
Sec. 38-134. - Levels of response. 
    There shall be four (4) levels of water shortage responses. A description of each response level and the corresponding water reduction measures are listed below. A customer education and outreach program will be available to encourage water conservation and assist with obtaining maximum results at each stage. 
(a)  Stage I, Voluntary Reductions. In Stage I, Voluntary Reductions, all water customers will be asked to voluntarily reduce their normal water consumption by five (5) percent per day of the customer's average usage. Examples of such voluntary reductions and efficiency measures include the following: 
(1)  Washing dishes by hand or fully loading dishwashers; 
(2)  Identifying and repairing plumbing leaks; 
(3)  Limiting the frequency of car washing; 
(4)  Watering plants with leftover household water; 
(5)  Watering plants deeply to encourage root growth; 
(6)  Delaying the seeding or sodding of new lawns; 
(7)  Washing clothes only with fully loaded washers; 
(8)  Installing flow restriction devices on showers and toilets; 
(9)  Prohibiting children from playing in lawn sprinklers; and 
(10)  Putting industrial/commercial voluntary conservation programs into effect which: 
a.  Restrict water use for dust control, 
b.  Limit the washing of commercial vehicles, 
c.  Reduce usage of automatic exterior sprinklers, and 
d.  Limit the wash down of exterior impervious services. 
    With the exception of Beaufort County Hospital, private medical offices as well as public health clinics, and customers who purchase water at a wholesale rate, all nonresidential customers who consume one thousand (1,000) cubic feet (seven thousand four hundred eighty (7,480) gallons) of water or more per day shall submit plans to the City Manager demonstrating the ability to reduce water consumption by ten (10) percent per day of the customer's average usage (Stage II, Mandatory Reductions I), which ten (10) percent shall be cumulative and may include any measures to achieve the five (5) percent voluntary reduction, and thirty (30) percent per day of the customer's average usage (Stage III, Mandatory Reductions II), which thirty (30) percent shall be cumulative and may include any measures to achieve the ten (10) percent reduction. 
    Determining the customers who consume one thousand (1,000) cubic feet (seven thousand four hundred eighty (7,480) gallons) or more of water per day shall be based on the customer's average usage. If no meter readings are recorded or otherwise available for a customer's billing period, the City Manager will establish an average based on other users similar to the customer with no recorded readings. 
(b)  Stage II, Mandatory Reductions I. In Stage II, Mandatory Reductions I, all residential water customers shall reduce their normal water consumption by five (5) percent per day of the customer's average usage, which five (5) percent shall be cumulative and may include any measures to achieve the five (5) percent voluntary reduction. With the exception of Beaufort County Hospital, private medical offices as well as public health clinics, and customers who purchase water at a wholesale rate, all nonresidential customers who consume one thousand (1,000) cubic feet (seven thousand four hundred eighty (7,480) gallons) of water or more per day shall implement the plan submitted in Stage I, Voluntary Reductions, for a ten (10) percent per day reduction and achieve a ten (10) percent per day reduction (cumulative) of the customer's average usage. 
When Stage II, Mandatory Reductions I, is in effect and unless specifically allowed, it shall be a violation of this article for any water customer to use water supplied by the city from the public water system for any of the following purposes: 
(1)  Watering lawns, grasses, shrubbery, trees, flowers, and vegetable gardens except under the following circumstances: 
a.  Such watering is done on either a Wednesday and Saturday or Thursday and Sunday schedule as determined by geographic location within the City between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. and such watering is done either by a handheld hose or container, a drip irrigation system, or automated sprinkler devices. 
b.  Persons regularly engaged in the sale of plants shall be permitted to use water to maintain such plants. 
c.  The City Manager shall have the authority to equitably adjust the foregoing restrictions by establishing zones or districts in which watering can be done on specified days and, further, depending on the water level in the aquifer, may authorize the operation of irrigation systems and other water uses restricted or prohibited by this article, on specified days in specified zones or districts as he determines is consistent with water conservation and the then current level of the aquifer. 
(2)  Filling of newly constructed or drained pools, wading pools, ornamental fountains, ponds, or other structures designed to hold more than one hundred (100) gallons of water. 
(3)  Washing outside areas such as streets, sidewalks, patios, service station aprons, parking lots, exteriors of office buildings, homes, or apartments, or using water for similar purposes; provided, however, that firms having a license from the city to conduct a pressure cleaning business in the city may wash residential, commercial, and office structures and other ancillary facilities as necessary to maintain public health and sanitation standards. 
(4)  Using water for dust control or compaction. 
(5)  Washing automobiles, trucks, trailers, vans, boats, airplanes, or any other type of mobile equipment; provided, however, persons regularly engaged in the business of washing motor vehicles or operating commercial car wash facilities shall be permitted to use water for such purposes and provided further, a business regularly engaged in the sale and/or leasing of vehicles may wash vehicles at the site of the business when they are received prior to placement on display for sale or lease, and when they are sold or leased to a new owner or lessor. 
(6)  Using water from public or private fire hydrants for any purpose except fire suppression or other public emergency or other public works department needs. 
(7)  Serving water in restaurants, cafeterias, or other eating establishments except upon request of patrons. 
(c)  Stage III, Mandatory Reductions II. In Stage III, Mandatory Reductions II, all residential water customers shall reduce their normal water consumption by ten (10) percent per day of the customer's average usage, which ten (10) percent shall be cumulative and may include any measures to achieve the previous five (5) percent mandatory reduction. With the exception of Beaufort County Hospital, private medical offices as well as public health clinics, and customers who purchase water at a wholesale rate, all nonresidential customers who consume one thousand (1,000) cubic feet (seven thousand four hundred eighty (7,480) gallons) of water or more per day shall implement the plan submitted in Stage I, Voluntary Reductions, for a thirty (30) percent per day reduction and achieve a thirty (30) percent per day reduction (cumulative) of the customer's average usage. 
When Stage III, Mandatory Reductions II, is in effect and unless specifically allowed, it shall be a violation of this article for any water customer to use water supplied by the city from the public water system for the following purposes: 
(1)  Using water in any of the ways restricted by the Stage II, Mandatory Reductions I, except as hereinafter provided or modified. 
(2)  Watering lawns, grasses, shrubbery, trees, flowers, and vegetable gardens except under the following circumstances: 
a.  Such watering is done either on a Saturday or Sunday, as determined by geographic location within the city, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. and such watering is done only by handheld hose or container, or a drip irrigation system. 
b.  Persons regularly engaged in the sale of plants shall be permitted to use water to maintain such plants. 
c.  The City Manager shall have the authority to equitably adjust the foregoing restrictions by establishing zones or districts in which watering can be done on specified days and, further, depending on the water level in the aquifer, may authorize the operation of irrigation systems and other water uses restricted or prohibited by this article, on specified days in specified zones or districts as he determines is consistent with water conservation and the then current level of the aquifer. 
(3)  Filling or refilling any swimming or wading pools, ornamental fountains, ponds, or other structures designed to hold more than one hundred (100) gallons of water. 
(4)  Commercial car wash facilities shall be permitted to use water for washing motor vehicles provided they can certify to the City Manager that their car wash facility recycles a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the water. 
All thirty (30) percent per day water consumption reduction plans required by this article must be approved by the City Manager, in his sole discretion, and shall be subject to revision in the discretion of and at the direction of the City Manager. If the managed reduction in water usage cannot be obtained without threatening health or safety, or if there has been a significant change in the customer's circumstances, the customer may apply to the City Manager for a variance of that customer's plan and/or the water use reduction and restriction requirements of this article. Customers may appeal the administrative decisions of the City Manager as described herein to the City Council. 
(d)  Stage IV, Emergency and/or Water Rationing. In Stage IV, Emergency and/or Water Rationing, water consumption is restricted solely to providing drinking water to protect public health, such as in residences, residential health care facilities and correctional facilities. All water customers are only permitted to use water at the minimum required for public health protection. Firefighting is the only allowable outdoor water use. Pickup locations for distributing potable water will be announced via the means of communication listed in the notifications section contained hereinabove. 
(Ord. No. 11-7, § 2, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 38-135. - Triggers or conditions for each level. 
    Stage I, Voluntary Reductions, will be declared and implemented by the City Manager when drought condition thresholds are reached in the city's service area or regionally. 
    Stage II, Mandatory Reductions I, will be declared and implemented by the City Manager at any time the static water levels drop in any three (3) of the city's eight (8) monitoring wells to a level that is within twenty (20) feet of the corresponding production well's intake, or current trends indicate levels will reach said level within the next thirty (30) days. Stage II, Mandatory, Reductions I, may also be declared and implemented by the City Manager at any time the city's water treatment facilities treatment capability is reduced by twenty-five (25) percent of its maximum rated capacity. 
    Stage III, Mandatory Reductions II, will be declared and implemented by the City Manager at any time the static water levels drop in any four (4) of the city's eight (8) monitoring wells to a level that is within fifteen (15) feet of the corresponding production well's intake, or current trends indicate levels will reach said level within the next thirty (30) days. Stage III, Mandatory Reductions II, may also be declared and implemented by the City Manager at any time the city's water treatment facilities treatment capability is reduced by forty-five (45) percent of its maximum rated capacity. 
    Stage IV, Emergency and/or Water Rationing, will be declared and implemented by the City Manager at any time the static water levels drop in any four (4) of the city's eight (8) monitoring wells to a level that is within ten (10) feet of the corresponding production well's intake, or current trends indicate levels will reach said level within the next thirty (30) days. Stage IV, Emergency and/or Water Rationing, may also be declared and implemented by the City Manager at any time the city's water treatment facilities treatment capability is reduced by fifty-five (55) percent of its maximum rated capacity. 
(Ord. No. 11-7, § 2, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 38-136. - Drought surcharge rates. 
    Drought surcharge rates may be implemented in Stages II, III and IV, and shall be determined and set by the City Council at or after the outset of each respective stage. The percentage increase in rates for residential and nonresidential customers, respectively, that results from the imposition of drought surcharge rates at each respective stage shall not exceed the percentage decrease in average usage that is required for residential and nonresidential customers, respectively, at each respective stage. 
(Ord. No. 11-7, § 2, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 38-137. - Enforcement of each level. 
    The requirements of this article will be enforced by the City's Public Works Department representatives, Code Enforcement Officers, and/or Police Personnel. Any person who violates this article shall be subject to a civil citation and shall be liable to the city for the civil penalties listed below, plus actual damages incurred by the city, per violation, per day so long as the violation continues. In addition to the civil penalties and damages specified in this section, the city may recover attorney's fees, court costs and other expenses of enforcement litigation. North Carolina General Statute 14-4 shall be inapplicable to this article and violations of this article shall not be considered a breach of the penal laws of the State of North Carolina. 
(a)  Residential users: 
(1)  First violation-Warning notice. 
(2)  Second violation-One hundred dollar ($100.00) civil penalty. 
(3)  Third violation-Two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) civil penalty. 
(4)  Fourth violation-Termination of service until such time as the violator establishes to the reasonable satisfaction of the City Manager that such customer has taken appropriate steps to prevent any further violations. 
(5)  Fifth violation-Termination of service until the City Manager declares an end of the water shortage. 
(b)  Nonresidential users: 
(1)  First violation-Warning notice. 
(2)  Second violation-Two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) civil penalty. 
(3)  Third violation-Five hundred dollar ($500.00) civil penalty. 
(4)  Fourth violation-Termination of service until such time as the violator establishes to the reasonable satisfaction of the City Manager that such customer has taken appropriate steps to prevent any further violations. 
(5)  Fifth violation-Termination of service until the City Manager declares an end of the water shortage. 
(c)  Nonresidential high volume water users -One thousand (1,000) cubic feet (seven thousand four hundred eighty (7,480) gallons) or more per day: 
(1)  First violation-Warning notice. 
(2)  Second violation-One thousand dollar ($1,000.00) civil penalty. 
(3)  Third and subsequent violations-Five thousand dollar ($5,000.00) civil penalty. 
(Ord. No. 11-7, § 2, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 38-138. - Variance protocols. 
    Applications for the variances provided for in this article are available from the Public Works Director's Office. All variance applications must be submitted to the Public Works Department for review by the City Manager or his/her designee. The variance approval or denial will be given within two (2) weeks of the Public Works Director's Office's receipt of a properly completed application and will be determined by consideration of, among other things, the current water supply and demand. Variances are revocable in the discretion of the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 11-7, § 2, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 38-139. - Abatement. 
    As water shortage conditions abate, water conservation and reduction measures employed during each stage will be decreased in reverse order of implementation. Permanent measures directed toward long-term monitoring and conservation will be implemented or continued so that the community will be in a better position to prevent shortages and respond to recurring water shortage conditions. 
(Ord. No. 11-7, § 2, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 38-140. - Effectiveness. 
    The effectiveness of this article will be evaluated by the measured reductions in water usage for residential and nonresidential customers according to each percentage of reduction per stage and the time elapsed during each stage compared to the past history of each customer. 
(Ord. No. 11-7, § 2, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 38-141. - Revision. 
    This article will be reviewed and revised as needed to adjust to new water demands based on the city's need and at least every five (5) years. The City Manager and staff will evaluate the Plan after the induction and completion of the Plan. If recommendations for changes are made, the City Manager will notify the City Council and the public of the recommended changes and submit recommended changes to City Council for its consideration. 
(Ord. No. 11-7, § 2, 6-13-2011) 
Chapter 39 - WASTEWATER/SUO[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, adopted Oct. 28, 2013, repealed the former Chapter 39, §§ 39-1-39-163, and enacted a new Chapter 39, §§ 39-1-39-163, as set out herein. The former chapter pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, adopted May 2, 2011. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 39-1. - Purpose and policy. 
    This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the City of Washington, hereafter referred to as the city, and enables the city to comply with all applicable State and Federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR, Part 403). 
The objectives of this chapter are: 
(a)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants and wastewater discharges into the municipal wastewater system; which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(b)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants and wastewater discharges into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into any waters of the State or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(c)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludges from the municipal system; 
(d)  To protect both municipal personnel who may be affected by sewage, sludge, and effluent in the course of their employment as well as protecting the general public; 
(e)  To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the municipal wastewater system; and 
(f)  To ensure that the municipality complies with its NPDES or non-discharge permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other Federal or State laws to which the municipal wastewater system is subject. 
This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system, through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
This chapter shall apply to all users of the municipal wastewater system, as authorized by N.C.G.S. 160A-312 and/or 153A-275. The city shall designate an administrator of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works or POTW and pretreatment program hereafter referred to as the POTW Director; except as otherwise provided herein, the POTW Director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or imposed upon the POTW Director may be delegated by the POTW Director to other city personnel. By discharging wastewater into the municipal wastewater system, industrial users located outside the city limits agree to comply with the terms and conditions established in this chapter, as well as any permits, enforcement actions, or orders issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-2. - Definitions and abbreviations. 
(a)  Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
(1)  Act or " the Act ". The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. 
(2)  Ammonia nitrogen . The total amount of nitrogen in wastewater in the form of ammonia or ammonium. 
(3)  Approval authority . The Director of the Division of Water Resources of the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources or his designee. 
(4)  Authorized representative of the industrial user . 
a.  If the industrial user is a corporation, authorized representative shall mean: 
1.  The president, secretary, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation, or 
2.  The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
b.  If the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, an authorized representative shall mean a general partner or the proprietor, respectively. 
c.  If the industrial user is a Federal, State or local government facility, an authorized representative shall mean a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
d.  The individuals described in section 39-2(a)(4)c. above may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
e.  If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to POTW Director prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
(5)  Billable biochemical oxygen demand . The discharge in pounds of BOD calculated using the billable flow and concentration of BOD in the wastewater in excess of two hundred fifty (250) mg/l. 
(6)  Billable total suspended solids . The discharge in pounds of TSS calculated using the billable flow and concentration of TSS in the wastewater in excess of two hundred fifty (250) mg/l. 
(7)  Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) . The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g. mg/l). 
(8)  Building drain . That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives wastewater and is located inside the walls of a building and conveys the wastewater to the building sewer, which begins five (5) feet outside the building wall. 
(9)  Building sewer . A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the POTW. 
(10)  Bypass . The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(11)  Categorical standards . This means the national categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment standard. 
(12)  Chemical oxygen demand . The total amount of oxygen required to oxidize the organic matter in waste as described in standard methods. 
(13)  City . The City of Washington or, where the context so indicates, the City Council. 
(14)  Color . This represents the true color due to the substances in solution. 
(15)  Concentration based limit . A limit based on the relative strength of a pollutant in wastewater, usually expressed in mg/l. 
(16)  Control Authority . Refers to the POTW organization if the POTW organization's pretreatment program approval has not been withdrawn. 
(17)  Direct discharge . The discharge of wastewater directly to the waters of the State. 
(18)  Environmental Protection Agency or EPA . The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
(19)  Grab sample . A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
(20)  Holding tank waste . Any waste from holding tanks, including but not limited to such holding tanks as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
(21)  Indirect discharge or discharge . The discharge or the introduction from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
(22)  Industrial user or user . Any person which is a source of indirect discharge. 
(23)  Instantaneous measurement . Represents a single reading, observation or measurement of the discharge. 
(24)  Interference . The inhibition, or disruption of the POTW collection system, treatment processes, operations, or its sludge process, use, or disposal, which causes or contributes to a violation of any requirement of the Control Authority's (and/or POTW's, if different from the Control Authority) NPDES, collection system, or nondischarge permit or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with specified applicable State and Federal statutes, regulations, or permits. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with section 405 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuary Act (MPRSA) or more stringent State criteria (including those contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
(25)  Local limits . Concentration or mass-based limits developed by the Director for controlling the discharge of pollutants. 
(26)  Mass-based limit . A limitation based on the actual quantity of a pollutant in a discharge, usually expressed in pounds per unit of production. 
(27)  Medical waste . Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
(28)  National categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard . Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users, and which appears in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
(29)  National Pollution Discharge Elimination System or NPDES Permit . A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342), or pursuant to N.C.G.S. 143-215.1 by the State under delegation from EPA. 
(30)  National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge standard . Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 39.26 of this chapter and are developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, section 403.5. 
(31)  Natural outlet . Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other surface water or groundwater. 
(32)  New source . 
a.  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307(c), provided that: 
1.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
2.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
3.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
b.  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of section a.2. or 3. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
c.  For purposes of this definition, construction of a new source has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
1.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
(i)  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
(ii)  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition. 
(33)  Noncontact cooling water . Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
(34)  Nondischarge permit . A permit issued by the State pursuant to G.S. 143-215.1(d) for a waste which is not discharged directly to surface waters of the State or for a wastewater treatment works which does not discharge directly to surface waters of the State. 
(35)  Operation and maintenance . All costs, direct and indirect, not including debt service and capital related expenditures, but inclusive of expenditures attributable to administration, monitoring, inspections, reviewing applications, maintenance of equipment, and treatment and collection of wastewater, necessary to assure adequate wastewater collection and treatment on a continuing basis which conforms to applicable regulations and assures optimal long-term facility management. 
(36)  Pass through . A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the State in quantities or concentrations which, alone or with discharges from other sources, causes a violation, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation, of the Control Authority's (and/or POTW's, if different from the Control Authority) NPDES, collection system, or nondischarge permit [or a downstream water quality standard even if not included in the permit]. 
(37)  Person . Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all Federal, State, and local government entities. 
(38)  pH . A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed as standard units, and calculated as the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
(39)  Pollutant . Any "waste" as defined in N.C.G.S. 143-213(18) and dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, metals, BOD, COD, toxicity, and odor). 
(40)  POTW Director . The City Administrator designated with the responsibility for the pretreatment program and enforcement of this Sewer Use Ordinance. 
(41)  POTW treatment plant . That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
(42)  Pretreatment or treatment . This is the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollution into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes or other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
(43)  Pretreatment program . The program for the control of pollutants introduced into the POTW from nondomestic sources which was developed by the city in compliance with 40 CFR 403.8 and approved by the approval authority as authorized by N.C.G.S. 143-215.3(a)(14) in accordance with 40 CFR 403.11. 
(44)  Pretreatment requirements . Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard. 
(45)  Pretreatment standard . Any prohibited discharge standard, categorical standard, or local limits which applies to an industrial user. 
(46)  Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) or municipal wastewater system . A treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. For the purposes of this chapter, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, or in any other way, users of the POTW of the city. 
(47)  Qualified laboratory . Laboratories currently certified by the State to perform water and wastewater analyses. 
(48)  Severe property damage . Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the user's treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(49)  Significant industrial user or SIU . Any industrial user that discharges wastewater into a publicly owned treatment works and that: 
a.  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); or 
b.  Contributes process wastewater which makes up five (5) percent or more of the NPDES nondischarge permitted flow limit or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant. In this context, organic capacity refers to BOD, TSS, ammonia: total phosphorus, and total nitrogen; or 
c.  Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR Part 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471; or 
d.  Is designated as such by the Control Authority on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation, or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, or for contributing to violations of the POTW's effluent limitations and conditions in its NPDES or non-discharge permit, or for contributing to violations of the POTW's receiving stream standard, or for limiting the POTW's sludge disposal options. 
e.  Subject to Division approval under 15A NCAC 02H .0907(b), the Control Authority may determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria in paragraphs (a) and (b) above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standards or requirement, or for contributing to violations of the POTW's effluent limitations and conditions in its NPDES or non-discharge permit, [or for contributing to violations of the POTW's receiving stream standard,] or for limiting the POTW's sludge options, and thus is not a significant industrial user. 
f.  Subject to Division approval under 15A NCAC 02H .0907(b), the Control Authority may determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria in paragraph (c) above meets the requirements of 40 CFR Part 403.3(v)(2) and thus is a non-significant categorical industrial user. 
(50)  Significant noncompliance or SNC is the status of noncompliance of a significant industrial user when one (1) or more of the following criteria are met. Additionally, any industrial user which meets the criteria in subparagraph (a)(50), parts (c), (d), or (h) shall also be SNC. 
a.  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter (not including flow) during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(1); 
b.  Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(1) multiplied by the applicable TRC; (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, 1.2 for all other pollutants (except flow and pH); 
c.  Any other violation of a Pretreatment Standard or Requirement as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the Control Authority and/or POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); 
d.  Any discharge of a pollutant or wastewater that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in either the Control Authority's or the POTW's, if different from the Control Authority, exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR Part 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) and section 39-112 (e) of this SUO to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
e.  Violations of compliance schedule milestones, contained in a pretreatment permit or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing construction, and attaining final compliance by ninety (90) days or more after the schedule date; 
f.  Failure to provide reports for compliance schedule, self-monitoring data, baseline monitoring reports, ninety (90) day compliance reports, and periodic compliance reports within thirty (30) days from the due date; 
g.  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
h.  Any other violation or group of violations that the Control Authority and/or POTW determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(51)  Slug load or discharge . Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass-through, or in any other way violates the POTW's regulations, local limits, or industrial user permit conditions. This can include but is not limited to spills and other accidental discharges; discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge; or any other discharges that can cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 39-26 of this chapter. 
(52)  Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) . A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987. 
(53)  Standard methods . The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association, and Water Pollution Control Federation or another procedures recognized by the DWR, DPH, and EPA. 
(54)  State . Refers to the State of North Carolina. 
(55)  Storm sewer . A sewer that carries only stormwater, surface runoff, street wash, and drainage, and to which wastewater is not intentionally admitted. 
(56)  Stormwater . Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
(57)  Total Kjeldahl nitrogen . The sum of organic nitrogen and ammonia nitrogen content of a wastewater as determined by standard methods. 
(58)  Total nitrogen . The sum of TKN, nitrates, and nitrites content of a wastewater as determined by standard methods. 
(59)  Total phosphorus . All orthophosphates and condensed phosphates both dissolved and particulate, organic and inorganic. 
(60)  Total suspended solids . The total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or in suspension with, wastewater and is removable by laboratory filtration as described in standard methods. 
(61)  Toxic substances . Any substances whether gaseous, liquid, or solid, which when discharged to the POTW in sufficient quantities may tend to interfere with any wastewater treatment process, or to constitute a hazard to the environment or recreation in the receiving waters of the effluent from the POTW. These substances include but are not limited to those pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provisions of 307(a) of the Act, or other acts. 
(62)  Upset . An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(63)  User . Any person, who discharges, caused or permits the discharge of wastewater to the POTW. 
(64)  User charge system . The system charges levied on users for the operation and maintenance costs of the water or wastewater. 
(65)  Wastewater . The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, mobile sources, treatment facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
(66)  Wastewater permit . As set forth, in section 39-62 of this chapter. 
(67)  Waters of the State . All streams, rivers, brooks, swamps, sounds, tidal estuaries, bays, creeks, lakes, waterways, reservoirs and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the State or any portion thereof. 
(b)  This chapter is gender neutral and the masculine gender shall include the feminine and vice-versa. 
(c)  Shall is mandatory; may is permissive or discretionary. 
(d)  The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its use. 
(e)  The following abbreviations when used in this chapter shall have the designated meanings: 
(1)  BOD-Biochemical oxygen demand. 
(2)  CFR-Code of Federal Regulations. 
(3)  COD-Chemical oxygen demand. 
(4)  CWA-Clean Water Act. 
(5)  DENR-NC Department of Environment and Natural Resources. 
(6)  DPH NC-Division of Public Health. 
(7)  DWR NC-Division of Water Resources. 
(8)  EPA-Environmental Protection Agency. 
(9)  gpd-Gallons per day. 
(10)  l-Liter. 
(11)  mg-Milligrams. 
(12)  mg/l-Milligrams per liter. 
(13)  NCAC-North Carolina Administrative Code. 
(14)  N.C.G.S.-North Carolina General Statutes. 
(15)  NPDES-National Pollution Discharge Elimination System. 
(16)  O & M-Operation and Maintenance. 
(17)  POTW-Publicly Owned Treatment Works. 
(18)  RCRA-Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. 
(19)  SIC-Standard Industrial Classification. 
(20)  SWDA-Solid Waste Disposal Act. 
(21)  TKN-Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen. 
(22)  TSS-Total suspended solids. 
(23)  USC-United States Code. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-3. - Authority. 
    All utilities owned, leased or used by the city, whether inside or outside the corporate limits, shall be under the full control of the city pursuant to authorization in Sessions Laws of 1953, Chapter 300. The duty of enacting and enforcing rules and regulations governing the management and control of city properties shall be vested in the city, and the duty of enforcing such rules and regulations may be delegated. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-4. - Visiting utility stations. 
    No visitor shall be permitted to enter the wastewater treatment plant or any pumping station unless accompanied by the person in charge, or his designee, and under no circumstances shall any visitor handle or in any way come in contact with any part of the machinery. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-5. - Connections and meters. 
(a)  Connections . All meters, meter boxes, pipes and other equipment furnished and used by the city in installing any sewer connection shall be and remain the property of the city. 
(b)  Maintenance of meters . All meters, except such as are required to be furnished by specified users of water, shall be kept in good repair and working order by and at the expense of the city. Meters for measuring the flow of wastewater, where required, shall be provided and maintained by and at the expense of the customer. 
(c)  Connections-Work to be done by the city . The construction of laterals for the connection of the public sewer lines on any lot with public sewer lines in any street and the necessary excavation thereof shall be done only by the city. 
(d)  Connections-Application . 
(1)  No connection shall be made to any public sewer line except after approval of the written application therefore. 
(2)  Every application for a sewer connection shall state the name of the owner of the lot, the name of the street on which lot is situated, the number of the house, if there is one on the lot or, if not, a description of the location of the lot, the number and kind of connections required and the character of surface of the abutting street. Every such application shall be signed by the person making the application and shall be accompanied by the proper fee for making the connection applied for. 
(3)  No person shall make any connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, area drains, or other sources of inflow, groundwater, or other unpolluted waters to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected, directly or indirectly, to a public sanitary sewer. 
(e)  Connections-Separate connections required; exceptions . Every house or building abutting any public sewer shall have a separate connection. 
(f)  Connections-Where required . Within thirty (30) days after the time when any public sanitary sewer in any street is completed and ready for use, the owner of any abutting lot having thereon improvements for occupancy shall cause a sanitary closet and sink to be installed and to be connected with the sanitary sewer; provided, that where a house adjacent to a sanitary sewer is connected to an existing septic tank, a connection shall not be required as long as the septic tank operates properly or if the director determines that it is not feasible to connect. When, in the opinion, of the County Health Officer, the septic tank does not work properly or becomes a health hazard, he shall notify the owner in writing and send a copy of the notice to the Director. The owner shall then be required to connect to the sanitary sewer within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice. 
(g)  Connections-Where connection inside . 
(1)  Sewer connections shall be made into existing connections constructed by the city to serve a lot. If a connection does not exist, one shall be provided as close as possible to the location requested by the customer. The building sewer shall be constructed to the cleanout at approximately the start of the right-of-way or property line. 
(2)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, upon examination and testing by the Director, to meet all requirements of the city and this chapter. All new building sewers including necessary replacement of existing building sewers shall comply with the State Building Code, Volume II, Plumbing. 
(3)  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may, directly or indirectly, be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer provided, however, that such indemnification shall not extend to loss or damage due solely to willful misconduct or negligence on the part of the city. 
(4)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner to keep and maintain the building sewer connected to the public sewer in good repair. The owner shall be responsible for making necessary repairs, at his own expense, to the building sewer when notified in writing by the Director that repairs are necessary. Should the owner fail to repair the building sewer within fifteen (15) days after receiving written notification that such repairs are necessary, the city may make the necessary repairs and shall assess the owner for the cost of the repairs. 
(5)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, wastewater carried by such building drain may be lifted by a means approved by the city and discharged to the building sewer. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of applicable building and plumbing codes and other applicable rules and regulations of the city. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures shall be approved by the city before installation. 
(h)  Connections-Connections beyond the city limits . Any person owning or controlling premises located beyond the corporate city limits and desiring to install a plumbing system for the purpose of discharging wastewater into the public sewer may do so by complying with the requirements of this chapter and paying all applicable fees and charges. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-6. - Standards and provisions for sewer systems. 
(a)  Standards for sewer system . Plans for additions or alterations to the existing sewer system shall be approved by the Director or DWR. Septic tanks shall not be constructed within the city limits. Existing septic tanks may be used until any type of cleaning or repair is required, at which time the structure shall be connected to the public sewer and the septic tank removed or filled with dirt. 
(b)  Provisions of sewer service . 
(1)  Area outside city . 
a.  With adequate public sewer existing . Upon receipt of a request for sewer service and payment of all fees and charges, the city may construct a sewer connection to serve the property. The property owner shall pay the then existing connection fee and capital investment fee prior to receiving a tap. 
b.  Public sewer not existing . 
1.  Upon receipt of a request for sewer service, the city may approve the request and authorize construction of a line to serve the property. When a public sewer is constructed, it shall extend across the entire frontage of the property to be served. 
2.  The party requesting service shall pay the entire cost of construction, including materials, labor, equipment and necessary lift stations. 
3.  If the city determines that sufficient advantages exist, it may choose to bear the cost of constructing a public sewer from the nearest adequately sized public sewer to the property to be served. 
4.  Each property requesting service and abutting a public sewer constructed according to subsection (b)(1)b.1. or 2. of this section shall comply with subsection (b)(1)a. of this section. 
c.  Charges after annexation into city . After annexation into the city, property which abuts an existing public sewer shall pay the then existing inside capital investment fee and connection fee prior to receiving a connection. 
d.  Sewer rates . Customers outside the city shall be charged the regular outside rate. 
(2)  Area inside city . 
a.  With adequate public sewer existing . The city shall construct a sewer connection after receipt of the then existing connection fee. 
b.  Public sewer not existing . When a property owner within the city requests sewer service, the city may order the extension of a public sewer to serve the property and assess all abutting property owners an amount equal to the cost of materials, but such assessments shall not exceed fifteen dollars ($15.00) per front foot. The city shall pay the cost of all lift stations and force mains. 
c.  Other conditions . When a subdivision or developer requests sewer service and conditions in subsection (1) or (2) of this section do not apply, or if an unusually large amount of construction is required, the conditions of payment shall be determined through negotiations and established in a contract between the property owner and city. 
(c)  Outdoor privies . It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain, or use any outdoor privy; or use any device for collecting wastewater within the city limits which is not connected to the public sewer. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Secs. 39-7-39-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 39-26. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
(a)  Discharging wastewater to natural outlet prohibited; discharge of stormwater or unpolluted water . Wastewater shall not be discharged to a natural outlet in the limits of the city. All stormwater shall be discharged to the storm sewer system. Unpolluted water may be discharged to the storm sewer system with approval of DWR. 
(b)  Prohibited discharges into sewers-Generally . No person shall pour, throw or discharge any substance, or other solid or liquid, into any sanitary or storm sewer at any manhole or at any opening therein other than a sewer connection, nor shall any person discharge into any sanitary or storm sewer any substance likely to obstruct or to cause undue injury to the same or any substance of such high causticity or of a sufficiently acid nature to interfere materially with the equipment used in connection therewith. 
(c)  Prohibited discharges into sewers-Specified waters and wastes . 
(1)  General prohibitions . No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which causes interference or pass through. These general prohibitions apply to all users of a POTW whether or not the user is a significant industrial user or subject to any National, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(2)  Specific prohibitions . No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
a.  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees F (sixty (60) degrees C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
b.  Solid or viscous substance in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case, solids greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension. 
c.  Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than ten (10) or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage to the POTW or equipment. 
d.  Wastewater containing pollutants in sufficient quantity either singly or by interaction with other pollutants which cause interference, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW. 
e.  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
f.  Any wastewater having a temperature greater than one hundred fifty (150) degrees F (sixty-six (66) degrees C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed one hundred four (104) degrees F (forty (40) degrees C). 
g.  Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
h.  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW Director in accordance with section 39-33 of this chapter. 
i.  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case, shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal regulations or permits issued under section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or State criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
j.  Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, including, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts sufficient color to the treatment plant's effluent to render the waters injurious to public health or secondary recreation or to aquatic life and wildlife or to adversely affect the palatability of fish or aesthetic quality or impair the receiving waters for any designated uses. 
k.  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved by the POTW Director in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations. 
l.  Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the POTW Director. 
m.  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, solvents, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that may cause interference or pass through. 
n.  Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
o.  Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the POTW Director in a wastewater discharge permit. 
p.  Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts, or other chelating agents which will produce metallic complexes that interfere with the municipal wastewater system. 
q.  Any material that would be identified as hazardous waste according to 40 CFR Part 261 if not disposed of in a sewer except as may be specifically authorized by the POTW Director. 
r.  Any wastewater causing the treatment plant effluent to violate State water quality standards for toxic substances as described in 15A NCAC 2B.0200. 
s.  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test. 
t.  Recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy. 
u.  Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the municipal wastewater system. 
v.  At no time, shall two (2) successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five (5) percent nor any single reading over ten (10) percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. 
w.  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than one hundred (100) mg/l. 
(d)  Pollutants, substances, wastewater, or other wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the municipal wastewater system. All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial user's pretreatment facility before connecting with the system. 
(e)  When the POTW Director determines that a user(s) is contributing to the POTW, any of the above enumerated substances in such amounts which may cause or contribute to interference of POTW operation or pass through, the POTW Director shall: 
(1)  Advise the user(s) of the potential impact of the contribution on the POTW in accordance with article II, division 7 of this chapter. 
(2)  Take appropriate actions in accordance with section 39-61 and section 39-62 for such user to protect the POTW from interference or pass through. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-27. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are required to comply with applicable standards as set out in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 and incorporated herein. 
(a)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the POTW Director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(b)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the POTW Director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(c)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(d)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(e)  A user may request a removal credit adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.7. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-28. - Local limits. 
    An industrial waste survey is required prior to a user discharging wastewater containing in excess of the following average discharge limits: 
BOD 250 mg/l Cyanide 0.015 mg/l TSS 250 mg/l Lead 0.049 mg/l NH 3 25 mg/l Mercury 0.0003 mg/l Arsenic 0.003 mg/l Nickel 0.021 mg/l Cadmium 0.003 mg/l Silver 0.005 mg/l Chromium 0.05 mg/l (total chromium) Zinc 0.175 mg/l Copper 0.061 mg/l  
    Industrial waste survey information will be used to develop user-specific local limits when necessary to ensure that the POTW's maximum allowable headworks loading are not exceeded for particular pollutants of concern. User-specific local limits for appropriate pollutants of concern shall be included in wastewater permits. The POTW Director may impose mass based limits in addition to, or in place of concentration based limits. 
    No person shall discharge wastewater in excess of the concentration set forth in pretreatment standards or their wastewater discharge permit. The POTW Director shall establish permit limitations on a case-by-case basis in accordance with DWR and EPA regulations and an approved headworks analysis. State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than requirements or limitations developed by the city or EPA. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-29. - Right of revision. 
    The city reserves the right to establish limitations and requirements which are more stringent than those required by either State or Federal regulation if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in section 39-1 of this chapter or the general and specific prohibitions in section 39-26 of this chapter, as is allowed by 40 CFR 403.4. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-30. - Dilution. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or State. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-31. - Pretreatment of wastewater. 
(a)  Users shall provide pretreatment as required to comply with this chapter or discharge permit, and shall achieve compliance with all local limits and pretreatment standards within the specified time limitations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater shall be constructed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the owner. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedure shall be submitted to and approved by the Director before construction of the facilities. Submission and approval of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the Director under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to the Director prior to the initiation of the changes. 
(b)  Additional pretreatment measures . 
(1)  Whenever deemed necessary, the POTW Director may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  In order to equalize flows over a twenty-four-hour period, each user discharging in excess of forty thousand (40,000) gallons in any one (1) day shall construct and maintain at user's own expense a suitable storage tank. Such tank shall have a capacity of at least eighty (80) percent of the normal volume of one (1) twenty-four-hour production period of waste and an outlet to the sewer which is controlled by a waterworks type rate controller or other approved devices, the setting of which shall be directed by the city. The POTW Director shall approve all plans prior to construction. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(3)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the POTW Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the POTW Director and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. 
(4)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-32. - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
(a)  The POTW Director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs a plan or other action to control and prevent slug discharges and accidental discharges as defined in section 39-2(a)(51). All SIUs must be evaluated within one (1) year of being designated an SIU. The POTW Director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan or other specific action. Alternatively, the POTW Director may develop such a plan for any user. 
(b)  All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental discharge, discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load. Also see section 39-75 and section 39-76. 
(c)  An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW Director of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 39-76 of this chapter; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(d)  Wastewater which constitutes a slug as defined herein will have a surcharge at the discretion of the POTW Director. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-33. - Hauled wastewater. 
(a)  Septic tank waste shall not be introduced into the POTW or any part of the collection system. 
(b)  The POTW Director shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The POTW Director may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The POTW Director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the POTW Director. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the POTW Director. The POTW Director may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The POTW Director may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(d)  Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Secs. 39-34-39-41. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FEES 

Sec. 39-42. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the wastewater disposal system of the city for the implementation of the program established herein. A schedule of sewer rates shall be adopted by the City Council and made a part of the minutes of the meeting in which the action was taken. Certified copies of the rates will be on file in the office of the City Clerk and the office of the Public Works Director, and copies shall be made available to the customers of the city's sewer system. The rates shall be reviewed and adjusted by the City Council, as needed, or upon recommendations of the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-43. - General requirements within city. 
(a)  Sewer extensions shall be made upon order of the city as it deems necessary, and in accordance with provisions of State law the cost of such extensions shall be shared jointly by city and owners of property abutting the sewer extension improvements, according to this policy. 
(b)  Corner lots are exempt from front sewer improvement assessments for a maximum of one hundred fifty (150) feet on one (1) side of corner lot. In the event a sewer line is constructed across only one (1) side of a corner lot, that side shall be assessed at the then existing rate for its full distance. At such time in the future that a sewer line is extended across the other side of that corner lot, that side will be assessed at the then existing rate; except, that a corner lot exemption up to one hundred fifty (150) feet, but not exceeding the distance along that side, shall be allowed, provided an assessment has been paid for the first side. Lots having a double frontage shall be assessed for sewer improvements on both sides if both sides can be developed according to the zoning ordinance. If a double frontage lot is also a corner lot, on one (1) corner lot exemption shall be allowed, unless both frontages can be developed according to the zoning ordinance and both frontages have been assessed. In such case the property shall be entitled to two (2) corner lot exemptions. 
(c)  The city shall not assess any of the cost of enlarging sewer lines in use. 
(d)  An assessment for sewer extensions made under this policy may be spread over a period of ten (10) years if requested by the property owner. Such assessments shall bear interest at the highest rate provided by State law per annum on the unpaid balance, with the first assessment becoming due in October next succeeding the date of improvements within the city limits only. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-44. - Sewer connection fees and capital investment fees. 
(a)  Sewer connection fees are fees for the installation of a tap at the right-of-way. These fees shall be adopted by the City Council and made a part of the minutes of the meeting in which the action was taken. Certified copies of the fee schedule will be on file in the office of the City Clerk and the office of the Public Works Director, and copies shall be made available to the customers of the city's sewer system. The fees shall be reviewed and adjusted by the City Council, as needed, or upon recommendations of the City Manager. Minimum fees shall be paid prior to construction of the tap. Any additional fees to equal the total actual construction cost shall be paid prior to customer making tie-in to the tap. For any tap larger than listed on the fee schedule, the cost shall be estimated by the POTW Director at the time of the request. Any additional cost to equal the total actual construction costs shall be paid prior to customer making tie-in to the tap. For taps requiring more than the usual construction work, the city may require customer to employ an outside contractor to make the tap. Contractors shall obtain a permit from the Public Works Department and all work shall be in accordance to city specifications. 
(b)  Capital investment fees are charges for the construction of sewer lines which, at the time of construction, abut property outside the corporate limits. Fees shall be charged as established from time to time by ordinance. Property which is annexed into the city and abuts an existing sewer line, and has not previously paid a capital investment fee, shall pay the capital investment fee before service is provided. Property owners within the corporate limits may pay their capital investment fees in ten (10) equal annual installments, if requested by the property owners. Such capital investment fees will bear interest at the highest rate provided by State law per annum on the unpaid balance, with the first payment becoming due in October next succeeding the date the capital investment fee charge is made. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-45. - Service fees-New customers. 
    New customers to the wastewater system will be charged a service fee in the amount as established from time to time by ordinance and any deposit which is required of all customers. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-46. - Service fees-Transfers. 
    Customers moving from one (1) location to another within the wastewater system shall be charged a service fee in the amount established from time to time by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-47. - Sewer rates and bills. 
    A schedule of sewer rates shall be adopted by the City Council and made a part of the minutes of the meeting in which the action was taken. Certified copies of the rates will be on file in the office of the City Clerk and the office of the POTW Director, and copies shall be made available to the customers of the city's sewer system. The rates shall be reviewed and adjusted by the City Council, as needed, or upon recommendations of the City Manager. 
(a)  Residential service . 
(1)  This service is available for the collection and treatment of domestic sewage from single-family residences within the city and outside the city limits where the city's collection facilities are extended. 
(2)  Service is not available for resale under this schedule for any nondomestic sewage; such as from a business operated in the residence, for commercial for multifamily use, such as, master metered apartments, motels, inns, and mobile home parks, etc. 
(3)  This service is applicable when the customer's residence is served by a water service tap up to one (1) inch in diameter. 
(4)  The minimum monthly charge for city customers will be determined by the current rate schedule. 
(5)  Commodity charges will be based on the customer's total water consumption during the billing period. Water consumption will be metered and rounded to nearest cubic foot for billing. Except when the amount of water used is not registered because of a defective meter, the method described in section 39-50 will be used. 
(6)  Existing customers not receiving water service shall provide a meter to measure total use. When total use is not known, bills will be rendered on the basis of estimates by the POTW Director. 
(7)  The sewer service charge shall be billed to each customer at the same time the water bills are rendered and shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as water accounts. 
(b)  General service . 
(1)  This service is not available for resale for the collection and treatment of sewage discharged by commercial, industrial, institutional and other customers within the city and outside the city limits where the city's collection facilities are extended. 
(2)  The minimum monthly charge for inside city customers will be determined by the current rate schedule. 
(3)  Charges will be established periodically for billing of some costs attributable to wastewater with greater pollutant concentrations than normal domestic sewage. The following rates are applicable for five-day BOD and suspended solids: 
a.  BOD: $0.24/pound for concentration in excess of three hundred (300) mg/l. 
b.  TSS: $0.29/pound for concentration in excess of three hundred (300) mg/l. 
Charges for additional costs attributable to other pollutants will be assessed to each customer, as applicable. All nondomestic customers that utilize two (2) inch or greater meters shall be charged an additional $0.00414 per cubic foot for administration of the industrial pretreatment program. 
(4)  Commodity charges will be based on the customer's total water consumption during the billing period, except when the customer's water consumption significantly exceeds the discharge into the wastewater collection system. When applicable, the customer may pay the cost of installing and maintaining the necessary equipment to monitor the flow returned to the wastewater collection system, and has the billing use reduced accordingly. 
(5)  The sewer service charge shall be billed to each customer at the same time that the water bills are rendered and shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as water accounts. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-48. - Wastewater surcharges. 
(a)  All persons discharging industrial wastewater into the public sanitary sewer shall be rendered a monthly bill as a surcharge covering the entire costs to the city incurred by treating all wastewater having pollutants in excess of those defined as billable. Such surcharge shall be evoked as herein provided in addition to the existing service charge if such charge is now imposed or in addition to any sewer charge imposed after the adoption of this chapter. The surcharge shall include: 
(1)  All fixed charges and amortization costs of plant capacity required for treating such wastewater. 
(2)  A charge covering the operational cost incurred by the city in treating such wastewater. 
(b)  A surcharge in amounts established from time to time by ordinance per one hundred (100) pounds of billable biochemical oxygen demand and suspended solids shall be made to cover the fixed charges and amortization cost of plant capacity. The POTW Director shall recommend a surcharge for the other billable pollutants. 
(c)  The surcharge covering operational costs shall be fixed at the beginning of the fiscal year and shall be computed from the actual costs per pound of pollutant removed from the wastewater as experienced at the wastewater treatment plant during the preceding fiscal year. 
(d)  The combined surcharge as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be billed and payable monthly on a separate bill rendered by the city. Such bill shall be sent through the United States mail notifying all persons of the amount and date due. Failure to receive notice is not an excuse for nonpayment of bills. Delinquencies shall be handled in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(e)  In case a person discharging wastewater into the public sanitary sewer does not procure his water supply from the city and becomes delinquent on his payment of the surcharge, his connection with the wastewater system may be severed and may only be reconnected at his expense. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-49. - Billing, payments, and late payment penalties. 
(a)  All wastewater meters shall be read monthly, and bills shall be mailed on a cycle basis. 
(b)  Every bill shall be due when mailed to the customer at the last address provided by the customer. A bill shall reflect a due date of fifteen (15) days from the billing date shown on the bill. The same notice will serve as a notice of possible disconnect if payment is not received within thirty-two (32) days of the billing date, allowing greater than the statutory minimum. 
(c)  A late payment penalty in the amount of five (5) percent per month shall be imposed upon any outstanding unpaid balance twenty-five (25) days after the billing date shown on the bill. The late payment penalty will be reflected on the bill rendered the following month. 
(d)  An automated telephone reminder system will attempt to contact all delinquent accounts prior to disconnection as a courtesy if the customer has provided a phone number. 
(e)  If payment has not been received within thirty-two (32) days from the original billing date, services will be disconnected on the thirty-third (33 rd ) day. After payments in the night deposit are posted and the cutoff person has left the office for the purpose of disconnecting a delinquent customer, a service fee in an amount as established from time to time by ordinance will be charged on that date, whether services are disconnected or not. 
(f)  A customer whose services are disconnected for such delinquency may have services restored during regular working hours by the payment of the bill in full plus the twenty-five dollar ($25.00) service fee. If a customer requests that services be reconnected after regular working hours, their service fee shall be in an amount as established from time to time by ordinance. Payment must be received by 11:00 a.m. the following day or services will be disconnected. 
(g)  The customer shall pay all billed utility charges before transferring service from one (1) location to another. The final bill shall be mailed to the customer's new billing address. If a customer fails to pay his utility bills for any account where he is listed as the customer and such account becomes delinquent, the city may transfer the amount owed to any other account where the customer is a primary recipient of utilities and cutoff utilities to such account for nonpayment. The city may also refuse to transfer an account to a new customer's name or connect services to a new account where the delinquent customer will be a primary recipient of utilities. A customer is a primary recipient of utilities wherever he is listed as a customer, resides as a head of household or conducts a trade or business. The city's determination that a customer is primary recipient of utilities shall be effective until the customer proves otherwise. 
(h)  Any customer who has a check or draft returned from a financial institution because of insufficient funds or closed account shall be charged a service fee in accordance with N.C.G.S. § 25-3-506. 
(i)  Customers requesting alternate payment due dates must make such request of the city and utilize the city's bank draft service. The customer may choose one (1) of the following periods of the month for their bill to be drafted: 
(1)  Between the 7 th and 16 th of the month; 
(2)  Between the 14 th and 24 th of the month; 
(3)  Between the 22 nd and 31 st of the month; 
(4)  Between the 28 th and 9 th of the month. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-50. - Meter testing; protested bills. 
    If a sewer customer has an excessive bill and thinks that it is caused by a faulty meter, he may, by making a deposit with the city, request that the meter be removed and checked. If the meter is found to be in error, the deposit will be refunded and the bill adjusted for the three (3) preceding months. The adjustment will be based on the percentage of error in the meter. If the meter is found to be accurate, the deposit will be retained by the city. The deposit amount shall be as established from time to time by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-51. - Adjustment of sewer bills. 
(a)  If the city determines that it has overcharged or undercharged a customer on account of its error, the city shall refund or recover the difference, subject to the following: 
(1)  The adjustment period shall be limited to the lesser of the actual period during which the error occurred or thirty-six (36) months; 
(2)  The amount of adjustment shall be determined by the POTW Director based upon such evidence as deemed appropriate; and 
(3)  Any overcharge may be either refunded or credited to the customer and any undercharge shall be billed to the customer. 
(b)  If the city determines that it has undercharged a customer on account of any unlawful or materially misleading act of such customer, the undercharge shall be determined and collected as set out in subsection (a) of this section, except the adjustment period shall be twelve (12) months if the adjustment period cannot be determined. The city shall, in addition to collecting such undercharge, have the right to take such other action against such customer as is permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013; Ord. No. 15-4, § 1, 5-11-2015) 
Sec. 39-52. - Sewer facilities impact fees. 
(a)  Definitions . The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Capital equipment means equipment with an expected use life of three (3) years or more. 
(2)  Connection to the sewer system means the physical connect of a building, structure or use of land to the city's sewer lines, no matter if such connection is made through or by intermediate lines. 
(3)  Development order means a regulatory approval by city. 
(4)  Fee payer means a person applying for connection to the city's sewer system. 
(5)  Sewer system means the physical public collection and treatment facilities of the city administrative adjuncts to such system and the planned future improvements to such system. 
(6)  Sewer facilities means physical public collection and treatment facilities of the city. 
(b)  Legislative findings . The city finds, determines and declares that: 
(1)  The city has expanded and must further expand and upgrade its sewer facilities in order to maintain current and meet anticipated future standards of public health if new development is to be accommodated without decreasing current standards of health. 
(2)  The imposition of impact fees is one of the preferred methods of ensuring that development bears a proportionate share of the cost of sewer facilities necessary to accommodate such development. This must be done in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(3)  Connecting to the city sewer system will create a need for the construction, equipping, expansion, and upgrading of sewer facilities. 
(4)  The fees established by this section are derived from, are based upon, and do not exceed the costs of providing additional and/or upgraded sewer facilities necessitated by the connection to the city's sewer system. 
(c)  Short title, authority, and applicability . 
(1)  The ordinance from which this section is derived shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Washington Sewer Facilities Impact Fee Ordinance." 
(2)  The City Council has the authority to adopt the ordinance from which this section is derived pursuant to its general police powers and its obligation to protect the health, welfare, safety of its residents. 
(3)  This section shall apply in the incorporated and extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) areas of city served by its sewer system. 
(d)  Intent and purposes . 
(1)  This section is intended to assist in the implementation of the city comprehensive plan. 
(2)  The purpose of this section is to regulate the use and development of land to ensure that new development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide sewer facilities in the incorporated and extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) areas of city served by its sewer system. 
(e)  Rules of construction . 
(1)  The provisions of this section shall be liberally construed to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(2)  For the purposes of administration and enforcement of this section, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this section: 
a.  In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this section and any caption, illustration, summary table, or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
b.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
c.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
d.  The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for", "designed for", "maintained for", or "occupied for." 
e.  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity. 
f.  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and", "or", "either or", the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
1.  The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events or events shall apply. 
2.  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
3.  The term "either or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
g.  The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
h.  The term "City Manager" means the Washington City Manager or municipal officials he may designate to carry out the administration of this section. 
(f)  Imposition of sewer facilities impact fee . Any person who, after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived seeks to connect to the city sewer system is hereby required to pay a sewer facilities impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this section. 
(g)  Computation of the amount of sewer facilities impact fee . 
(1)  Sewer facilities impact fees shall be established from time to time by ordinance. A schedule of these fees shall be adopted by the City Council and made a part of the minutes of the meeting in which the action was taken. Certified copies of the rates will be on file in the office of the City Clerk and the office of the POTW Director, and copies shall be made available to the customers of the city's sewer system. The rates shall be reviewed and adjusted by the City Council, as needed, or upon the recommendation of the City Manager. 
(2)  If a fee payer opts not to have the impact fee determined according to subsection (b) of this section, then the fee payer shall prepare and submit to the City Manager an independent fee calculation study for the land development activity for which a connection to the city's sewer system is sought. The independent fee calculation study shall follow the prescribed methodologies and formats for sewer demand prescribed by the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR). The documentation submitted shall show the basis upon which the independent fee calculation was made. The City Manager shall consider the documentation submitted by the fee payer but is not required to accept such documentation as he shall reasonably deem to be inaccurate or not reliable and may, in the alternative, require the fee payer to submit additional or different documentation for consideration. If an acceptable independent fee calculation study is not presented, the fee payer shall pay sewer facilities impact fees based upon the current fee schedule. If an acceptable independent fee calculation study is presented, the City Manager may adjust the fee to that appropriate to the particular development. Determination made by the City Manager pursuant to this subsection may be appealed to the Washington City Council by filing a written request with the City Manager within ten (10) days of the City Manager's determination. 
(h)  Payment of fee . 
(1)  The fee payer shall pay the sewer facilities impact fee required by this section to the city Division of Revenue Collections prior to the connection to the city's sewer system. 
(2)  All fines collected shall be properly identified by and promptly transferred for deposit in the appropriate Sewer Facilities Impact Fee Trust Fund to be held in separate accounts as determined in this section and used solely for the purposes specified in this section. 
(i)  Sewer Facilities Impact Fee Trust Funds established . 
(1)  There are hereby established two (2) separate Water and Sewer Facilities Impact Fee Trust Funds: 
a.  The Water Facilities Impact Fee Trust Fund; and 
b.  The Sewer Facilities Impact Fee Trust Fund. 
(2)  Funds withdrawn from these accounts must be used in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(j)  Use of funds . 
(1)  Funds collected from sewer facility impact fees shall be used solely for the purpose of acquiring, equipping, and/or making capital improvements to sewer facilities under the jurisdiction of the city, and shall not be used for maintenance or operations. 
(2)  Funds from the Sewer Facilities Impact Fee Trust Fund may only be used for sewer facilities purposes. Funds shall be expended in the order in which they are collected. 
(3)  In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for advanced provision of capital facilities for which sewer facilities impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities provided are of the type described in subsection (b) of this section. 
(4)  At least once each fiscal period the City Manager shall present to the City Council a proposed capital improvement program for sewer facilities, assigning funds, including any accrued interest, from the several Sewer Facilities Impact Fee Trust Fund to specific sewer facilities improvements projects and related expenses, monies, including any accrued interest, not assigned in any fiscal period shall be retained in the same Sewer Facilities Impact Fee Trust Fund until the next fiscal period, except, as provided by the refund provisions of this section. 
(5)  Funds may be used to provide refunds as described in subsection (k) of this section. 
(6)  Funds may be funded to rebate developer costs for providing sewer capital facilities in excess of the capacity required for the individual developer making the provision. Any rebates must be pursuant to a refunding agreement between the developer and the city after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. Prior refunding agreements may be renegotiated in order to bring such agreements into accord with the provisions of this section. 
(k)  Refund of fees paid . Any funds not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following six (6) years from the date the sewer facilities impact fee was paid shall, upon application of the then current landowner, be returned to such landowner with interest at the rate of five (5) percent annually, provided that the landowner submits an application for a refund to the City Clerk within one hundred eighty (180) days of the expiration of the six-year period. 
(l)  Exemptions and credits . 
(1)  The following shall be exempted from payment of the impact fee: 
a.  Alterations or expansions of an existing building where no additional or larger sewer connections are requested and where the use is not changed. 
b.  The replacement of a building or structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use where no additional or larger sewer connections are requested and where the use is not changed. 
c.  The installations of a replacement mobile home on a lot or other such site when sewer capital facilities impact fee for such mobile home site has previously been paid pursuant to this section or where a mobile home legally exited on such cite on or prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
d.  Any claim of exemption must be made no later than the time of application for connection to the city's sewer system. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived. 
(2)  Credits . 
a.  Sewer facilities capital improvements may be offered by the fee payer as total or partial payment of the required impact fee. The offeror must request a sewer facilities impact fee credit. If the City Manager accepts such an offer, whether the acceptance is before or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, the credit shall be determined and provided in the following manner: 
1.  Credit for the dedication of land shall be valued at: 
(i)  One hundred ten (110) percent of the most recent assessed value by the county tax assessor; 
(ii)  By such other appropriate method as the City Council may have accepted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived for particular sewer facilities improvements; or 
(iii)  By fair market value established by private appraisers acceptable to the city. Credit for the dedication of sewer facilities land shall be provided when the property has been conveyed at no charge to; and accepted by, the city in a manner satisfactory to the City Council. 
2.  Applicants for credit for construction of sewer facilities improvements shall submit acceptable engineering drawings and specification and construction cost estimates to the City Manager. The City Manager shall determine credit for construction based upon either these cost estimates or upon alternated engineering criteria and construction cost estimates if the City Manager determines that such estimates submitted by the applicant are either unreliable or inaccurate. The City Manager shall provide the applicant with a letter or certificate setting forth the dollar amount of the credit, the sewer facilities impact fee component to which the credit will apply the reason for the credit, and the legal description or other adequate description of the project or development to which the credit may be applied. The applicant must sign and date a duplicate copy of a duplicate copy of such letter or certificate and return such signed document to the City Manager before credit will be given. Failure of the applicant to sign, date and return such document within sixty (60) days shall nullify the credit. 
3.  Except as provided in subsection (1) of this section, credit against impact fees otherwise due will not be provided until: 
(i)  The construction is completed and accepted by the city; or 
(ii)  A suitable maintenance and warranty bond is received and approved by the City Clerk, when applicable. 
4.  Credit may be provided before completion of specified sewer facilities improvements if adequate assurances are given by the applicant that the standards set out in this section will be met and if the fee payer posts security, as provided in this subsection, for the costs of such construction. Security in the form of a performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit or escrow agreement shall be posted with and approved by the City Clerk in an amount determined by the City Manager. If the sewer facilities construction project will not be constructed in one (1) year of acceptance of the offer by the City Manager, the amount of the security shall be increased by ten (10) percent compounded, for each year of the life of the security. The security shall be reviewed and approved by the City Clerk of the City Council prior to acceptance of the security by the City Clerk. If sewer facilities construction project is not to be completed within five (5) years of the date of the fee payer's offer, the City Council must approve the sewer facilities construction project and its scheduled completion date prior to the acceptance of the offer by the City Manager. 
b.  Any claim for credit must be made no later than the time of application for connection. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived. 
c.  Credits shall not be transferable from one (1) project or development to another without the approval of the City Council. 
d.  Credits shall not be transferable from one (1) component of the water and sewer facilities impact to another component of this fee. 
e.  Determination made by the City Manager, pursuant to the credit provisions of this section, may be appealed to the City Council by filing a written request with the City Manager within ten (10) days of the City Manager's determination. 
(m)  Review . The fees contained in subsection (g)(1) of this section shall be reviewed by City Council at least once each fiscal biennium at the time of adoption of the city budget. 
(n)  Penalty provision . A violation of this section 39-52 of this chapter shall be prosecuted in the same manner as misdemeanors are prosecuted and, upon conviction, the violator shall be punishable according to law. However, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal prosecution city shall have the power to sue in civil court to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Secs. 39-53-39-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE 

Sec. 39-61. - Wastewater dischargers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or discharge to the POTW without first obtaining the permission of the city. When requested by the POTW Director, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within thirty (30) days of the request. The POTW Director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-62. - Wastewater permits. 
    All significant industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial user permit prior to the commencement of discharge to the POTW. Existing industrial users who are determined by the POTW Director to be significant industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial user permit within one hundred eighty (180) days of receiving notification of the POTW Director's determination. Industrial users who do not fit the significant industrial user criteria may at the discretion of the POTW Director be required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit for nonsignificant industrial users. 
(a)  Significant industrial user determination . All persons proposing to discharge nondomestic wastewater, or proposing to change the volume or characteristics of an existing discharge of nondomestic wastewater shall request from the POTW Director a significant industrial user determination. If the POTW Director determines or suspects that the proposed discharge fits the significant industrial user criteria he will require that a significant industrial user permit application be filed. 
(b)  Significant industrial user permit application . Users required to obtain a significant industrial user permit shall complete and file with the city, an application in the form prescribed by the POTW Director, and accompanied by an application fee in the amount prescribed in the schedule of charges and fees. Significant industrial users shall apply for a significant industrial user permit within ninety (90) days after notification of the POTW Director's determination in section 39-62(a) above. The application shall include, at a minimum, the following. 
(1)  Name, address, and location (if different from the address); 
(2)  Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes for pretreatment, the industry as a whole, and any processes for which categorical pretreatment standards have been promulgated; 
(3)  Analytical data on wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not limited to those mentioned in article II, division 1 of this chapter, any of the priority pollutants (section 307(a) of the Act) which the applicant knows or suspects are present in the discharge as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory, and any other pollutant of concern to the POTW; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended and as required in section 39-80 and section 39-81; 
(4)  Time and duration of the indirect discharge; 
(5)  Average daily and thirty (30) minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any; 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, floor drains, sewer connections, direction of flow and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation; 
(7)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be accidentally or intentionally discharged; 
(8)  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, State, or Federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards; 
(9)  If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be longer than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions apply to this schedule: 
a.  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. No increment in the schedule shall exceed nine (9) months. 
b.  No later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the POTW Director including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the POTW Director. 
(10)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production; 
(11)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(12)  Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system; 
(13)  If subject to a categorical standard, a baseline monitoring report in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(b) and 15A NCAC 2H .0908(a), as outlined in section 39-71 of this chapter; 
(14)  Description of current and projected waste reduction activities in accordance with N.C.G.S. 143-215.1(g); 
(15)  Description of existing on-site pretreatment facilities and practices; 
(16)  Any other information as may be deemed by the POTW Director to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(c)  Application signatories and certification . All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by the current authorized representative of the user on file with the Control Authority and/or municipality as defined in section 39-2(a)(3) and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(d)  Application review and evaluation . The POTW Director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. 
(1)  The POTW Director is authorized to accept applications for the city and shall refer all applications to the POTW staff for review and evaluation. 
(2)  Within thirty (30) days of receipt the POTW Director shall acknowledge and accept the complete application; or if not complete, shall return the application to the applicant with a statement of what additional information is required. 
(e)  Tentative determination and draft permit . 
(1)  The POTW staff shall conduct a review of the application and an on-site inspection of the significant industrial user, including any pretreatment facilities, and shall prepare a written evaluation and tentative determination to issue or deny the significant industrial user permit. 
(2)  If the staff's tentative determination in paragraph (1) above is to issue the permit, the following additional determinations shall be made in writing: 
a.  Proposed discharge limitations for those pollutants proposed to be limited; 
b.  A proposed schedule of compliance, including interim dates and requirements, for meeting the proposed limitations; and 
c.  A brief description of any other proposed special conditions which will have significant impact upon the discharge described in the application. 
(3)  The staff shall organize the determinations made pursuant to paragraphs (1) and (2) above and the general permit conditions of the city into a significant industrial user permit. 
(f)  Permit supporting documentation . The Control Authority staff shall prepare the following documents for all significant industrial user permits. 
(1)  An allocation table (AT) listing permit information for all significant industrial users, including but not limited to permit limits, permit effective and expiration dates, and a comparison of total permitted flows and loads with Division approved maximum allowable loadings of the POTW, including flow, on forms or in a format approved by the Division. The AT shall be updated as permits are issued or renewed, and as permits are modified when the permitted limits or other AT information is revised. 
(2)  The basis, or rationale, for the pretreatment limitations, including the following: 
a.  Documentation of categorical determination, including documentation of any calculations used in applying categorical pretreatment standards; and 
b.  Documentation of the rationale of any parameters for which monitoring has been waived under 40 CFR Part 403.12(e)(2). 
(g)  Final action on significant industrial user permit applications. 
(1)  The POTW Director shall take final action on all applications not later than ninety (90) days following receipt of a complete application. 
(2)  The POTW Director is authorized to: 
a.  Issue a significant industrial user permit containing such conditions as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter and N.C.G.S. 143-215.1; 
b.  Issue a significant industrial user permit containing time schedules for achieving compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements; 
c.  Modify any permit upon not less than sixty (60) days notice and pursuant to section 39-62(i) of this chapter; 
d.  Revoke any permit pursuant to section 39-112 of this chapter; 
e.  Suspend a permit pursuant to section 39-112 of this chapter; 
f.  Deny a permit application when in the opinion of the POTW Director such discharge may cause or contribute to pass through or interference of the wastewater treatment plant or where necessary to effectuate the purposes of N.C.G.S. 143-215.1. 
(h)  Adjudicatory hearings . 
(1)  An applicant whose permit is denied, terminated or is granted subject to conditions he deems unacceptable and a permittee/user assessed a civil penalty under section 39-112, shall have the right to an adjudicatory hearing before the POTW Director, or other hearing officer appointed by the POTW Director, upon making written demand, identifying the specific issues to be contested, to the POTW Director within thirty (30) days following receipt of the significant industrial user permit, civil penalty assessment, or administrative order. Unless such written demand and is made within the time specified herein, the action shall be final and binding and further appeal is barred. For modified permits, only those parts of the permit being modified may be adjudicated. The POTW Director, or other hearing officer, as appropriate, shall make a decision upon said demand and, within forty-five (45) days of receipt of said demand, transmit a copy of the decision to the petitioner by registered or certified mail. 
a.  New permits . Upon appeal, including judicial review in the General Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions of a newly issued permit, the terms and conditions of the entire permit are stayed and the permit is not in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution. 
b.  Renewed or modified permits . Upon appeal, including judicial review in the General Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions of a renewed or modified permit, the terms and conditions of the existing permit remain in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution. 
c.  Terminated permits . Upon appeal, including judicial review in the General Courts of Justice, of a terminated permit, no permit is in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution. 
(2)  Any decision of a Hearing Officer, or the POTW Director, made as a result of an adjudicatory hearing held hereunder, may be appealed to the City Manager or other unbiased entity designated by the City Manager, upon filing written demand within ten (10) days of receipt of notice of the decision. Failure to make written demand within the time specified herein shall bar further appeal. The City Manager, or other unbiased entity designated by the City Manager, shall make a final decision on the appeal within ninety (90) days and transmit a copy of the decision to the petitioner by registered or certified mail. This decision is the final decision for the purposes of judicial review. Appeal hearings shall be conducted in accordance with applicable provisions of the city regulations. 
(3)  Official record . When a final decision for the purposes of judicial review is issued under paragraph (1) above, the Hearing Officer, shall prepare an official record of the case that includes all notices, motions, and other like pleadings; a copy of all documentary evidence introduced; a certified transcript of all testimony taken, if testimony is transcribed, or, if testimony is taken and not transcribed, then a narrative summary of any testimony taken; and a copy of the final decision of the Hearing Officer. 
(4)  Judicial Review . Any person against whom a final order or decision of the Hearing Officer is entered pursuant to the hearing conducted under paragraph (1) above, may seek judicial review of the order or decision by filing a written request for review by the Superior Court of Justice within thirty (30) days after receipt of notice by registered or certified mail of the order or decision, but not thereafter, along with a copy to the city. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of a copy of the written request for review by the Court, the Hearing Officer shall transmit to the reviewing court the original or a certified copy of the official record. 
(i)  Permit modification . 
(1)  Modifications of permits shall be subject to the same procedural requirements as the issuance of permits except as listed below: 
a.  Changes in the ownership of the discharge when no other change in the permit is indicated, 
b.  A single modification of any compliance schedule not in excess of four (4) months, 
c.  Modification of compliance schedules (construction schedules) in permits for new sources where the new source will not begin to discharge until control facilities are operational. 
d.  Modifications of the monitoring requirements in the permit. 
Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(2)  Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by section 39-62(b), the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. 
(3)  A request for a modification by the permittee shall constitute a waiver of the sixty-day notice required by N.C.G.S. 143-215.1(b) for modifications. 
(j)  Permit conditions . 
(1)  The POTW Director shall have the authority to grant a permit with such conditions attached as he believes necessary to achieve the purpose of this chapter and N.C.G.S. 143-215.1. Wastewater permits shall contain, but are not limited to containing, the following: 
a.  A statement of duration (in no case more than five (5) years); 
b.  A statement of nontransferability; 
c.  Applicable effluent limits based on categorical standards or local limits or both; 
d.  Applicable monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on Federal, State and local law; 
e.  Requirements for notifying the POTW in the event of an accidental discharge or slug load as defined in section 39-2; 
f.  Requirements to implement a plan or other controls for prevention of accidental discharges and/or slug loads as defined in section 39-2(a)(51), if determined by the POTW Director to be necessary for the user; 
g.  Requirements for immediately notifying the POTW Director of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental discharges, or slug load as defined in section 39-2(a)(51). Also see section 39-75 and section 39-76; and 
h.  A statement of applicable civil and/or criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable compliance schedule. 
(2)  In addition, permits may contain, but are not limited to containing, the following: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization. 
b.  Limits on the instantaneous, daily and/or monthly average and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater pollutants or properties. 
c.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or construction of appropriate containment devices, etc., designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works. 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the municipal wastewater system. 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the system. 
f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment. 
g.  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests, and reporting schedules. 
h.  Requirements for immediate reporting of any instance of noncompliance and for automatic resampling and reporting within thirty (30) days where self-monitoring indicates a violation(s). 
i.  Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment standards and requirements. 
j.  Requirements for submission of periodic self-monitoring or special notification reports. 
k.  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plans and records relating to wastewater discharges as specified in section 39-83 and affording the POTW Director, or his representatives, access thereto. 
l.  Requirements for prior notification and approval by the POTW Director of any new introduction of wastewater pollutants or of any significant change in the volume or character of the wastewater prior to introduction in the system. 
m.  Requirements for the prior notification and approval by the POTW Director of any change in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process used by the permittee. 
n.  A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable Federal and State pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the terms of the permit. 
o.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the POTW Director to ensure compliance with this article, and State and Federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(k)  Permit duration . Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be issued for a period of less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. 
(l)  Permit transfer . Wastewater permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation. 
(m)  Permit reissuance . A significant industrial user shall apply for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application in accordance with section 39-62 a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Secs. 39-63-39-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 39-71. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the POTW Director a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b), below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the POTW Director a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b), below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below: 
(1)  Identifying information . The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits . A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations . A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement . Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants . 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the POTW Director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 39-80 of this chapter. 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 39-81 of this chapter and 40 CFR 403.12(b) and (g), including 40 CFR 403.12(g)(4). 
(6)  Certification . A statement, reviewed by the user's current authorized representative as defined in section 39-2(a)(4) and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule . If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O & M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 39-72 of this chapter. 
(8)  Signature and certification . All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 39-62(c) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-72. - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
    The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by section 39-71(b)(7) of this chapter: 
(a)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(b)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months; 
(c)  The user shall submit a progress report to the POTW Director no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(d)  In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the POTW Director. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-73. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard, deadline. 
    Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the POTW Director a report containing the information described in section 39-71(b)(4)-(6) of this chapter. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 39-62(c) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-74. - Periodic compliance reports. 
    Municipalities may sample and analyze user discharges in lieu of requiring the users to conduct sampling and analysis. 
(a)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the POTW Director but in no case less than once every six (6) months, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the applicable flows for the reporting period. Sampling and analysis must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 39-80 and section 39-81 of this chapter. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 39-62(c) of this chapter. 
(b)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW Director, using the procedures prescribed in section 39-80 and section 39-81 of this chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-75. - Reports of changed conditions. 
    Each user must notify the POTW Director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the change. The permittee shall not begin the changes until receiving written approval from the Control Authority and/or municipality. See section 39-76(d) for other reporting requirements. 
(a)  The POTW Director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 39-62 of this chapter. 
(b)  The POTW Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 39-62 of this chapter or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 39-62 of this chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(c)  For the purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow or pollutant increases of twenty (20) percent or greater, the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, increases or decreases to production, increases in discharge of previously reported pollutants, discharge of pollutants not previously reported to the Control Authority and/or municipality, new or changed product lines, new or changed manufacturing processes and/or chemicals, and new or changed customers. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-76. - Reports of potential problems. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in section 39-2(a)(51), that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the POTW Director of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the POTW Director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (a), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(d)  All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental discharge, discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in section 39-2(a)(51). 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-77. - Reports from unpermitted users. 
    All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the POTW Director as the POTW Director may require. All users classified as non-significant categorical industrial users under section 39-2(49)(f) shall provide appropriate reports to the POTW Director as the POTW Director may require. At a minimum, this shall include the annual certification of continuing to meet the non-significant categorical industrial user criteria as required under 40 CFR 403.12(q). 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-78. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
(a)  If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the POTW Director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the POTW Director within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. If allowed by the POTW Director, the user is not required to resample: 
(1)  If the POTW Director monitors at the user's facility at least once a month; or 
(2)  If the POTW Director samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(b)  If the POTW Director has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user and the POTW sampling of the user indicates a violation, the POTW Director shall repeat the sampling and obtain the results of the repeat analysis within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violations, unless one (1) of the following occurs: 
(1)  The POTW Director monitors at the user's facility at least once a month; or 
(2)  The POTW Director samples the user between their initial sampling and when the POTW receives the results of this initial sampling; or 
(3)  The POTW Director requires the user to perform sampling and submit the results to the POTW Director within the thirty-day deadline of the POTW becoming aware of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-79. - Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
    The city prohibits the discharge of any hazardous wastes without notification and approval of the POTW Director. 
(a)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharge during the calendar month, and an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place no later than one hundred eighty (180) days before the discharge commences. The user shall not begin the discharge until receiving written approval from the city. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharge. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section 39-75 of this chapter. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of section 39-71, section 39-73 and section 39-74, of this chapter. 
(b)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (a), above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(c)  In the case of any new regulation under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the POTW Director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(d)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(e)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable Federal or State law. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-80. - Analytical requirements. 
    All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed by a laboratory certified by the state to perform the wastewater analysis in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard or unless otherwise performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA or the city. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA and the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-81. - Grab and composite sample collection. 
(a)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(b)  Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, volatile organic compounds, and any other pollutants as required by 40 CFR 136. The POTW shall determine the number of grabs necessary to be representative of the user's discharge. See 40 CFR 403.12(g)(5) for additional grab sample number requirements for BMR and 90-day compliance reports. Additionally, the POTW Director may allow collection of multiple grabs during a twenty-four-hour period which are composited prior to analysis as allowed under 40 CFR 136. 
(c)  Composite samples . All wastewater composite samples shall be collected with a minimum of hourly aliquots or grabs for each hour that there is a discharge. All wastewater composite samples shall be collected using flow proportional composite collection techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the POTW Director. When authorizing time-proportional composites or grabs, the samples must be representative and the decision to allow the alternative sampling must be documented. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-82. - Timing. 
    Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-83. - Record keeping. 
(a)  Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the POTW Director. 
(b)  The POTW Director may develop procedures for receipt of electronic reports for any reporting requirements of this chapter. Such procedures shall comply with 40 CFR Part 3. These procedures shall be enforceable under Division 7, Enforcement, of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Secs. 39-84-39-91. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - COMPLIANCE MONITORING 

Sec. 39-92. - Monitoring facilities. 
    The city requires the user to provide and operate at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
    There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
    Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the city and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days following written notification by the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-93. - Inspection and sampling. 
    The city will inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city, approval authority and EPA or their representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying or in the performance of any of their duties. The city, approval authority and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, approval authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. Denial of the city's, approval authority's or EPA's access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter. Unreasonable delays may constitute denial of access. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-94. - Search warrants. 
    If the city, approval authority, or EPA has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the city, approval authority, or EPA may seek issuance of a search warrant from the court having jurisdiction within the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Secs. 39-95-39-102. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION 

Sec. 39-103. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data provided by an industrial user to the POTW Director pursuant to this chapter identifying the nature and frequency of a discharge shall be available to the public without restriction. All other information which may be submitted by an industrial user to the POTW Director in connection with any required reports shall also be available to the public unless the industrial user or other interested person specifically indentifies the information as confidential upon submission and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the POTW Director that the disclosure of such information or a particular part thereof to the general public would divulge methods or processes entitled to protection as trade secrets. 
(b)  Information provided by an industrial user to the POTW Director that is determined to be entitled to confidential treatment shall be made available upon written request to the Division of Water Resources or any State agency for uses related to the pretreatment program, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit collection system, stormwater permit, and/or non-discharge permit, and for uses related to judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. 
(c)  Information and data received by the Division or other state agency under paragraph (b) above shall be subject to the processes set forth in G.S. 143-215.3C. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Secs. 39-104-39-111. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 39-112. - Administrative remedies. 
(a)  Notification of violation . Whenever the POTW Director finds that any industrial user has violated or is violating this chapter, wastewater permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained therein or any other pretreatment requirement the POTW Director may serve upon such a person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, an explanation for the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the city by the user. Submission of this plan does not relieve the discharger of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(b)  Consent orders . The POTW Director is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the discharger to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as an administrative order issued pursuant to section 39-112(d), below. 
(c)  Show cause hearing . The POTW Director may order any industrial user who causes or is responsible for an unauthorized discharge, has violated this chapter or is in noncompliance with a wastewater discharge permit to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. In the event the POTW Director determines that a show cause order should be issued, a notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
    The POTW Director shall review the evidence presented at the hearing and determine whether the proposed enforcement action is appropriate. 
    A show cause hearing under this section is not a prerequisite to the assessment of a civil penalty under section 39-113 nor is any action or inaction taken by the POTW Director under this section subject to an administrative appeal under section 39-62(h). 
(d)  Administrative orders . When the POTW Director finds that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate this chapter, permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement the POTW Director may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to do any of the following: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; 
(2)  Comply in accordance with a compliance time schedule set forth in the order; 
(3)  Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the event of a continuing or threatened violation; 
(4)  Disconnect unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated within a specified time period. 
(e)  Emergency suspensions . The POTW Director may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or wastewater permit when such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, interferes with the POTW or causes the POTW to violate any condition of its NPDES or non-discharge permit. 
    Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. A hearing will be held within fifteen (15) days of the notice of suspension to determine whether the suspension may be lifted or the user's waste discharge permit terminated. In the event of a failure to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the POTW Director shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The POTW Director shall reinstate the wastewater permit and the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncompliant discharge. The industrial user shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the POTW Director prior to the date of the above-described hearing. 
(f)  Termination of permit or permission to discharge . 
(1)  The POTW Director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit or permission to discharge for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
a.  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge; 
b.  Failure to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
c.  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or, 
d.  Violation of conditions of the permit or permission to discharge, conditions of this chapter, or any applicable State and Federal regulations; 
e.  Tampering with or deliberately altering monitoring equipment; 
f.  Changes in POTW NPDES permit, receiving stream water quality standards, POTW treatment plant process, sludge disposal practices or requirements, or other modifications of similar nature that impact the city's ability to accept industrial wastewater; 
g.  For causes necessitating an emergency suspension; 
h.  Failure to show cause; or 
i.  Nonpayment of sewer user charges. 
(2)  A user whose permission to discharge has been revoked may apply for new permission to discharge and shall pay all delinquent fees, charges, penalties, and such other sums as may be due to the city. 
(3)  Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the proposed termination of their wastewater permit and will be offered an opportunity to show cause under article II, section 39-112(c) of this chapter why the proposed action should not be taken. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-113. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  Any user who is found to have failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, may be assessed a civil penalty of up to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per day per violation. 
(1)  Penalties between ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per day per violation may be assessed against a violator only if: 
a.  For any class of violation, only if a civil penalty has been imposed against the violator within the five (5) years preceding the violation, or 
b.  In the case of failure to file, submit, or make available, as the case may be, any documents, data, or reports required by this chapter, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, only if the POTW Director determines that the violation was intentional and a civil penalty has been imposed against the violator within the five (5) years preceding the violation. 
(b)  In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the POTW Director shall consider the following: 
(1)  The degree and extent of the harm to the natural resources, to the public health, or to public or private property resulting from the violation; 
(2)  The duration and gravity of the violation; 
(3)  The effect on ground or surface water quantity or quality or on air quality; 
(4)  The cost of rectifying the damage; 
(5)  The amount of money saved by noncompliance; 
(6)  Whether the violation was committed willfully or intentionally; 
(7)  The prior record of the violator in complying or failing to comply with the pretreatment program; 
(8)  The costs of enforcement to the city. 
(c)  Appeals of civil penalties assessed in accordance with this section shall be as provided in section 39-116. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-114. - Other available remedies. 
    Remedies, in addition to those previously mentioned in this chapter, and are available to the POTW Director who may use any single one or combination against a noncompliant user. Additional available remedies include, but are not limited to: 
(a)  Criminal violations . The District Attorney for the applicable Judicial District may, at the request of the city, prosecute noncompliant users who violate the provisions of N.C.G.S. 143-215.6B. [Note: Under North Carolina law, it is a crime to negligently violate any term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit, or negligently fail to apply for a pretreatment permit, issued by local governments (N.C.G.S. 143-215.6B(f)), to knowingly and willfully violate any term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit, or knowingly and willfully fail to apply for a pretreatment permit, issued by local governments (N.C.G.S. 143-215.6B(g)), to knowingly violate any term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit issued by local governments, or knowingly fail to apply for a pretreatment permit, knowing at the time that a person is placed in imminent danger of death or serious bodily injury, (N.C.G.S. 143-215.6B(h)), and to falsify information required under Article 21 of Chapter 143 of the General Statutes (N.C.G.S. 143-215.6B(i)). 
(b)  Injunctive relief . Whenever a user is in violation of the provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued hereunder, the POTW Director, through the City Attorney, may petition the Superior Court of Justice for the issuance of a restraining order or a preliminary and permanent injunction which restrains or compels the activities in question. 
(c)  Discontinuance of sewer . 
(1)  The POTW Director shall have the right to discontinue sewer service to the property of a user of such service in the event of nonpayment of sewer charges; provided that no discontinuation shall be made until the user shall have been given notice of his right to be heard in person or by counsel on the question of discontinuation before the city or any person designated by the city after not less than five (5) days written notice specifying the basis of the discontinuation. Any user whose permit has been terminated or who has failed to pay the user charge or any other charge imposed by the city shall be subject to termination of service by disconnection of the property from the sewer service. The city shall have the right of entry in and upon the premises and the right of ingress and egress to determine the location of the service line or to dig it up to uncover it for the purpose of disconnecting the service line from the property, or sealing, or plugging such line, or any collection line, upon the notice as provided under the city's regulations. 
(2)  Whenever a user is in violation of the provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated ability to comply. 
(d)  Public nuisances . Any violation of the prohibitions or effluent limitations of this chapter or of a permit or order issued hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the POTW Director. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the appropriate ordinances of the city governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the POTW for any costs incurred in removing, abating or remedying said nuisance. 
(e)  Judicial remedies . If any person discharges wastewater contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any order or permit issued hereunder, or otherwise violates provisions of this chapter or any order or permit issued hereunder, the POTW, through the city's attorney, may commence an action for appropriate legal or equitable relief in the appropriate General Court of Justice. 
(f)  If a public sewer becomes obstructed or damaged because of any substances improperly discharged into it, the person responsible for such discharge shall be billed and shall pay for the expenses incurred by the city in cleaning out, repairing or rebuilding the sewer as well as damages incurred by the city arising from claims of private property owners which are caused by such obstruction or damage. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-115. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
    The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The POTW Director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the POTW Director may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the POTW Director is empowered to take more than one (1) enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-116. - Adjudicatory hearings. 
    Any person jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision, including but not limited to order, requirement, determination, fine, violation, grant, denial, approval or finding, made or based in whole, in part, or otherwise pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, by the city or representative thereof, shall have the right to an adjudicatory hearing concerning said decision upon making written demand therefor as more specifically provided for in, and thereafter utilizing the procedures contained in, the section of this chapter concerning adjudicatory hearings, which section is 39-62(h), as may be amended. As more particularly provided for in section 39-62(h), all such decisions are final and binding unless said written demand is filed within thirty (30) days of the date such decision is made. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-117. - Enforcement management strategy plan for the City of Washington. 

(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Secs. 39-118-39-124. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - ANNUAL PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE 

Sec. 39-125. - Annual publication of significant noncompliance. 
    At least annually, the POTW Director shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction(s) served by the POTW, a list of those industrial users which were found to be in significant noncompliance, also referred to as reportable noncompliance, in 15A NCAC 2H .0903(b)(34), with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, during the previous twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Secs. 39-126-39-133. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 39-134. - Upset. 
(a)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph (b), below, are met. 
(b)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(3)  The user has submitted the following information to the POTW Director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days): 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(c)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(d)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(e)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-135. - Prohibited discharge standards defense. 
    A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section 39-26(c)(1) of this chapter or the specific prohibitions in section 39-26 (c)(2)(b), (m), (d)-(g), (i)-(l), and (n)-(w) of this chapter if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(a)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(b)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 39-136. - Bypass. 
(a)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section. 
(b)  Notification . 
(1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW Director, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the POTW Director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of this time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW Director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(c)  Exceptions to enforcement action . 
(1)  Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW Director may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (b) of this section. 
(2)  The POTW Director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the POTW Director determines that it will meet the three (3) conditions listed in paragraph (c)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Secs. 39-137-39-144. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - SEVERABILITY 

Sec. 39-145. - Severability. 
    If any provision, paragraph, word, section or article of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections, and chapters shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Secs. 39-146-39-153. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - CONFLICT 

Sec. 39-154. - Conflict. 
    All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Secs. 39-155-39-162. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - EFFECTIVE DATE 

Sec. 39-163. - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Chapter 40 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Corporate boundaries, § 1.3; extraterritorial powers, art. VIII. 
Cross reference- Master plan, § 2-219 et seq.; Planning Board, § 2-214 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; housing appeals board, § 6-113; cemeteries, ch. 8; licenses and business regulations, ch. 16; massage business operators, § 16-109; junked motor vehicle regulated; removal authorized, § 18-246; entertainment activities, § 20-2; subdivisions, ch. 34. 
Federal law reference- Preservation of local zoning authority concerning wireless telecommunications facilities, 47 USC 322(c)(7); limited Federal preemption of state and local zoning laws affecting amateur radio facilities, Memorandum Opinion and Order, PRB-1, 101 FCC 2d 952 (1985) and 47 CFR 97.15(b); Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act, 42 USC 2000cc et seq. 
State Law reference- Building setback lines, G.S. 160A-306; planning and regulation of development, G.S. 160A-360 et seq.; grant of power, G.S. 160A-381 et seq.; interlocal cooperation, G.S. 160A-460 et seq. 
 This entire chapter was reissued on 6-10-1996. Amendments made to this chapter since that date are indicated. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 40-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance for the City of Washington, North Carolina," and may be referred to as the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 27-1) 
Sec. 40-2. - Purpose. 
(a)  These regulations have been made in accordance with the comprehensive plan for the city and its extraterritorial area and are adopted to promote the systematic development of land within the city and within the extraterritorial areas of the city in an efficient, economic manner which will best promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the people, and for the following specific purposes: 
(1)  To lessen congestion in the streets. 
(2)  To secure safety from fire, panic, and other hazards. 
(3)  To provide for adequate light and air. 
(4)  To prevent the overcrowding of land. 
(5)  To avoid undue concentration of population. 
(6)  To facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, and other public requirements. 
(7)  To promote desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods. 
(8)  To conserve property values. 
(9)  To encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the city and extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(10)  To control and minimize the extent of floods by preventing obstructions which inhibit water flow and increase flood height and damage and to regulate the use of flood hazard areas to prevent or minimize the loss or damages to persons or property caused by water, mud, or waterborne debris. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter are adopted under the authority granted by the General Assembly of the state, particularly G.S. 160A-174 and G.S. ch. 160A, art. 19 et seq. 
(Code 1993, § 27-2) 
Sec. 40-3. - Interpretation and application. 
(a)  In interpreting and applying these regulations, the requirements contained herein are the minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter. 
(b)  Except as provided herein, these regulations shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annual or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants, deed restrictions or other agreements between parties. 
(c)  Whenever the requirements of these regulations impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings or require a larger percentage of lot to be left unoccupied than other provisions of this Code or other ordinances, rules, regulations, permits, or any easements, covenants, deed restrictions, or other agreements between parties, the provisions of these regulations shall govern. 
(Code 1993, § 27-3) 
Sec. 40-4. - Jurisdiction. 
    These regulations shall govern the use and the development thereon of all lands within the city and the extraterritorial area of the city as defined in this chapter and shown on the Official Zoning Map for the city. The map is available for public inspection in the office of the Department of Planning and Development. Additional regulations apply within the designated Washington Historic District. These additional regulations are set forth in this chapter, and in the Historic Preservation Commission Design Guidelines, copies of which are available in the offices of the Department of Planning and Development. 
(Code 1993, § 27-4) 
Sec. 40-5. - Zoning map. 
(a)  The map which is on file in the office of the Department of Planning and Development and which is identified by the words "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map of the City of Washington, North Carolina," the date of adoption and the signature of the Mayor, and which is attested by the City Clerk and the city seal, together with all notes officially entered thereon, is hereby adopted by reference as the Official Zoning Map of the city and the extraterritorial area within the zoning jurisdiction of the city, and it is hereby incorporated in and made a part of this section as though it were fully set out herein. 
(b)  The Official Zoning Map shall remain on file in the office of the Department of Planning and Development and shall be available to the public for inspection and use during all regular business hours. 
(c)  The Director of Planning and Development, or his designee, shall be responsible for the maintenance and revision of the Official Zoning Map. Upon notification by the City Council that a zoning change has been made, the Director of Planning and Development, or his designee, shall make the necessary changes on the Official Zoning Map within a reasonable time. Failure to make the changes in a timely manner shall not affect the validity of the zoning change. 
(d)  In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret, the City Council may, by ordinance, adopt a new Official Zoning Map which shall be the same in every detail as the map it supersedes. The new map shall bear the signatures of the same officials as the original and shall bear the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map (adopted (date of adoption of map replaced)) and referred to in the zoning ordinance for the City of Washington, North Carolina." The date of adoption of the new Official Zoning Map shall be shown also. 
(Code 1993, § 27-5) 
Sec. 40-6. - Land and buildings regulated. 
(a)  No land, building or structure shall be used, no building or structure shall be erected, and no existing building or structure shall be moved, added to, enlarged, or altered, except in conformity with these regulations or any other applicable regulations. 
(b)  All of the provisions of this chapter are hereby made applicable to the erection, construction, and use of buildings by the state and its political subdivisions. No land owned by the state may be included within a conditional use district without approval of the Council of State or its designate. 
(Code 1993, § 27-6; Ord. No. 06-02, § 12, 2-13-2006) 
State Law reference- Applicability of statutes to government-constructed buildings, G.S. 160A-392. 
Sec. 40-7. - Relationship of building to lot. 
    Every building hereafter erected, moved or structurally altered shall be located on a lot, and in no case shall there be more than one (1) principal use upon any lot in a residential district, or on a lot with a permitted residential use, except as expressly provided in these regulations. 
(Code 1993, § 27-7) 
Sec. 40-8. - Reduction or change in lot size prohibited. 
    No lot shall be reduced or changed in size such that it creates a lot or lots that do not meet the requiements of these regulations, including, but not limited to, the total area; minimum frontage; front, side, or rear setbacks; lot area per dwelling unit; or other dimensions, areas, or open spaces. No lot shall be subdivided so as to produce an additional lot which is not in conformity with these or other applicable regulations, unless such lot is combined with other land to produce a conforming lot or unless said lot is deeded, dedicated, and accepted for public use. 
(Code 1993, § 27-8) 
Sec. 40-9. - Maintenance of open space. 
    No yard shall be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with these regulations. No yard for any principal building shall be considered as a yard for any other principal building. 
(Code 1993, § 27-9) 
Sec. 40-10. - Uses prohibited. 
    Unless a use of land is specifically allowed in a zoning district, either as a matter of right or as a special use, then such use shall be prohibited in the district. 
(Code 1993, § 27-10) 
Sec. 40-11. - Reenactment of prior zoning provisions; saving provisions. 
(a)  This chapter in part carries forward by reenactment some of the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city enacted in 1972, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to reenact and continue in force, without interruption, such existing provisions, so all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are preserved and may be enforced. All provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city enacted in 1972 which are not reenacted herein are hereby repealed. 
(b)  All suits of law or on equity and all prosecutions resulting from the violation of any zoning ordinance heretofore in effect, which are now pending in any of the courts of the state or of the United States, shall not be abated or abandoned by reason of the adoption of this chapter but shall be prosecuted to their finality the same as if this chapter had not been adopted. Any and all violations of the existing zoning ordinance, prosecutions for which have not yet been instituted, may be hereafter filed and prosecuted. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to abandon, abate or dismiss any litigation or prosecution now pending or which may heretofore have been instituted or prosecuted. 
(Code 1993, § 27-11) 
Sec. 40-12. - Temporary moratoria. 
(a)  Cities may adopt temporary moratoria on any city development approval required by law. The duration of any moratorium shall be reasonable in light of the specific conditions that warrant imposition of the moratorium and may not exceed the period of time necessary to correct, modify, or resolve such conditions. Except in cases of imminent and substantial threat to public health or safety, before adopting an ordinance imposing a development moratorium with a duration of 60 days or any shorter period, the City Council shall hold a public hearing and shall publish a notice of the hearing in a newspaper having general circulation in the area not less than seven days before the date set for the hearing. A development moratorium with a duration of 61 days or longer, and any extension of a moratorium so the total duration is 61 days or longer, is subject to the notice and hearing requirements of G.S. 160A-364. Absent an imminent threat to public health or safety, a development moratorium adopted pursuant to this section shall not apply to any project for which a valid building permit, issued pursuant to G.S. 160A-417, is outstanding, to any project for which a conditional use permit application or special use permit application has been accepted, to development set forth in a site-specific or phased development plan approved pursuant to G.S. 160A-385.1, to development for which substantial expenditures have already been made in good-faith reliance on a prior valid administrative or quasi-judicial permit or approval, or to preliminary or final subdivision plats that have been accepted for review by the city prior to the call for public hearing to adopt the moratorium. Any preliminary subdivision plat accepted for review by the city prior to the call for public hearing, if subsequently approved, shall be allowed to proceed to final plat approval without being subject to the moratorium. 
(b)  Any ordinance establishing a development moratorium must expressly include at the time of adoption each of the following: 
(1)  A clear statement of the problems or conditions necessitating the moratorium and what courses of action, alternative to a moratorium, were considered by the city and why those alternative courses of action were not deemed adequate. 
(2)  A clear statement of the development approvals subject to the moratorium and how a moratorium on those approvals will address the problems or conditions leading to imposition of the moratorium. 
(3)  An express date for termination of the moratorium and a statement setting forth why that duration is reasonably necessary to address the problems or conditions leading to imposition of the moratorium. 
(4)  A clear statement of the actions, and the schedule for those actions, proposed to be taken by the city during the duration of the moratorium to address the problems or conditions leading to imposition of the moratorium. 
(c)  No moratorium may be subsequently renewed or extended for any additional period unless the city shall have taken all reasonable and feasible steps proposed to be taken by the city in its ordinance establishing the moratorium to address the problems or conditions leading to imposition of the moratorium and unless new facts and conditions warrant an extension. Any ordinance renewing or extending a development moratorium must expressly include, at the time of adoption, the findings set forth in subsection (b)(1) through (4) of this section, including what new facts or conditions warrant the extension. 
(d)  Any person aggrieved by the imposition of a moratorium on development approvals required by law may apply to the appropriate division of the General Court of Justice for an order enjoining the enforcement of the moratorium, and the court shall have jurisdiction to issue that order. Actions brought pursuant to this section shall be set down for immediate hearing, and subsequent proceedings in those actions shall be accorded priority by the trial and appellate courts. In any such action, the city shall have the burden of showing compliance with the procedural requirements of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 06-02, § 15, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 40-13. - Unified development ordinances. 
    A city may elect to combine any of the ordinances authorized by this chapter into a unified ordinance. Unless expressly provided otherwise, a city may apply any of the definitions and procedures authorized by law to any or all aspects of the unified ordinance and may employ any organizational structure, board, commission, or staffing arrangement authorized by law to any or all aspects of the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 06-02, § 16, 2-13-2006) 
Secs. 40-14-40-23. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 40-24. - Usage. 
(a)  The numbers, abbreviations, terms and words used in these regulations shall be used, interpreted, and defined as this article provides. Words or terms not defined shall have their customary dictionary definition. Words or terms defined in other articles shall have the definitions provided in that article. 
(b)  Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the plural number include the singular; words used in the singular include the plural; the word "herein" means "in these regulations"; the word "regulations" means "these regulations"; and words of any gender shall be applicable to all genders. 
(c)  The term "person" includes a corporation, a partnership, and an incorporated or unincorporated association of persons, such as a club; the term "shall" is always mandatory; the term "may" is permissive; and the term "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof. 
(d)  When any requirement of these regulations result in a fraction of a number unit, then a fraction of one-half (1/2) or more shall be considered as the next higher whole number or unit and a fraction of less than one-half (1/2) shall be disregarded. This provision shall apply to numbers including, but not limited to, parking requirements, numbers of dwelling units, vegetation requirements, and square footage computations. 
(Code 1993, § 27-1) 
Sec. 40-25. - Words and terms defined. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory building means a subordinate building or structure located on the same lot as, and detached from, the principal building, the use of which is an accessory use to that of the principal building. 
    Accessory dwelling unit means a dwelling unit that exists either as part of a principal dwelling or an accessory building and is secondary and incidental to the use of the property as a single-family residence. 
    Accessory use means a use which meets the following conditions: 
(a)  Is located on the same lot as the principal use, whether or not it is located in the same building; 
(b)  Is incidental to and subordinate to the principal use; 
(c)  Is subordinate or dependent to the principal use; 
(d)  Is customarily associated with the principal use; 
(e)  Will not create a nuisance or hazard to the principal use or area uses to a greater degree than that which can be expected by the principal use prior to creation of such accessory use; 
(f)  May not operate more than sixty (60) days after the permitted original use of such property has ceased to function or exist; and 
(g)  May not begin prior to the principal use on the property. 
    Airport zoning ordinance terms and definitions. See article IX of this chapter. 
    Aisle width means the distance between two (2) rack sections, allowing for the marine forklift to turn while carrying a boat to or accessing a boat rack. 
    Alley means a public vehicular or pedestrian way which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Area, gross floor, means the area within the inside perimeter of the exterior walls with no deduction for corridors, stairs, closets, thickness of walls, columns or other features exclusive of courts and vent shafts. 
    Area, net floor, means the area actually occupied, not including accessory unoccupied areas, such as corridors, stairs, closets, thickness of walls, columns, toilet room, mechanical area or other such features. 
    Article means those articles found within this chapter, unless otherwise referenced. 
    Athletic field means an outdoor site, allowing athletic structures and equipment, designed for formal athletic competition in field sports (e.g., softball, soccer, football). 
    Automobile graveyard or junkyard means an establishment or place of business which is maintained, used, or operated for storing, keeping, buying or selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts. Any establishment or place of business upon which six (6) or more unlicensed, used motor vehicles which cannot be operated under their own power are kept or stored for a period of fifteen (15) days or more shall be deemed to be an automobile graveyard. 
    Automobile repair service, major, means an establishment primarily engaged in one (1) or more of the following activities: 
(a)  General repair service; 
(b)  Engine repair; 
(c)  Installation or repair of transmissions; 
(d)  Installation or repair of automotive glass; 
(e)  Installation or repair of exhaust systems; 
(f)  Repair of tops, bodies, and interiors; and 
(g)  Automotive painting and refurbishing. 
    Automobile repair service, minor, means an establishment primarily engaged in one (1) or more of the following activities: 
(a)  Diagnostic service and tuneups; 
(b)  Installation or repair of air conditioners, brakes, carburetors, electrical systems, fuel systems, generators, starters, and radiators; 
(c)  Lubricating service; and 
(d)  Front end and wheel alignment. 
    Automobile service station (gasoline service station) means an establishment in which gasoline, accessories and services for automobiles are supplied and dispensed at retail. Uses permitted at an automobile service station do not include major mechanical and bodywork, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, or the storage of automobiles which are in nonrepairable operating condition or not to be repaired. 
    Basement means the portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade. 
    Bed and breakfast means a private home offering bed and breakfast accommodations to twelve (12) or fewer persons per night for a period of less than one (1) week. See Hotel or Motel. 
    Billiard parlor, pool room means any establishment that has more than two (2) billiard/pool tables or whose principal purpose is the operation of a billiard parlor or pool room, regardless of the total number of billiard/pool tables. Billiard or pool tables are not permitted in grocery or convenience stores. 
    Blind center means an institution established for the purpose of providing education, training and/or employment for eligible blind persons. Primary occupants of the structure will be those as defined under G.S. 111-11. Operation of the center will be in compliance with the State of North Carolina enabling legislation for visually handicapped persons. 
    Board of Adjustment refers to the Board appointed to administer the duties and responsibilties outlined in article XIX of this chapter. 
    Boardinghouse or roominghouse means any single-family dwelling, in which rooms are rented by the owner-occupant to not more than four (4) persons who are not related by blood, adoption or marriage to the owner-occupant. See Family. 
    Brewery. A building or establishment used for the manufacture of malt liquors, such as beer and ale. Breweries manufacture in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) barrels (a barrel is approximately thirty-one (31) gallons) of malt liquors a year. 
    Brewpub. A combination brewery, restaurant and/or pub; beer is brewed for consumption on the premises and served along with food. Considered an accessory use to a micro-brewery. 
    Building means a structure with a roof which is designed or intended for the shelter, support, protection or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
    Building lines means lines that are tangent to the exterior surface of buildings or structures, or the surfaces of cantilevered projections therefrom, parallel to front, side and rear lot lines, and referred to as front, side and rear building lines, respectively. 
    Carnival means a traveling or transportable group or aggregation of rides, shows, games, concessions, and operators, or any combination thereof. 
    Chapter refers to, as used herein, this chapter 40, unless otherwise referenced. 
    Church or place of worship means a building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship and holding a certificate of nonprofit organization from the Secretary of State. 
    Circus means traveling or transportable show or exhibition consisting of performances by persons and animals under one (1) or more tents or similar structures, with or without other sideshows. 
    City Council means the governing body of the city, as provided by the Charter of the City of Washington, North Carolina. The Mayor and Council on behalf of the city, and in conformity with applicable laws, provide for the exercise of all municipal powers and are charged with the general government of the city. 
    Club, public or private, means an establishment of which the principal use is entertainment and which: 
(a)  May be open to the general public; 
(b)  May require a membership, cover, or minimum charge for admittance or service during regular or special periods of operation; 
(c)  May provide live or recorded amplified music; 
(d)  May provide a floorshow; 
(e)  May provide a dance area; 
(f)  May offer a full service bar; 
(g)  May offer food services; 
(h)  May provide food attendant (waiter/waitress), table ordering and busboy services; and 
(i)  Does not qualify under the definition of the term "restaurant, fast food" or "restaurant, conventional" as contained herein. 
    Coin-operated amusements center or game center means an establishment having five (5) or more token- or coin-operated amusement devices or machines. Four (4) or fewer machines shall be classified as an accessory use. Such machines, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, or other means, may be operated by the public generally for use as a game or for entertainment or amusement. Coin-operated amusement devices or machines include such devices as electronic videogames, pinball machines, billiard and/or pool tables that are coin-operated and six (6) feet in length or less, and other similar machines. Billiard parlors and pool rooms shall not be considered as a game center. An establishment with more than two (2) coin-operated billiard and/or pool tables shall be considered a billiard parlor for purposes of this chapter. Also, for purposes of this chapter, bingo games and parlors shall be considered as game centers. See Billiard parlor, pool room. 
    Common area means all areas, including private streets, conveyed to an owner's association within a development or owned on a proportional undivided basis in a condominium development. 
    Condominium means the ownership of single units in a multiunit structure with common areas and facilities. Such structures may contain one (1) or more stories, and may include any permissive group housing development type including, but not limited to, garden apartment, multifamily dwelling, attached dwelling or two-family dwelling units. 
    Condominium development means two (2) or more condominium units for residential use, with their principal building or group of buildings, accessory buildings, common areas and courtyards on a lot as authorized by the condominium development regulations of this chapter. 
    Condominium unit means an enclosed space consisting of one (1) or more rooms occupying all or part of a floor in a building of one (1) or more floors or stories designed for residential use, and shall include such accessory spaces and areas as may be described in the declaration of covenants and restrictions, such as garage space, balcony, terrace or patio, provided it has a direct exit to a street or to a given common space leading to a street. 
    Congregate care facility means a facility providing shelter and services for ambulatory individuals at least fifty-five (55) years of age who, by reason of age, functional impairment, or infirmity, may require meals, housekeeping, and personal care assistance. Congregate care facilities do not include nursing home or similar institutions devoted primarily to the care of the chronically ill or the incurable. 
    Convenience store means any food-personal merchandise store which sells at retail only prepackaged food and beverage products, personal toiletries, sundries, over-the-counter medications, household supplies, magazines, and the like in combination from a limited inventory; does not stock fresh vegetables, produce, poultry or meats; has a total lot coverage not to exceed four thousand (4,000) square feet; and which may or may not offer made-to-order food or drink. Billiard and pool tables are not permitted within convenience stores. 
    County, state or federal government building or use means any building, structure or use of the county, state or federal government or their various subparts. The term shall include offices, libraries, fire stations, sheriffs' departments, courts, recreation facilities, and parks. All government buildings or uses shall only be allowed in accordance with the table of permitted and special uses for the particular district. 
    Day care, adult, means an establishment which provides for the care and supervision of aged, handicapped, or disabled adults away from their homes by persons other than their family members, custodians or guardians for periods not to exceed eighteen (18) hours within any twenty-four-hour period. 
    Day care, child, means an establishment which provides for the care and supervision of children away from their homes by persons other than their family members, custodians or guardians for periods not to exceed eighteen (18) hours within any twenty-four-hour period. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
    Director of Planning and Development means the person, official, or his authorized representative, whom the City Council has designated as its agent for the acceptance, coordination and approval of all plans and permits required by this chapter, and for the enforcement of these regulations, unless otherwise specifically provided in the particular case. The Director of Planning and Development shall, excepting City Manager authority, have final administrative interpretation concerning the meaning, requirement or extent of any section, graphic or description set forth by this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided in the particular case. 
    Distillery. A distillery shall mean and include any premises or plant wherein alcohol or liquor is manufactured, made and distilled from raw materials, blended or rectified, or any place wherein alcohol or liquor is produced by any method suitable for the production of alcohol. 
    District, zoning, means a section of the city or its extraterritorial area within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
    Dormitory means a building or group of buildings where group sleeping accommodations are provided with or without meals for persons not members of the same family group, in one (1) room, or in a series of closely associated rooms under joint occupancy and single management, such as a college dormitory or privately owned dormitory intended for use by college students. 
    Drive-through facilities means facilities which are accessory to a principal use whereby goods or services may be offered directly to customers in motor vehicles by means which eliminate the need for customers to leave their motor vehicles. 
    Drystack boat storage means a facility for which the primary structure is designed for the temporary storage of boats, stacked vertically and horizontally in layers, and elevated off the ground. 
    Dwelling means a building or a portion thereof which is wholly or partly used for, or intended to be used for temporary or permanent residential occupancy for one (1) or more families. 
    Dwelling, attached (one-family attached dwellings), means any one-family dwelling that is connected on one (1) or more sides by means of a common dividing structure or loadbearing wall of at least five (5) linear feet to one (1) or more other one-family dwelling units. Typically, such one-family attached dwelling units consist of individual townhouses for sale, duplex units for sale (two-family dwelling), condominium development or other multiplex development with individual dwelling units for sale. An individual one-family attached unit for sale may also include the sale of its accompanying individual lot of record. 
    Dwelling, detached, means a one-family dwelling that is completely surrounded by permanent open spaces. 
    Dwelling, multifamily, means separate and detached structure or group of structures containing three (3) or more total dwelling units on a common lot and sharing common facilities; or two (2) or more single-family or two-family attached dwellings located on a common lot; or one (1) or more attached dwelling units on a common lot and sharing common facilities with a nonresidential use. Excluded from this definition are the terms "mobile home parks" and "caretaker dwellings." 
    Dwelling, two-family attached (duplex), means a separate and detached structure containing two (2) attached dwelling units, each designed for occupancy by one (1) family on an individual lot exclusive to such units and their accessory uses. 
    Dwelling unit means a single, independent housekeeping unit with sanitation, living, dining, sleeping, and permanently installed kitchen and bathroom facilities for use by one (1) family. 
    Extraterritorial jurisdiction means the area beyond the corporate limits within which the planning, zoning and building regulations of the city apply in accordance with state law. Such area is delineated on the Official Zoning Map for the City of Washington. 
    Fair means the public display for sale, entertainment or education of agricultural, industrial or civic articles or similar displays or exhibitions, usually held not more than annually for a period of less than one (1) week. 
    Family means an individual living alone; two (2) or more persons related by blood, adoption, or marriage; or a group of not more than four (4) unrelated persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a shared dwelling unit. See Room renting. 
    Family care home means an establishment defined under G.S. 168-20 through 168-23, as amended, with support and supervisory personnel that provides room and board, personal care and rehabilitation services in a family environment for not more than six (6) residents who are handicapped. The term "handicapped person" means a person with a temporary or permanent physical, emotional, or mental disability including, but not limited to, mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, hearing and sight impairments, emotional disturbance and orthopedic impairments, but not including mentally ill persons who are dangerous to others. The term "dangerous to others" means that within the recent past the individual has inflicted, attempted to inflict, or threatened to inflict serious bodily harm to another; has acted in such a way as to create a substantial risk of serious bodily harm to another; or has engaged in extreme destruction of property, and that there is a reasonable probability that this conduct will be repeated. Previous episodes of dangerousness to others, when applicable, may be considered when determining reasonable probability of future dangerous conduct. Professionals or paraprofessionals providing assistance to the occupants shall be allowed in addition to the maximum occupancy. 
    Farm means or may consist of a single tract of land, or a number of separate tracts which may be held under different tenures. It may be operated by the operator alone or with the assistance of members of his household or hired employees, or it may be operated by a partnership, corporation, or other type of organization. 
    Farmers market means an establishment, either enclosed or open, dedicated for farmers to sell farm products not grown upon the premises. 
    Farming means establishments (farms, ranches, dairies, nurseries, orchards, hatcheries, etc.) primarily engaged in the production of crops, plants, vines, or trees (excluding saw mills); and the keeping, grazing, or feeding of livestock for the sale of livestock or livestock products, for livestock increase, or for value increase. The term "livestock" as used herein includes cattle, sheep, goats, hogs, and poultry. Also included are animal specialties, such as, horses, rabbits, and fish in captivity. Agricultural production also includes establishments primarily engaged in the operation of sod farms, mushroom cellars, poultry hatcheries, and in the production of bulbs, flower seeds, and vegetable seeds. 
    Foundation means that part of a structure which is in contact with the soil and is typically constructed of concrete and/or masonry. 
    Fraternal or civic organization (not including residential) means a nonprofit establishment that is organized and chartered for a fraternal or civil purpose and that is not open to the general public, but is open only to the members of the organization and their bona fide guests. Payment of an admission fee denominated as a membership fee for entrance into an establishment does not in and of itself constitute membership. This provision does not, however, prohibit such an establishment from being open to the general public for raffles and bingo games as required by G.S. 14-309.11(a) and 14-309.13. 
    Fraternity or sorority house means a dwelling occupied by and maintained exclusively for college or university students who are affiliated with a social, honorary, or professional organization recognized by the college or university. 
    Front of the building means any side which has a main entrance to the living room areas of any dwelling unit. No wall will be considered fronting on a street if it forms more than a forty-five-degree angle with the street line. 
    Frontage means all the property abutting one (1) or more sides of a street. 
    Group care facility means an establishment qualified for a license by the State of North Carolina for provision of resident services to more than six (6) residents who are physically disabled, mentally retarded, or developmentally disabled; persons recuperating from alcohol- or drug-related problems; persons adjusting to society as an alternative to imprisonment; and persons recuperating from mental or emotional illness. This definition shall not include mentally ill persons who are dangerous to others. The term "dangerous to others" means that within the recent past the individual has inflicted, attempted to inflict, or threatened to inflict serious bodily harm to another; has acted in such a way as to create a substantial risk of serious bodily harm to another; or has engaged in extreme destruction of property, and that there is a reasonable probability that this conduct will be repeated. Previous episodes of dangerousness to others, when applicable, may be considered when determining reasonable probability of future dangerous conduct. Professionals or paraprofessionals providing assistance to the occupants shall be allowed in addition to the maximum occupancy. 
    Hazardous means any use, product, operation, material, compound or reaction which by its known or reasonably expected nature creates excessive noise, odor, smoke, dust, danger of fire or explosion, emission of gas, particles, solids, or other objectionable or toxic characteristics which may adversely impact the public's health, safety and general welfare. Nonhazardous shall include those attributes which by their nature do not qualify under this definition. 
    Height of structure means the vertical distance from the finished grade to the highest point of the structure. 
    Historic Preservation Commission. See article XV of this chapter. 
    Home occupation means an activity conducted for financial gain as an accessory use to a single-family dwelling unit by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit. The incidental use of any dwellings by the occupants for the purpose of receiving or transmitting messages or mail; recordkeeping or bookkeeping; filing; address listing for applicable privilege license or tax identification; and other similar activities which do not involve the on-site sale, delivery, distribution, reception, storage or manufacture of goods, products or services shall not constitute a home occupation for the purpose of regulation under this chapter. 
    Hotel or motel means a building or group of buildings containing guest rooms, suites, separate units or connecting units where, for compensation, lodging is provided on a shortterm basis. For purposes of this definition the term "shortterm basis" shall include only daily or weekly periods. Not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the rooms, suites or units may have kitchen or cooking facilities. The hotel or motel shall be designed and marketed in a fashion that reflects the intended use of transient lodgers. No persons other than approved resident managers, supervisors or caretakers and their families shall utilize, consider or reference any hotel or motel room, suite or unit as a secondary or primary place of residence. A hotel or motel may contain restaurants, meeting rooms, indoor recreation facilities, lounges, entertainment facilities, retail sales of personal accessories for occupants, maid and bell boy service, laundry services, telephone and secretarial service as accessory uses to the hotel or motel use. This definition shall also include the term "bed and breakfast inns." 
    Internal service facility means facilities incidental to the permitted nonresidential principal use, including cafeterias, snack bars and similar retail activities conducted solely for the convenience of employees, patients, patrons, or occasional visitors provided that such facilities are housed within the principal or related buildings and provided that neither the facility itself nor any advertising display is visible beyond the premises. 
    Junkyard means use of land or buildings or other structures for indoor and outdoor storage, collection, demolition, dismantling, processing, abandonment, sale, or resale of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper, other scrap materials, used lumber, used building materials, salvaged house wrecking, salvaged structural steel, salvaged materials, salvaged equipment, automobiles, and boats or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. This definition shall also include the term "automobile graveyards." 
    Kennel means any facility for the purpose of boarding domesticated animals on a commercial basis or as an accessory use to district uses. This tem does not include livestock sales pavilions, auditoriums, yards, distribution facilities, transhipment facilities or slaughterhouses. 
    Landfill, demolition and construction debris, major, means a disposal site (other than a minor demolition and construction debris landfill as defined in this section) for stumps, limbs, leaves, concrete, brick, wood, and uncontaminated earth. Disposal of any other types of wastes must be approved by the state Division of Health Services. 
    Landfill, demolition and construction debris, minor, means a disposal site for stumps, limbs, leaves, concrete, brick, wood, and uncontaminated earth which is less than three (3) acres in size and is in operation for less than one (1) year. 
    Lot means a parcel of land in single ownership occupied or intended for occupancy by a principal building together with its accessory buildings including the open space required under this chapter. For the purpose of this chapter, the owner shall be required to specify which is the front when requesting a building permit. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot which has frontage on at least two (2) intersecting streets; provided that the interior angle of such intersection is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
    Lot coverage means that portion of a lot occupied by a structure, whether at ground level or the equivalent thereto when a structure is elevated on pilings. 
    Lot depth means the horizontal distance between front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, double frontage, means a lot which fronts on two (2) parallel streets, or which fronts upon two (2) streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. 
    Lot frontage means the distance between side lot lines measured along the street right-of-way or easement. 
    Lot line means a line that marks the boundary of a lot. 
    Lot line, front, means the common boundary line between a street right-of-way or easement and the lot line. 
    Lot of record means a lot which is a part of subdivision or plat which has been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of Beaufort County, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds in accordance with the subdivision regulations in effect at the time of recordation. 
    Lot, reversed corner, means a corner lot which does not front on the same street with the interior lots on the same side, as distinguished from the same end of the block. 
    Lot width means the distance between side lot lines measured along the minimum public or private street setback line, unless otherwise provided. 
    Manual of Standard Designs and Details means the Manual of Standard Designs and Details which is a supplement to the subdivision regulations. Such supplement contains engineering designs and details relative to plat layout; storm drainage design; sedimentation control; basis; pipes and manholes; ending walls and retaining walls; street standards; pavement design; ground cover; driveways; parking; stormwater detention and other uniform design standards. 
    Manufacturing means establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products. These establishments are usually described as plants, factories, or mills and characteristically use power-driven machines and materials handling equipment. Establishments engaged in assembling component parts of manufactured products are also considered manufacturing if the new product is neither a structure nor other fixed improvement. Also included is the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins, or liquors. 
(a)  The materials processed by manufacturing establishments include products of agriculture, forestry, fishing, mining, and quarrying as well as products of other manufacturing establishments. The new product of a manufacturing establishment may be finished in the sense that it is ready for utilization or consumption, or it may be semifinished to become a raw material for an establishment engaged in further manufacturing. 
(b)  The materials used by manufacturing establishments may be purchased directly from producers, obtained through customary trade channels, or secured without recourse to the market by transferring the product from one (1) establishment to another which is under the same ownership. Manufacturing production is usually carried on for the wholesale market by transferring the product from one (1) establishment to another which is under the same ownership. Manufacturing production is usually carried on for the wholesale market, for interplant transfer, or to order for industrial users, rather than for direct sale to the domestic consumer. 
    Marina means any publicly or privately owned dock, basin, or wet storage facility constructed to accommodate more than four (4) boats. 
    Marine forklift means a forklift designed to move boats. In most cases, marine forklifts are designed with negative lift to launch boats. 
    Micro-brewery. A brewery where malt beverages are made on the premises and produce less than fifteen thousand (15,000) barrels of malt liquors a year. Micro-breweries provide areas for on-premise consumption, education, retail sales or other accessory uses. 
    Micro-distillery. A facility, no larger than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet of gross floor area that produces craft distilled spirits of alcoholic beverages at no more than fifty thousand (50,000) U.S. gallons per year and where the principal distiller defines the house style and oversees all aspects of the production. 
    Mining means the extraction of minerals occurring naturally; solids, such as coal and ores; liquids, such as crude petroleum; and gases, such as natural gas. The term "mining" is also used in the broad sense to include quarrying, well operation, milling (crushing, screening, washing, floatation, etc.) and other preparation customarily done at the mine site, or as a part of mining activity. 
    Mixed development means a mixture of residential and permitted office and/or commercial uses. 
    Mobile home means a portable dwelling unit designed for transportation on its own chassis and placement on a temporary or semipermanent foundation having a measurement of over thirty-two (32) feet in length and over eight (8) feet in width. A Doublewide mobile home is two (2) or more portable manufactured units, designed for transportation on their own chassis, which connect on site for placement on a temporary or semipermanent foundation to create a detached dwelling unit, and having a measurement of over thirty-two (32) feet in length and over eight (8) feet in width. The term "mobile home" shall also include manufactured homes. 
    Mobile home park, conforming. See article VIII of this chapter. 
    Mobile home park, nonconforming, means a parcel of land containing two (2) or more mobile home dwelling units where such placement or improvements do not conform to the minimum requirements of this chapter. 
    Mobile home site or lot means a parcel of land in a mobile home park designed to accommodate one (1) mobile home and its accessory buildings or uses for the exclusive use of the occupants. 
    Mobile home stand means that area of a mobile home site or lot which has been reserved for the placement of a mobile home. 
    Modular or sectional structures means a modular structure is a factory-fabricated, transportable building not built on its own chassis, designed to be used by itself or to be incorporated with similar units and requiring a foundation at the site. Modular or sectional structures are distinguished from mobile homes by not being permanently build on a chassis and by requiring a foundation for support. Modular or sectional structures as defined herein do not fall within the provisions of the mobile home or mobile home park requirements, but instead are considered dwellings or structures and shall meet appropriate zoning, subdivision, and North Carolina State Building Code requirements. 
    Municipal government building or use means any building, structure or use of the City of Washington or its various subparts. This term shall include cemeteries, warehouses, fire stations, police stations, municipal offices, libraries, recreation facilities and parks, civic centers, and garages. Uses not listed in this definition shall only be allowed in accordance with the table of permitted and special uses for the particular district. Where municipal-operated facilities to be used for athletic events and/or night programs are to be located in residential areas, a public hearing shall be properly advertised and conducted before City Council for the purpose of hearing and considering any comments by the public as to the location under consideration. 
    Negative lift means a distance from the top of a boat launch pad to the point below the water which will launch a boat. 
    New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter. 
    Noncommercial park or recreational facility means nonprofit or neighborhood recreation clubhouse, swimming pools, tennis courts, play lots, ballfields and the like which are owned and operated by any nonprofit organization or neighborhood association as a principal or accessory use. 
    Nonconformity means any dimension, area, use, or other situation, which does not comply with the requirements, standards or conditions set forth by this chapter, whether existing on the effective date of this chapter or following any amendment thereto. 
    Nonprofit use means any use holding a certificate of nonprofit organization from the Secretary of State for social, literary, political, civic, religious, fraternal, recreational, or charitable purposes, which is not operated for profit or to render a service which is customarily conducted as a business. 
    Owner/occupant means any person, firm, corporation, lessee, receiver, trustee, guardian or personal representative holding legal title or legal right to occupy or carry on business upon any lot or any manager, operator or other person authorized to occupy or conduct business on behalf of an owner. Where there is more than one (1) owner as defined, their duties and obligations under this chapter are joint and severable and shall include responsibility for compliance with this chapter. 
    Parking area aisles means a portion of the vehicle accommodation area consisting of lanes providing access to parking spaces. 
    Parking space means the storage space of not less than nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet for one (1) automobile plus the necessary access space. It shall always be located outside the dedicated street right-of-way. 
    Pawnbroker means any person who loans money on the security of personal property pledged in his keeping. 
    Pet shop means an establishment which sells domesticated animals to be kept for pleasure rather than for utility. Pet shops are completely enclosed operations which utilize outside storage of animals only pursuant to further approval under the provisions pertaining to animal boarding; outside facility contained herein. 
    Planned Unit Development (PUD). See article XII of this chapter. 
    Planning Board means the Planning Board is that body created by City Council in chapter 2, article IX of this Code, pursuant to G.S. 160A-361 to act as a planning agency for the City Council on planning and zoning matters within the City of Washington and the City of Washington's planning and zoning extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
    Porch means an attached, open, unenclosed (including screening and the like) roofed entrance to a building, including necessary supports. 
    Principal use means the primary purpose for which a building structure or lot is designed, arranged or intended and for which it is or may be used under these regulations. 
    Public utility building or use means any aboveground building or use necessary for the delivery of electric, water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, gas, telephone, cable TV or other utility service system which meets any one (1) of the following conditions: 
(a)  Utility structures in excess of one hundred (100) total square feet; 
(b)  Utilizes any structure in excess of fifteen (15) feet in height; 
(c)  Requires any on-site permanent maintenance or service attendant; 
(d)  Requires or utilities three (3) or more parking spaces; or 
(e)  Creates noise, smoke, dust, odor, glare or any other condition which may have an adverse impact on area properties or uses. 
    Recreational vehicle or travel trailer (camper) means any vehicle smaller than eight (8) feet in width and thirty-two (32) feet in length equipped with some or all facilities normally found in a dwelling unit and designed to serve temporarily as a substitute dwelling for short periods of time. 
    Recycling collection point means an incidental use that serves as a drop-off point for temporary storage of recoverable resources. No processing of such items shall be allowed. 
    Repair, major. The following activities shall be considered major repair: 
(a)  Engine overhaul or dismantling of subparts; 
(b)  Body or frame repair; 
(c)  Windshield or glass replacement; 
(d)  Transmission or other subpart rework service; 
(e)  Welding or metal cutting; and 
(f)  Any other repair other than minor repair. 
    Repair, minor. The following activities shall be considered minor repair: 
(a)  Engine tuneups; change of plugs, filters, oil, lubricants, belts, adjustments; 
(b)  Change and rotate tires; 
(c)  Brake services; 
(d)  Electrical system services; 
(e)  Radiator services; 
(f)  Muffler services; 
(g)  Battery service; and 
(h)  Starter, alternator repair. 
    Residential use means the use of land and buildings for domestic occupancy within dwelling units, including single-family, two-family attached, multifamily, boardinghouse, roominghouse, family care home and land-use intensity (rating 50) development, by the persons authorized to occupy such units. Uses not listed in this definition shall be considered as nonresidential uses for purposes of article V of this chapter, pertaining to standards and criteria for special uses." 
    Restaurant, conventional, means an establishment open to the general public which should have the following characteristics: 
(a)  Does not require a membership, cover, or minimum charge for admittance or service during regular or special periods of operation; 
(b)  Has sales of prepared and/or packaged foods, in a ready-to-consume state, in excess of 50 percent of the total gross receipts for such establishment during any month; 
(c)  May or may not offer food via over-the-counter service; 
(d)  May offer food in disposable containers; 
(e)  Does provide sit-down dining area; 
(f)  Does provide food attendant (waiter/waitress), table ordering and busboy services; 
(g)  May offer carryout and/or delivery services; 
(h)  Does not offer drive-through or drive-in services; and 
(i)  Pursuant to subsections (1) and (2) of this definition, may have as ancillary or accessory uses a full-service bar, live or recorded amplified music, floorshow and dancing area which are open to the restaurant patrons and the general public and are limited to the hours of operation of the principal use restaurant. 
    Restaurant, fast food, means an establishment open to the general public which: 
(a)  Does not require a membership, cover, or minimum charge for admittance or service during regular or special periods of operation; 
(b)  Has sales of prepared and/or packaged foods, in a ready-to-consume state, in excess of 50 percent of the total gross receipts for such establishment during any month; 
(c)  Offers food via over-the-counter service; 
(d)  May offer food in disposable containers; 
(e)  May provide sit-down dining area; 
(f)  May provide food attendant (waiter/waitress) table ordering and busboy services; 
(g)  May offer drive-through, drive-in, carryout and/or delivery service; and 
(h)  Does not include the following: 
(1)  Ancillary or accessory food service for a permitted principal use where such food service is open to the general public, such as, an employee and/or patron cafeteria or eating area; 
(2)  Temporary food service as part of permitted temporary uses such as carnivals, fairs, street fairs, circuses, athletic events, community events, converts, nonprofit fundraising events, emergency shelters, and the like; or 
(3)  Any establishment where the preparation of food is merely incidental to the sale of food such as a grocery store or food market and the like. 
    Retail sales means establishments engaged in selling merchandise for personal or household consumption, and rendering services incidental to the sale of goods. Retail sales establishments are classified by kind of business according to the principal lines of commodities sold (apparel), or the usual trade designation (shoe store). Characteristics of retail trade is engaged in activities to attract the general public to buy; the establishment buys or receives merchandise as well as sells; the establishment may process its products but such processing is incidental or subordinate to selling; the establishment is considered as retail in the trade; and the establishment sells to customers for personal or household use. 
    Retirement center means a facility which provides housing, meals, recreational and educational activities, and medical care for retired people. This term shall include the following uses within the retirement facility: dwelling units, in accordance with district standards, nursing facilities or infirmaries, food preparation and service for the occupants, administrative offices, recreational facilities, and assembly halls. 
    Room renting means the renting of rooms in an owner-occupied dwelling to not more than four (4) persons. See Family. 
    Satellite dish means an apparatus capable of receiving communications from a transmitter relay located in planetary orbit. 
    School means a use of land or buildings for academic instruction authorized and administered by the Beaufort County School System or other comparable private schools. 
    Section means, as used herein, shall refer to those sections found within this chapter 40, pertaining to zoning, for the City of Washington, North Carolina, unless otherwise referenced. 
    Setback lines means the lines which parallel any public street right-of-way, private street easement, side and rear property line or peripheral boundary line which delineates the area of a lot upon which a building may be constructed or expanded. 
    Shelter, emergency , means an accessory structure or portion of a primary structure that provides protection to human life during periods of danger, including nuclear fallout, air raids, natural hazards, or other emergencies. 
    Shelter for homeless or abused means an establishment operated by a governmental or nonprofit organization intended to be used solely for temporary occupancy by homeless or abused persons. 
    Shelters for homeless women and children. An establishment operated by a governmental or non-profit organization intended to be used solely for temporary occupancy by homeless women and children. 
    Shelters for the victims of domestic violence means an establishment operated by a governmental or nonprofit organization intended to be used primarily for the temporary occupancy by victims of domestic violence or abuse. 
    Sign terms and definitions. See article XVI of this chapter. 
    Special use means a use of land, buildings, or structures that requires special and individual control over number, area, location, design, methods of operation, and relationship to surrounding uses in order to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
    Stable means a building or structure designed or used for maintaining livestock or horses or for the storage of manure or soil fertilizer. 
    Story means that portion of a building between the upper surface of a floor and upper surface of the floor or roof next above. Attic space which is arranged, built, finished or intended for business occupancy or habitation shall be considered as a floor for purposes of this definition. Where no floors exist (e.g., water towers, observation towers, grandstands, stadiums, belfries) each twelve (12) feet of height shall constitute one (1) story. 
    Street means any area delineated by dedicated rights-of-way or common property easements upon which improvements have been made for use by and open to the public. 
    Street line means the right-of-way boundary of a street. 
    Streets, private, means streets that have been designated by easement and as such constitute public vehicular areas as provided and regulated by law. Such streets shall be maintained by the property owner or pursuant to recorded agreements. 
    Streets, public, means streets that have been designated by easement and as such constitute public vehicular areas as provided and regulated by law. Such streets shall be maintained by the appropriate governmental body or pursuant to recorded agreements. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground including, but not limited to, the following: walls, fences, buildings, signs, swimming pools, gas or liquid storage tanks, towers and other similar items. For the purpose of flood zone management, the term "structure" shall mean a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, as well as a mobile home. 
    Subdivision means the division of a parcel or tract of land in accordance with the subdivision regulations. 
    Subdivision regulations. See chapter 34 of the Washington City Code, pertaining to subdivisions. 
    Swimming pool means a water-filled enclosure, permanently constructed or portable, having a depth of more than eighteen (18) inches below the surrounding land, or an above-surface water-filled enclosure having a depth of more than thirty (30) inches, designed, used, and maintained for swimming and bathing. 
    Tap room/tasting room. An area that is necessary for a micro-brewery or micro-distillery where the public can purchase and/or consume only the beer or alcohol produced on site. Considered an accessory use to a brewery, micro-brewery, distillery and micro-distillery. 
    Temporary event means an activity which is infrequent in occurrence and limited in duration. 
    Tourist homes means a dwelling wherein rooms are rented to provide overnight accommodations for transient guests; provided that the character of the dwelling is not changed and, in connection therewith, there is no display, no stock in trade nor commodity other than meals sold on the premises, and no person not a resident on the premises is employed specifically in connection with the accommodation of tourists. Up to two-thirds (2/3) of the area of the dwelling may be used for this purpose. 
    Townhouse-type development means the division of land containing attached units within one (1) or several structures and may include the reservation of common area and which may be restricted to internal access through the original lot, common area or shared easements. 
    Trucking terminal means a building or area used for the temporary parking of motor freight vehicles or trucks during loading and unloading and between trips, including office space and necessary warehouse space for storage of transitory freight. 
    Use means any purpose for which land, buildings, or structures are designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained; or any activity conducted, or intended to be conducted in a building, structure or on a tract of land. 
    Variance means an exception to a specific provision of these regulations granted by the Board of Adjustment. 
    Wellness center means a facility designed to promote health awareness and maintenance through a variety of programs and services tailored to a range of individual needs, including, but not limited to, physical fitness and nutrition education. The programs shall be coordinated by a physician consultant who shall oversee the content and conduct of each program. 
    Wholesale trade means establishments or places of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm or professional business users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or companies. In addition to selling, wholesale establishments may maintain inventories of goods (warehouse), physically assemble, sort and grade goods, deliver goods and refrigerate goods. 
    Yard means an open space on the same lot with a principal building unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. 
    Yard, front , means a yard across the full width of the lot extending from the front line of the principal building to the front property line. 
    Yard, rear , means a yard extending across the full width of the lot between the rear line of the principal building and the rear lot line. 
    Yard sale means a one (1) or two (2) day activity occurring at a residential dwelling no more than two (2) times in any given twelve-month period where items which the residents have no further use for are being resold to the general public. Yard sales do not include items which were originally obtained to be resold to the general public. Yard sales shall be considered an accessory use. 
    Yard, side , means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building situated between the side line of the building and the adjacent side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
    Zoning Map, Official, means the Official Zoning Map for the City of Washington. 
(Code 1993, § 27-13; Ord. No. 98-14, 7-13-1998; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 1-8-2007; Ord. No. 11-12, § 1, 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 14-7, § 1, 10-6-2014; Ord. No. 17-1, § 1, 3-13-2017; Ord. No. 17-5, § 1, 12-11-2017) 
Secs. 40-26-40-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS 

Sec. 40-34. - Continuation of use. 
(a)  Unless specifically provided in these regulations and subject to the restrictions and qualifications set forth in these regulations, nonconforming situations that were otherwise lawful on the effective date of these regulations may be continued. 
(b)  Nonconforming projects may be completed only in accordance with the provisions of section 40-40. 
(c)  Nonconforming signs shall be defined and regulated in accordance with the standards of section 40-418. 
(Code 1993, § 27-14) 
Sec. 40-35. - Extension or enlargement. 
(a)  Except as specifically provided in this section, a nonconforming situation shall not be intensified through expansion or enlargement. The following activities are particularly prohibited: 
(1)  For nonconforming uses, an increase in the total amount of space devoted to a nonconforming use; extensions throughout any portion of a building by a nonconforming use; and an increase in volume, intensity, or frequency by a nonconforming use. 
(2)  For other nonconforming situations, greater nonconforming with respect to dimensional restrictions, density requirements, or other regulations such as parking requirements; and enclosing a previously unenclosed area that does not meet all applicable development standards. 
(b)  Subject to section 40-40, authorizing the completion of nonconforming projects in certain circumstances, a nonconforming use may not be extended to additional buildings or to land outside the original building. 
(c)  Subject to section 40-40, a nonconforming use of undeveloped land may not be extended to cover more land than was occupied by that use when it became nonconforming, except a use that involves the removal of natural materials from the lot (a sand mining operation) may be expanded to within twenty (20) feet of the boundaries of the lot where the use was established at the time it became nonconforming if ten (10) percent or more of the earth products had already been removed on the effective date of these regulations. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, any structure used for single-family residential purposes that is a nonconforming use may be enlarged or replaced with a similar structure of a larger size, so long as the enlargement or replacement does not create new nonconformities or intensity existing nonconformities such as failure to comply with required setbacks or parking regulations. This subsection is subject to the limitations set out in section 40-38, pertaining to abandonment and discontinuance of a nonconforming use. Subject to article XIX and notwithstanding other requirements of this article, the Board of Adjustment may grant a variance from the requirements within this article for the enlargement of a nonconforming single-family residence. 
(Code 1993, § 27-15) 
Sec. 40-36. - Repairs, maintenance, and reconstruction. 
(a)  If a structure is located on a lot where a nonconforming use exists, then minor repairs and routine maintenance is permitted, provided the cost of such repairs and maintenance within any twelve-month period does not exceed ten (10) percent of the appraised valuation of the damaged structure, as shown on the county tax records of the building, structure, or other development of land, or portion thereof. 
(b)  If a structure located on a lot where a nonconforming use exists is damaged to an extent that the costs of repair or replacement would exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the appraised valuation of the damaged structure, as shown on the county tax records at the time of such damage, then the structure, if restored, shall thereafter be devoted to conforming uses. Notwithstanding this requirement, any nonconforming, owner-occupied, single-family residence may be restored and used as an owner-occupied residence regardless of the extent of the damage. 
(Code 1993, § 27-16) 
Sec. 40-37. - Change in property use. 
(a)  A change of use where a nonconforming situation exists shall be permitted only if the intended change is to a use that is permissible in the district where the property is located. 
(b)  If the intended change in use is to a principal use that is permissible in the district where the property is located, and all of the other requirements of this article applicable to that use can be met, permission to make the change must be obtained in the same manner as permission to make the initial use of a vacant lot. Once conformity with this article is achieved, the property may not revert to its nonconforming status. 
(c)  If the intended change is to a principal use that is permissible in the district where the property is located, but all the requirements of the article applicable to that use cannot be reasonably complied with, then the change is permissible if the Board of Adjustment issues a special use permit authorizing the change. The special use permit may be issued if the Board of Adjustment finds, in addition to any other findings that may be required by this article, that: 
(1)  The intended change will not violate section 40-35, pertaining to the extension or enlargement of nonconforming situations. 
(2)  All of the requirements of this article that can be reasonably complied with will be met. Compliance with a requirement of this article is not reasonably possible if compliance cannot be achieved without adding additional land to the lot where the nonconforming situation is maintained or moving a substantial structure that is on a permanent foundation. Mere financial hardship caused by the cost of meeting requirements, such as a paved parking lot, does not constitute grounds for finding that compliance is not reasonably possible. 
Except as provided in section 40-35(c), the applicant shall not be given permission, pursuant to this subsection, to construct a building or add to an existing building if additional nonconformities would thereby be created. 
(Code 1993, § 27-17) 
Sec. 40-38. - Abandonment and discontinuance of use. 
(a)  When a nonconforming situation is discontinued for a consecutive period of one hundred eighty (180) days, the property involved may thereafter be used only for conforming purposes. 
(b)  For purposes of determining whether a right to continue a nonconforming use is lost pursuant to this section, all of the buildings, activities, and operations maintained on a lot are generally to be considered as a whole. For example, the failure to rent one (1) apartment in a nonconforming apartment building for one hundred eighty (180) days shall not result in a loss of the right to rent that apartment or space thereafter so long as the apartment building as a whole is continuously maintained. But if a nonconforming use is maintained in conjunction with a conforming use, discontinuance of the nonconforming use for the required one hundred eighty (180) day period shall terminate the right to maintain the nonconforming use thereafter. 
(c)  When a structure or use made nonconforming by this article is vacant or discontinued at the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the one hundred eighty-day period for purposes of this section begins to run on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Code 1993, § 27-18) 
Sec. 40-39. - Nonconforming lots. 
(a)  Any single nonconforming lot of record, existing as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, that has eighty (80) percent or more of the minimum required lot area and lot width for the district where the property is located may be used as a building lot as long as all other dimensional requirements can be met. 
(b)  If any single nonconforming lot of record, existing as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, has eighty (80) percent or less of the minimum required lot area and lot width for the district where the property is located, or in any case where dimensional requirements for any nonconforming lot cannot be met, the Board of Adjustment may authorize a special use permit authorizing a single-family residence on the lot if it finds that: 
(1)  The property cannot be reasonably developed for the use proposed without such deviations; 
(2)  Such residence will not substantially injure the value of adjoining or abutting property or significantly endanger the public health or safety if built as proposed; and 
(3)  Proposed yards, building height, and other dimensional requirements of the proposed residence will deviate from the requirements of this chapter no more than shall be necessary to make reasonable use of the property. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) of this section, if a property owner owns adjoining vacant lots to a nonconforming lot, the property owner shall be required to combine one (1) or more of these lots to the nonconforming lot, in order to form one (1) conforming lot, before he shall be allowed to use the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 27-19) 
Sec. 40-40. - Completion of nonconforming projects; vested rights. 
(a)  When a building permit has been validly issued for construction of a nonconforming project, such project shall be permitted to develop in accordance with the terms of that permit, provided the building permit remains unrevoked and unexpired. A permit shall not expire or be revoked because of the running of time while a vested right under this section is outstanding. 
(b)  A vested right shall be deemed established to any property upon the valid approval of a site plan by the person or commission having planning and zoning jurisdiction over the property. Such vested right shall confer upon the property owner the right to undertake and complete the development and use of said property under the terms and conditions of the site plan. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from revoking the original approval for failure to comply with applicable terms and conditions of the approval. 
(c)  A site plan shall be deemed approved upon the effective date of action of the appropriate person or commission with planning and zoning jurisdiction over the property. 
(d)  A right which has been vested, as provided for in this section, shall remain vested for a period of two (2) years. The vesting shall not be extended to any amendments or modifications to any site plan; the vested right shall remain only in the original site plan, as approved. A right which has been vested as provided in this section shall terminate at the end of the two year period with respect to buildings and uses for which no valid building permit applications have been filed. 
(e)  A vested right once established, as provided for in this section, precludes any zoning action by the city against the property which would change, alter, impair, prevent, diminish, or otherwise delay the development or use of the property as set forth in an approved site plan, except as provided by state or federal law. Applicable new regulations shall become effective with respect to property which is subject to a site plan upon the expiration or termination of the vested rights period provided for in this section. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any provision of this section, the establishment of a vested right shall not preclude, change, or impair the authority of the city to adopt and enforce zoning ordinance provisions governing nonconforming situations, lots, or uses. 
(g)  A vested right obtained under this section is not a personal right, but shall attach to and run with the applicable property. After approval of a site plan, all successors to the original landowner shall be entitled to exercise such rights as provided herein. 
(h)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to conflict with the rights conferred upon a subdivider by the city subdivision regulations when preliminary plat approval has been given to a nonconforming project. 
(i)  Except as provided in this section, no building permit shall be issued, nor shall any site plan approval be vested for a project that does not conform to these regulations. 
(Code 1993, § 27-20) 
Sec. 40-41. - Removal of certain nonconforming uses required. 
(a)  The following use shall become nonconforming in all districts as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived and shall be removed within seventy-two (72) months after the date of adoption: junkyards or automobile graveyards. 
(b)  The following uses shall become nonconforming in all districts except I1, as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived and shall be removed within seventy-two (72) months after the date of adoption: 
(1)  Salvage yards, auto parts. 
(2)  Salvage yards, scrap processing. 
(Code 1993, § 27-21; Ord. No. 00-12, 9-11-2000) 
Secs. 40-42-40-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 40-71. - Location and boundaries of districts. 
    The location and boundaries of the districts established by sections 40-75 through 40-93 of this article shall be as shown on the Official Zoning Map. 
(Code 1993, § 27-22) 
Sec. 40-72. - Rules for interpretation of boundaries. 
    Where the location of district boundaries on the Official Zoning Map is uncertain and where no specific ordinance description is found to exist, the following rules shall apply: 
(a)  Streets, rights-of-way and easements. Boundaries indicated on the zoning map as approximately following the centerline of a street, highway, railroad right-of-way, utility easement, stream or river bed, or of such lines extended, shall be construed to be such district boundaries. 
(b)  Lot lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(c)  Political boundaries. Boundaries indicated as approximately following political boundaries shall be construed as following the political boundaries. 
(Code 1993, § 27-23) 
Sec. 40-73. - Vacation, abandonment, or withdrawal of streets and alleys. 
    Where any public street or alley is officially closed or abandoned, the regulations applicable to parcels of abutting property shall apply to that portion of such street or alley added thereto by virtue of such vacation or abandonment. 
(Code 1993, § 27-24) 
Sec. 40-74. - Interpretation of boundaries by Board of Adjustment. 
    In case any further uncertainty exists, the Board of Adjustment shall interpret the intent of the map as to location of such boundaries. 
(Code 1993, § 27-25) 
Sec. 40-75. - Zoning districts established. 
    In order that the purposes of these regulations may be accomplished, the following zoning districts are hereby established within the jurisdiction area as described in section 40-4. The uses prescribed in each zoning district are intended to preserve and enhance the physical character of the area as well as to conserve and stabilize property values. 
(Code 1993, § 27-26) 
Sec. 40-76. - RA20 Residential Agricultural District. 
    The RA20 Residential Agricultural District is primarily designed to accommodate a compatible mixture of single-family dwellings and agricultural uses at lower densities of approximately two (2) units or less per acre. These areas are generally found in areas without sewer service that are not yet appropriate for development at higher densities. 
(Code 1993, § 27-27) 
Sec. 40-77. - R15S Residential Single-Family District. 
    The R15S Residential Single-Family District is primarily designed to accommodate single-family dwellings at lower densities of approximately three (3) units or less per acre. 
(Code 1993, § 27-28) 
Sec. 40-78. - R9S Residential Single-Family District. 
    The R9S Residential Single-Family District is primarily designed to accommodate single-family dwellings at medium densities of approximately five (5) units or less per acre. 
(Code 1993, § 27-29) 
Sec. 40-79. - R6S Residential Single-Family District. 
    The R6S Residential Single-Family District is primarily designed to accommodate single-family dwellings at higher densities of approximately seven (7) units or less per acre. 
(Code 1993, § 27-30) 
Sec. 40-80. - RMF Residential Multifamily District. 
    The RMF Residential Multifamily District is primarily designed to accommodate a compatible mixture of single-family, two-family, and multifamily dwellings at higher densities, as set out in article XI of this chapter, pertaining to multifamily development. 
(Code 1993, § 27-31) 
Sec. 40-81. - RMH Residential Mobile Home District. 
    The RMH Residential Mobile Home District is primarily designed to accommodate a compatible mixture of single-family (including mobile homes), two-family, and multifamily dwellings at higher densities, as set out in article VIII of this chapter, pertaining to mobile home parks. 
(Code 1993, § 27-32) 
Sec. 40-82. - RHD Residential Historic District. 
    The RHD Residential Historic District is primarily designed to accommodate a compatible mixture of single-family, two-family, and multifamily dwellings at higher densities of approximately seven (7) units or less per acre while preserving the historic character of the district. 
(Code 1993, § 27-33) 
Sec. 40-83. - PUD Planned Unit Development. 
    The PUD Planned Unit Development District is a special use residential zoning district that provides an alternative to traditional development standards, as further provided under article XII of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 27-34) 
Sec. 40-84. - O and I Office and Institutional District. 
    The O and I Office and Institutional District is primarily designed to accommodate a compatible mix of business, professional, and institutional uses, in addition to providing a desirable buffer between commercial and low-density residential uses. 
(Code 1993, § 27-1) 
Sec. 40-85. - B1H Central Business Historic District. 
    The B1H Central Business Historic District is primarily designed to provide convenient shopping and service facilities by promoting compact development of commercial, office, and service uses while preserving the historic character of the district. 
(Code 1993, § 27-36) 
Sec. 40-86. - B2 General Business District. 
    The B2 General Business District is primarily designed to provide roadside uses which will best accommodate the needs of the motoring public and of businesses demanding high-volume traffic. This district also includes the Central Business District fringe area. 
(Code 1993, § 27-37) 
Sec. 40-87. - B3 Shopping Center District. 
    The B3 Shopping Center District is primarily intended to accommodate a wide range of high intensity retail and service developments meeting the needs of the community and the region. The district is established on large sites to provide locations for major developments which contain multiple uses; shared parking and drives; and coordinated signage and landscaping. 
(Code 1993, § 27-38) 
Sec. 40-88. - B4 Neighborhood Business District. 
    The B4 Neighborhood Business District is primarily designed to accommodate convenient shopping facilities consisting primarily of necessary goods and personal services required to serve a neighborhood. 
(Code 1993, § 27-39) 
Sec. 40-89. - I1 Heavy Industrial District. 
    The I1 Heavy Industrial District is primarily designed to accommodate those industrial, wholesale, warehouse, and other uses which by their nature may create an excessive amount of noise, odor, smoke, dust, airborne debris or other objectionable impacts which might be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of surrounding areas. 
(Code 1993, § 27-40) 
Sec. 40-90. - I2 Light Industrial District. 
    The I2 Light Industrial District is primarily designed to accommodate those industrial, wholesale, warehouse, and other uses which by their nature do not create an excessive amount of noise, odor, smoke, dust, airborne debris, or other objectionable impacts which might be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of surrounding areas. 
(Code 1993, § 27-41) 
Sec. 40-91. - CP Corporate Park District. 
    The CP Corporate Park District is primarily intended to accommodate office, warehouse, research and development, assembly uses on large sites in a planned, campus-like setting compatible with adjacent residential uses. The district also contains retail and service uses which customarily locate within planned employment centers. 
(Code 1993, § 27-42.1; Ord. No. 04-1, § 1, 1-12-2004) 
Sec. 40-92. - AP Airport District. 
    The AP Airport District is primarily designed to accommodate a compatible mix of airport facilities and agricultural uses. 
(Code 1993, § 27-42) 
Sec. 40-93. - Table of uses. 
    The following uses shall be allowed only within the respective zoning districts as specified within this subsection: 
(a)  Permitted uses, as specified on the table of uses, are indicated by the letter "P." 
(b)  Special uses, as specified on the table of uses, are indicated by the letter "S." Special use standards are included in article V of this chapter, pertaining to standards and criteria for special uses. 
(c)  Permitted uses, subject to developmental standards (see section 40-149), as specified on the table of uses, are indicated by the letter "D." 
Table of Uses Use Types 
  
P=Permitted Use 
S=Special Use 
D=Subject to 
Developmental Standards 
Blank=Not Permitted REF SIC RA 20 R 15S R 9S R 6S RMF RMH RHD O and I B1H B2 B3 B4 I1 I2 AP CP Agricultural Uses Agricultural production (crops) 0100 P P P P P P Agricultural production (livestock) 0200 D Animal feeder/breeder 0210 D Animal services (livestock) 0751 D Animal services (other) 0752 D Fish hatcheries 0920 P Forestry 0810 P P P Horticultural specialties 0180 P Veterinary services (livestock) 0741 P Wayside stand farm produce-produced on site 0000 P Residential Uses Boardinghouses and Roominghouses (4 or less) 7021 D D Common area recreation and service facilities 0000 P P P P P P P P Congregate care facilities 0000 S S S P Family care homes (6 or less) 0000 D D D D D D D D Group care facilities 0000 S S P Home occupation 0000 D D D D D D D D D Hospice home - inpatient (6 persons) S Mobile homes 0000 P Mobile home park 0000 P Multifamily dwellings 0000 S S S P P S P P Private dormitories 0000 S Shelters, emergency 0000 P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Shelters for homeless women and children S S S S Shelters for the homeless 0000 S S Shelters for the victims of domestic violence S S S S Single-family detached dwellings 0000 P P P P P P P P P S Townhouse and condominium dwellings 0000 D D Two-family dwellings (twin homes and duplexes) 0000 S S S P P S P Accessory Uses and Structures Accessory dwelling units, attached 0000 P P P P Accessory uses and structures (customary) 0000 P P P P P P P P P P P P P P S P Caretaker dwellings 0000 S S S S S S D Gardens 0000 P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Home occupations (includes renting of rooms) 0000 D D D D D D D D D Migrant labor housing 0000 S Recycling collection points 0000 S S P P P Radio, television and radio telephone communication towers 0000 D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D Swimming pools 0000 D D D D D D D D D D D D D D Recreational Uses Amusement or water parks 7996 S Athletic fields 0000 D D D D D D D D D D D D P Batting cages 7999 P P P Billiard parlors 7999 S S S Bingo games 7999 P P P Bowling centers 7933 P P P P Clubs or lodges 8640 S P S S S S Clubs or lodges, private clubs S S Coin-operated amusements 7993 P P P Commercial marina S Country clubs with golf courses 7997 S S P Dance schools 7911 P P P P P P Electronic gaming operations (aka Internet sweepstakes operations) S Fortunetellers, astrologers 7999 S S Go-cart raceways 7999 P P P Golf courses, miniature 7999 S P P Golf courses 7992 S S P P P D Golf driving ranges 7999 S S P P P D Marinas 0000 D S S Martial arts instruction schools 7999 P P P Noncommercial parks and recreational facilities P Physical fitness centers 7991 P P P P P P Public parks 7990 D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D Public recreation facilities 7990 D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D Recreation facilities (other) 7997 S Riding stables 7999 D D D Shooting ranges, indoor 7999 S Shooting ranges, outdoor 7999 S Skating rinks 7999 P P P P Sports instructional schools 7999 S P P P P P Sports and recreation clubs, indoor 7997 P P P P Swim and tennis clubs 7997 S S S S S S P P D Tattoo parlors S S Educational and Institutional Uses Ambulance services 4119 P P P P P P P Auditoriums, coliseums, or stadiums 0000 P P P P P Cemeteries/mausoleums 0000 S S S S S S S Churches 8661 P S S S P P P P D P P P P P P Colleges or universities 8220 P P Correctional institutions 9223 P Day care centers, adult (5 or less) 8322 D D D D D D D D P Day care centers, adult (6 or more) 8322 S S S P Day care centers, child (5 or less) 8351 D D D D D D D D P Day care centers, child (6 or more) 8351 S S P S S Elementary or secondary schools 8211 S S S S S S D D D Fire stations 9224 D D D D D D D P P P P P P P P Fraternities or sororities (university and college) 0000 S S Government offices 9000 D D D D D D D P Hospitals 8062 P Libraries 8231 D D D D D P Medical, dental and related office storage S Museums or art galleries 8412 P P P P P P Nursing and convalescent homes 8050 S P Orphanages 8361 S P Police stations 9221 D D D D D D D P P P P P P P P Post offices 0000 P P P P P P P P Psychiatric hospitals 8063 P Retreat centers 0000 P P P P P School admin. facilities 9411 S P P P P P P P P Specialty hospitals 8069 P Business, Professional and Personal Services Accounting, auditing or bookkeeping 8721 P P P P P P P Administrative or management services 8740 P P P P P P P Ad agencies or representatives 7310 P P P P P P P Advertising services, outdoor 7312 P P P Automobile rental or leasing 7510 P P P P P Automobile repair services, major 0000 S S P P Automobile repair services, minor 0000 P P P P Automobile parking (commercial) 7521 P P P P P P Automobile services, spray on truck bed liners (no sandblasting allowed on the exterior of the building) 7549 P Automobile towing and storage services 7549 P S S Banks, savings and loans, or credit unions 6000 P P P P P P D Barbershops 7241 P P P P P P D Beauty shops 7241 P P P P P P D Blind centers 0000 S Boat repairs 3730 P P P P Building maintenance services 7349 P P P P P Carwashes 7542 P P P P Civic, trade, or business organizations 0000 S P P P Clothing alterations or repairs 0000 P P P Computer maintenance and repairs 7378 P P P P P Computer services 7370 P P P P P P P Economic, sociological, educational research 8732 P P P P P P P Employment agencies, personnel agencies 7360 P P P P P P P Engineering, architect, or survey services 8710 P P P P P P P P Equipment rental and leasing (outside storage) 7350 S P P Equipment repairs, heavy 7690 S P Equipment repairs, light 7690 P P P Finance or loan offices 6100 P P P P P P P Funeral homes or crematoriums 7261 P P P Furniture repair shops 7641 P P P Hotels or motels 7011 P P P P P P P Insurance agencies (no on-site claims inspections) 6411 P P P P P P P Insurance agencies (carriers/on-site claims) 6300 P P P P P P Internal service facilities 0000 P P P P P P Kennels or pet grooming services 0752 D D D D D D D P Landscape and horticultural services 0780 P P P Laundromats, coin-operated 7215 P P P P Laundry or dry cleaning plants 7211 P P P P P P P Laundry or dry cleaning substations 7212 P P P P P P Law offices 8111 P P P P P P P Medical, dental, or related offices 8000 P P P P P P P P Medical or dental labs 8071 P P P P P P P Motion picture productions 7810 P P P P Music instrument sales P Noncommercial research organizations 8733 P P P P P P P Office uses not otherwise classified 0000 P P P P P P P Organic food products and sales 0000 S Pest or termite control services 7342 P P P Photocopying and duplicating services 7334 P P P P P P P Photo finishing laboratories 7384 P P P P P Photography, commercial 7335 P P P P P Photography studios 7221 P P P P P P Police stations and fire stations S Real estate offices 6500 P P P P P P P Recreational vehicle parks or campsites 7033 S Refrigerator or large appliance repairs 7623 S P P Rehabilitation or counseling services 8300 P P P P P Research, development or testing services 8730 P P P Security services 7380 P P P P P Septic tank services 7699 P Shoe repair or shoeshine shops 7251 P P P P Stock, security, or commodity brokers 6200 P P P P P P P Tanning salons 7299 P P P P P Taxidermists 7699 P P Television or radio studios 0000 P P P Television, radio, or electronic repairs 7620 P P P P Theaters, outdoors 7833 S Theaters, indoor 7832 P P P Tire recapping 7534 P Tourist homes (bed and breakfast) 7011 S S S P P P P Travel agencies 4720 P P P P P P P Truck driving school 8249 P P P Truck and trailer rental and leasing, light 0000 P P P Truck and semi rental and leasing, heavy 0000 P P Truck washing 7542 P Veterinary services (other) 0742 P P P P P P P S Vocational, business, or secretarial schools 8240 P P P P P P P Watch or jewelry repair shops 7631 P P P P Retail Trade ABC stores (liquor) 5921 P P P P Antique stores 5932 P P P P Appliance stores 5722 P P P P Arts and crafts 0000 P P P P P Auto supply sales 5531 P P P P P P Bakeries 5461 P P P P P Bars 5813 S P Boat sales 5551 P P P Bookstores 5942 P P P P P Brewery P P Building supply sales (no storage yard) 5211 P P P P P P Building supply sales (with storage yard) 5211 P P Cake decorating supply stores 5999 P P P P P Candle shops 5999 P P P P P Camera stores 5946 P P P P P Candy stores 5441 P P P P P Clothing, shoe and accessory stores 5600 P P P P Coin, stamp, or similar collectible shops 5999 P P P P P Computer sales 5734 P P P P P Convenience stores (with gas pumps) 5411 P P S P P P Convenience stores (without gas pumps) 5411 P P P P P P Cosmetics shops 5999 P P P P Dairy products stores 5451 P P P P Department, variety or general merchandise stores 5300 P P P Distillery P P Drugstores 5912 S P P P P P Fabric or piece goods stores 5949 P P P P P Farm implement sales 0000 P P P P Flea markets, indoors 0000 P P P P Flea markets, outdoors 0000 S S Floor covering, drapery, or upholstery 5710 P P P P Florists 5992 P P P P Food stores 5400 P P P P Fuel oil sales 5980 P P P Furniture sales 5712 P P P Garden centers or retail nurseries 5261 P P P P Gift or card shops 5947 P P P P Hardware stores 5281 P P P P Hobby shops 5945 P P P P Home furnishings, miscellaneous 5719 P P P Jewelry stores 5944 P P P Luggage or leather goods stores 5948 P P P Manufactured home sales 5271 D D D Micro-brewery S S Micro-distillery S S Miscellaneous retail sales 5999 P P P Motor vehicle sales (new and used) 5511 P P P Motorcycle sales 5571 P P P Musical instrument sales 5736 S P P P Newsstands 5994 P P P P Office machine sales 5999 P P P P P Optical goods sales 5995 P P P P P Paint and wallpaper sales 5231 P P P P Pawnshops or used merchandise stores 5932 P P P Pet stores 5999 P P P Record, tape and compact disc stores 5735 P P P Recreational vehicle sales 5561 P P P Restaurants, conventional 5812 S P P P S P P P Restaurants, fast food 5812 S P P P P P Service stations, gasoline 5541 P P S P P Sporting goods stores 5941 P P P P Stationery stores 5943 P P P P Television, radio, or electronic sales 5731 P P P Tire sales 5531 P P P P Tobacco stores 5993 P P P Truckstops 5541 P P Videotape rental and sales 7841 P P P P P Wholesale Trade Agricultural chemicals/Pesticides/fertilizer 5191 P Agricultural products, other 5191 P P Ammunition 5099 P Animals and animal products, other 5199 P Apparel, piece goods and notions 5130 P P P P Beer/wine/distilled alcoholic beverages 5180 P P P Books, periodicals and newspapers 5192 P P P P Chemicals and allied products 5169 P Drugs and sundries 5122 P P P P Durable goods, other 5099 P P P P Electrical goods 5060 P P P P Farm supplies (inc. assembly of farm products such as granaries and storage bins) 5191 P P Farmers market 0000 P P P Fish and seafood wholesaling and distribution P S Fish market 5421 S P Flowers, nursery stock, florists supplies 5193 S P P P P Forest products 5099 P P Furniture and home furnishings 5020 P P P P Grain and field beans 5153 P Groceries and related products 5140 P P P P Hardware 5072 P P P P Jewelry, watches, precious stones and metals 5094 P P P P Livestock 5154 P Lumber and other construction materials 5030 P Lumber, millwork, and veneer 5031 P P P Machinery, construction and mining 5082 P Machinery, equipment and supplies 5080 P P P Machinery, farm and garden 5083 P Market showrooms (furniture, apparel, etc.) 0000 P Metals 5051 P P S Minerals 5052 P Motor vehicles 5012 P P Motor vehicles, parts and supplies 5010 P P P Motor vehicles, tires and tubes 5014 P P P Paints and varnishes 5198 P P Paper and paper products 5110 P P P P Petroleum and petroleum products 5170 P Plastics materials 5162 P P P Plumbing and heating equip. 5070 P P P Professional and commercial equipment and supp. 5040 P P P P Resins 5162 P Scrap and waste materials 5093 P Sporting and recreational goods and supplies 5091 P P P P Tobacco and tobacco products 5194 P P P Toys and hobby goods and supplies 5092 P P P P Wallpaper and paint brushes 5198 P P P P Transportation, Warehousing, and utilities Airports or air transportation facilities 4500 P Bulk mail and packaging 4212 P P Bus terminals 4100 P P P Communications or broadcasting facilities 4800 P P P P P P P Courier services, central facility 4215 P P Courier service substations 4215 P P P P P P P Demolition debris landfills, major 0000 S Demolition debris landfills, minor 0000 P P Drystack boat storage facilities S S S Hazardous and radioactive waste (transportation, storage, and disposal) 4953 S Heliports 4522 P Moving and storage services 4214 P P Pump stations 0000 P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Railroad terminals or yards 4010 P P Refuse and raw material hauling 4212 P Sewage treatment plants 4952 P Solid waste disposal (nonhazardous) 4953 S Taxi terminals 4121 P P P Telecommunication towers 0000 S S S S S S S S S S S S Trucking or freight terminals 4210 P P Utility company offices 0000 P P P P P P Utility equipment and storage yards 0000 P P P Utility lines and related appurtenances 0000 P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Utility service facility (no outside storage) 0000 P P P S Utility substations 0000 P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Warehouses (general storage/enclosed) 4220 P P P P Warehouses (self-storage) 4225 S P P Water treatment plants 0000 P P Manufacturing and Industrial Uses Aircraft and parts 3720 P Ammunition, small arms 3482 P Animal feeds (including dog and cat) 2048 S Animal slaughtering or rend 0000 S Apparel and finished fabric products 2300 P P S P Arms and weapons 3480 P P S Asbestos, abrasive, and related prod. 3290 P Asphalt plants 2951 S Audio, video and communication equipment 3600 P P S P Bakery products 2050 P P S Batteries 3691 P Beverage products (alcoholic) 2080 P Beverage products (nonalcohol) 2086 P P S P Bicycle assembly 3751 P P S P Bicycle parts and accessories 3751 P P S P Boatbuilding and shipbuilding 3730 P P S Brooms and brushes 3991 P P S P Burial caskets 3995 P P S Chemicals, paints and allied products 2800 P Coffee 2095 P P S P Computer and office equipment 3570 P P S P Concrete, cut stone, and clay products 3200 P Contractors (no outside storage) 0000 P P P S P Contractors, general building 1500 P P P P S Contractors, heavy construction 1600 P P S Contractors, special trade 1700 P P S Costume jewelry and notions 3690 P P S P Dairy products 2020 P P S S Drugs 2830 P P S S Electrical industrial apparatus, assembly 3620 P P S P Electrical industrial apparatus, manufacture 3620 P P S Electrical components 3670 P P S Electrical equipment 3600 P P S Fabricated metal products (including can manufacture) 3400 P Fabricated valve and wire products 3490 P P S Fats and oils, animal 2077 P Fats and oils, plant 2070 P P S Fish, canned, cured, or frozen 2091 S Floor coverings (excluding carpet) 3996 P Food and related products, misc. 2090 P P S P Furniture framing 2426 P P S Furniture and fixture assembly 0000 P P S P Furniture and fixtures 2500 P P S Glass 3200 P Glass products from purchased glass 3231 P P S P Grain mill products 2040 P P S Heating equipment and plumbing fixtures 3430 P P S Household appliances 3630 P P S Ice 2097 P P P S P Industrial and commercial machinery 3500 P S Jewelry and silverware (no plating) 3910 P P S P Leather and leather products (no tanning) 3100 P P S P Lighting and wiring equipment 3640 P P S S Logging and wood, raw materials 2411 S Manufactured housing and wood buildings 2450 P P S Measurement, analysis and control instruments 3800 P P S P Meat/poultry, packing and process 2010 P Medical, dental and surgical equipment 3840 P P S P Metal coating and engraving 3470 S Metal fasteners (screws, bolts, etc.) 3450 P P S Metal processing 3350 P P S Millwork, plywood, and veneer 2430 P P S P Mining and quarrying 1000 S Motor vehicle assembly 3710 P Motor vehicle parts and accessories 3714 P P S Motorcycle assembly 3751 P P S Musical instruments 3930 P P S P Paper products (no coating or laminating) 2670 P P S Paper products (coating or laminating) 2670 P Paperboard containers and boxes 2650 P P S P Pens and art supplies 3950 P P S P Petroleum and related products 2900 S Pharmaceutical preparations 2834 P P S P Photographic equipment 3861 P P S P Photographic supplies 3861 P P S P Pottery and related products 3260 P P S P Preserved fruits and vegetables (no can manufacture) 2030 P P S Primary metals products and foundries 3300 P Printing and publishing 2700 P P P P S P Pulp and paper mills 2610 S Rubber and plastics, miscellaneous 3000 P P S Rubber and plastics, raw 3000 S Salvage yards, auto parts 5015 S Salvage yards, scrap processing 5093 S Sawmills or planing mills 2420 P Signs 3993 P P S P Soaps and cosmetics 2840 P P S P Sporting goods and toys 3940 P P S P Stitching and embroidery shops 2395 S P P S Sugar and confectionery products 2060 P P S P Surface active agents 2843 P Textile products (no dyeing and finishing) 2200 P P S P Textile products (with dyeing and finishing) 2260 P Tires and inner tubes 3011 S Tobacco products 2110 P Wood containers 2440 P P S P Wood products, miscellaneous 2490 P Other Uses Arts and craft shows 0000 P Automotive parking lots, at grade level 0000 P P P P P P D P P P P P P P P P Christmas tree sales 0000 P Concerts, stage shows 7920 P Conventions, trade shows 0000 P Outdoor advertising signs 0000 S Outdoor religious events 0000 P Temporary events 0000 D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D Demolition debris landfills, minor SP  
(Code 1993, § 27-43; Ord. No. 97-16, 9-8-1997; Ord. No. 98-3, 2-9-1998; Ord. No. 98-5, 3-9-1998; Ord. No. 98-7, 5-11-1998; Ord. No. 98-9, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 98-14, 7-13-1998; Ord. No. 98-17, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 98-20, 11-9-1998; Ord. No. 99-1, 1-11-1999; Ord. No. 99-3, 6-14-1999; Ord. No. 99-5, 6-14-1999; Ord. No. 99-9, 7-12-1999; Ord. No. 00-3, 2-14-2000; Ord. No. 01-12, , 10-8-2001; Ord. No. 01-14, 10-8-2001; Ord. No. 02-01, 1-14-2002; Ord. No. 02-18, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 02-24, 11-11-2002; Ord. No. 03-03, 2-10-2003; Ord. No. 04-1, § 2, 1-12-2004; Ord. No. 04-19, § 1, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 04-20, § 1, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 04-21, § 1, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 06-22, § 1, 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 06-25, § 2, 12-11-2006; Ord. No. 07-01, § 2, 1-8-2007; Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 10-8-2007; Ord. No. 10-7, § 1, 8-9-2010; Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-13-2010; Ord. No. 11-1, § 1, 2-14-2011; Ord. No. 11-5, § 1, 3-14-2011; Ord. No. 11-12, § 2, 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 14-7, §§ 2, 3, 10-6-2014; Ord. No. 17-1, § 2, 3-13-2017; Ord. No. 17-5, §§ 2, 3, 12-11-2017) 
Secs. 40-94-40-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR SPECIAL USES 

Sec. 40-115. - General criteria. 
    The Board of Adjustment may grant permission for the establishment of the following uses, or category of uses, if the Board of Adjustment finds from the evidence produced after a study of the complete record that: 
(a)  The proposed use does not adversely affect the general plans for the physical development of the city as embodied in these regulations or in any plan or portion thereof adopted by the Planning Board or by the City Council; 
(b)  The proposed use will not be contrary to the purposes stated in these regulations; 
(c)  The proposed use will not adversely affect the health and safety of residents and workers in the city; 
(d)  The proposed use will not be detrimental to the use of or development of adjacent properties or other neighborhood uses; 
(e)  The proposed use will not be affected adversely by existing uses; 
(f)  The proposed use will be placed on a lot of sufficient size to satisfy the space requirements of such use; 
(g)  The proposed use will not constitute a nuisance or fire hazard because of the number of persons who will attend or use such facility, of the vehicular movement, of noise or fumes or of the type of physical activity; 
(h)  The proposed use will comply with all additional specific criteria set forth for each particular use as established in these regulations; 
(i)  The proposed use will comply with the minimum area, setback, and other locational requirements of the zoning district in which it will be located; 
(j)  The proposed use will comply with the off-street parking and loading requirements of these regulations. All parking and driveways shall be located in a safe and convenient manner; 
(k)  The proposed use will not create or aggravate hazards to vehicular or pedestrian traffic on the roads and sidewalks, both off-site and on-site, serving the proposed use as determined by the size, capacity, and condition of such roads and sidewalks, lighting, drainage, intensity of use by both pedestrians and vehicles and the visibility afforded to pedestrians and the operators of motor vehicles on such roads; and 
(l)  The proposed use will be compatible with existing uses that are adjacent to or neighboring the proposed location, as measured in terms of its physical size, intensity of use, visual impact, and proximity to other structures. 
(Code 1993, § 27-44) 
Sec. 40-116. - Additional restrictions. 
    The Board of Adjustment may impose or require additional conditions, restrictions, and standards as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of workers and residents of the community, and to protect the value and use of property in the general neighborhood. 
(Code 1993, § 27-45) 
Sec. 40-117. - Revocation of permits. 
    Whenever the Board of Adjustment shall find, in the case of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations, that any of the terms, conditions, or restrictions upon which such permit was granted are not being complied with, the Board shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunities for a hearing. 
(Code 1993, § 27-46) 
Sec. 40-118. - Specific criteria. 
    The Board of Adjustment may grant permission for the establishment of the uses listed under section 40-119, subject to the specific criteria set forth under section 40-120 and any conditions which the Board may deem necessary to satisfy the general criteria set forth in section 40-115. 
(Code 1993, § 27-47) 
Sec. 40-119. - Index to listed uses. 
    The index to the listed uses, referred to in section 40-118, are as follows: 
(a)  Major or minor repair facilities, includes major automobile repair services, minor automobile repair services, heavy equipment repairs, light equipment repairs, refrigerator or large appliance repairs. 
(b)  Cemeteries/mausoleums. 
(c)  Adult or child day care facilities. 
(d)  Group care facilities. 
(e)  Other care facilities, includes congregate care facilities, adult day care facilities, nursing or convalescent homes, orphanages. 
(f)  Clubs or lodges, billiard parlors. 
(g)  Fraternity or sorority, private dormitories. 
(h)  Salvage yards, auto parts; salvage yards, scrap processing. 
(i)  Bars. 
(j)  Caretaker dwellings. 
(k)  Restaurants; with drive-through or with no drive-through. 
(l)  Mining and quarrying. 
(m)  Demolition debris landfills, major and solid waste disposal (nonhazardous). 
(n)  Shelters for the homeless. 
(o)  Migrant labor housing. 
(p)  Amusement or water parks. 
(q)  Country clubs with golf courses. 
(r)  Golf driving ranges. 
(s)  Recreational facilities, other. 
(t)  Swim and tennis clubs. 
(u)  Warehouses, self-storage. 
(v)  Theaters, outdoor. 
(w)  Sports instruction schools. 
(x)  Fish market. 
(y)  Shooting ranges, indoor. 
(z)  Shooting ranges, outdoor. 
(aa)  Recreational vehicle parks or campsites. 
(bb)  Flea markets, outdoor. 
(cc)  Flowers, nursery stock, and florists supply. 
(dd)  Convenience stores, with gas pumps. 
(ee)  Civic, trade, or business organizations. 
(ff)  Fortunetellers, astrologers. 
(gg)  Correctional institutions. 
(hh)  Hazardous and radioactive waste. 
(ii)  Heavy or noxious manufacturing, including animal feeds; animal slaughtering or rendering; asphalt plants; canned, cured, or frozen fish; industrial or commercial machinery; metal coating and engraving; petroleum and related products; pulp and paper mills; raw rubber and plastics; tires and inner tubes. 
(jj)  Tourist homes. 
(kk)  Recycling collection points. 
(ll)  Outdoor advertising signs. 
(mm)  Organic food products and sales. 
(nn)  Hospice home-inpatient. 
(oo)  Corporate park. 
(pp)  Drystack boat storage. 
(qq)  Medical, dental and related office storage and warehouse. 
(rr)  Electronic gaming operations (aka internet sweepstakes operations). 
(ss)  Tattoo parlors. 
(tt)  Commercial marina. 
(uu)  Shelters for the victims of domestic violence. 
(vv)  Micro-brewery and micro-distillery. 
(ww)  Shelters for homeless women and children. 
(Code 1993, § 27-48; Ord. No. 01-12, 10-8-2001; Ord. No. 03-03, 2-10-2003; Ord. No. 04-1, § 3, 1-12-2004; Ord. No. 07-01, § 4, 1-8-2007; Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 12-13-2010; Ord. No. 11-1, § 2, 2-14-2011; Ord. No. 11-5, § 2, 3-14-2011; Ord. No. 11-12, § 3, 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 14-7, § 4, 10-6-2014; Ord. No. 17-1, § 3, 3-13-2017; Ord. No. 17-5, § 4, 12-11-2017) 
Sec. 40-120. - Listed uses, specific criteria. 
    The specific criteria for the listed uses, referred to in section 40-118, are as follows: 
(a)  Major or minor repair facilities. Major or minor repair facilities, includes major automobile repair services, minor automobile repair services, heavy equipment repairs, light equipment repairs, refrigerator or large appliance repairs. 
(1)  All wrecked or damaged motor vehicles and parts shall be screened by an opaque fence of uniform construction, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, and with a bufferyard of greater intensity as required by the bufferyard regulations as not to be visible from adjoining property lines and street rights-of-way. 
(2)  All vehicles on the premises for repair shall be stored at the rear of the principal structure. 
(3)  No vehicle shall be stored on the premises for more than fifteen (15) days. 
(4)  There shall be no exterior storage of items other than vehicles. No vehicle shall be stored within ten (10) feet of any street right-of-way. 
(5)  There shall be no sale of vehicles. 
(6)  Rental or utility trailers, cars, and trucks shall be permitted as accessory uses provided that all units in excess of four (4) shall be screened from adjoining street rights-of-way and property lines by an opaque fence of uniform construction, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, and with a bufferyard of greater intensity as required by the bufferyard regulations. 
(7)  Outdoor displays of products such as tires, oil, wiper blades, or other similar products shall be permitted provided they are within ten (10) feet of the principal structure and outside required bufferyards. Signage displayed in conjunction with such displays shall be in accordance with the sign regulations. 
(8)  All services except fuel sales and services related to fuel sales, such as, window washing and oil checks, shall be performed within a completely enclosed building. 
(b)  Cemeteries/mausoleums. 
(1)  A minimum of three (3) contiguous acres shall be required to establish a cemetery or mausoleum. This minimum area shall not apply to a family cemetery or family mausoleum. 
(2)  Primary access shall be to a collector or thoroughfare street. 
(3)  No gravesite shall be within ten (10) feet of any property line or within twenty-five (25) feet of any street right-of-way. 
(c)  Adult or child day care facilities. 
(1)  Maximum number of attendees: An adult or child day care center with five (5) or fewer attendees may be operated as a home occupation subject to the development standards for a home occupation. A child day care home occupation may also provide after school care for up to three (3) additional children, who are less than thirteen (13) years of age, for not more than four (4) after school hours in any twenty-four-hour period. Children of the resident operator shall not be counted toward the maximum number of attendees. 
(2)  An adult or child day care center with six (6) or more attendees shall be operated as a principal use and subject to the following development standards: 
a.  An indoor activity area shall be provided equivalent to at least twenty-five (25) square feet per attendee, exclusive of kitchens, bathrooms, closets, and hallways. 
b.  Outdoor play area shall be provided at a ratio of one hundred (100) square feet per child and shall be enclosed by a fence at least four (4) feet in height and located outside the required street setback. All playground equipment shall be located in accordance with the bufferyard regulations. 
c.  All accessory structures, including, but not limited to, playground equipment and pools, must be located in the rear yard. 
d.  The minimum lot size shall be increased by a ratio of one hundred (100) square feet per attendee in excess of five (5). 
e.  Centers on a site greater than three (3) acres shall have frontage on a collector or thoroughfare street. 
f.  If located in a residential district, a residential appearance of the site shall be maintained to the greatest possible extent. 
g.  Employee parking shall be at the rear of the structure when an adult or child day care facility is located in a residential district. 
(d)  Group care facilities. 
(1)  The minimum lot size shall be two (2) acres. 
(2)  The principal and accessory use side and rear setbacks shall be twenty (20) feet for new construction in the case of single building development. 
(3)  Multifamily development standards shall apply, except as provided under subsection (4)b of this section. 
(4)  Maximum occupancy shall be in accordance with the North Carolina State Building Code, not to exceed twenty-five (25) and as provided by definition. 
(5)  No such facility shall be located within one-half (1/2) mile, two thousand six hundred forty (2,640) feet, of an existing group care facility or shelter for the homeless. 
(e)  Other care facilities. Other care facilities, includes congregate care facilities, nursing or convalescent homes, orphanages. 
(1)  The facility shall provide centrally located, shared food preparation service and major dining areas. 
(2)  Common recreation, social, and service facilities shall be provided at a minimum rate of fifty (50) square feet per dwelling unit or per rooming unit. 
(3)  All facilities shall be solely for the use of residents and their guests. 
(4)  Facilities for administrative services and limited medical services for the exclusive use of the residents may be located on the site. 
(f)  Clubs or lodges, billiard parlors. 
(1)  A special use permit granted under this section shall be for a period of one (1) year and must be renewed annually. It shall be the responsibility of the owner/operator to make timely application for permit renewal. 
(2)  No portion of a lot on which a club, lodge, or billiard parlor is located shall be within five hundred (500) feet of any portion of a lot on which another principal use club, lodge, or billiard parlor is located. 
(g)  Fraternity or sorority, private dormitories. 
(1)  The minimum lot size shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(2)  The gross floor area of the structure shall be no less than two hundred fifty (250) square feet per resident. 
(3)  The total amount of land devoted to structures and parking shall not exceed seventy (70) percent of the total lot area. 
(4)  No part of any principal structure or accessory structure shall be located within fifteen (15) feet of any property line or street right-of-way for new construction and conversions. 
(h)  Salvage yards, auto parts; salvage yards, scrap processing. 
(1)  The use shall be setback at least two (2) times the distance from the street right-of-way line that is required for the district in which it is located. 
(2)  An opaque fence of uniform construction, a minimum of eight (8) feet in height, shall be required around the perimeter of the activity. Such fencing shall be located between the use and all required planting yards, as defined in article VII of this chapter, pertaining to bufferyards and landscaping requirements. 
(3)  No activity shall be located, nor shall it be expanded to, within three hundred (300) feet of any residence existing (or under construction) or to any residential zoning district at the time of its initiation. 
(i)  Bars. 
(1)  No such establishment shall be located within two hundred (200) feet from the nearest property line of a church, elementary or secondary school, public park, playground, library, or residentially zoned property. 
(2)  The main entrance of the building shall be toward a street zoned predominantly for nonresidential uses. 
(3)  A minimum six-foot high opaque fence of uniform construction shall be erected adjacent to the property line of abutting residences. 
(4)  Parking areas related to the establishment shall be located no closer than twenty-five (25) feet to the property line of abutting residences. 
(j)  Caretaker dwellings. 
(1)  A building permit for a principal nonresidential building shall be obtained, or a principal nonresidential use shall be established, prior to occupancy. 
(2)  No more than one (1) caretaker dwelling unit shall be permitted per lot. 
(k)  Restaurants; with drive-through or without drive-through. When a restaurant is to be located adjacent to a residential district, the following standards shall be required: 
(1)  The restaurant shall maintain the front yard setback of the adjacent residential district. 
(2)  The restaurant shall maintain a minimum side and rear yard setback of twenty-five (25) feet from any property line which abuts a permitted residential dwelling unit or district. 
(l)  Mining and quarrying. 
(1)  No mining, quarrying, or excavation activity shall occur closer than three hundred (300) feet to an adjacent permitted residential dwelling. 
(2)  Access to sites shall be located as to avoid the routing of vehicles to and from the operation over streets that primarily serve abutting residential development. Maintenance of this access shall be the responsibility of the operator of the site. Measures to control dust along access roads shall be used as needed to maintain a relatively dustfree operation. 
(3)  Hours of operation shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, except as further provided. Hours of operation, where access is limited to public streets that are residential in nature, shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
(4)  Security fencing, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, shall be provided around the perimeter of both existing and abandoned operations, and shall be locked when the site is not in use. 
(5)  Within the time period established by the mining permit issued by the state, all equipment and stock piles incidental to such operation shall be removed by and at the expense of the owner. Except in a case where redevelopment for permitted activities for another permitted use is in progress on the site, all excavations shall be graded to reduce the surface to gently rolling topography in conformity with the surrounding landscape. This area shall be planted with a cover of sod, trees, shrubs, or grass. The area shall be drained or a retention pond provided to prevent stormwater from accumulating on the site or on neighboring properties or public streets. 
(m)  Demolition debris landfills, major and solid waste disposal (nonhazardous). 
(1)  There shall be a one hundred-foot setback from all property lines. No refuse shall be deposited or any building erected in this area. 
(2)  No such use may be located within three hundred (300) feet of any dwelling unit. 
(n)  Shelters for the homeless. 
(1)  The minimum lot size shall be fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
(2)  No facility shall be located within one-half (1/2) mile, two thousand six hundred forty (2,640) feet, of any existing homeless shelter, as measured from the nearest property line of the lot on which the proposed homeless shelter is to be located to the nearest lot line of an existing homeless shelter. 
(3)  Maximum occupancy shall be in accordance with the state building code or not more than one (1) person per each five hundred (500) square feet of lot area, whichever is less. 
(4)  Continuous on-site supervision must be maintained during all hours of operation. 
(5)  The shelter must be located within a building owned by and operated by a government agency or nonprofit organization. 
(o)  Migrant labor housing. 
(1)  Minimum lot size shall be two (2) acres. An additional two thousand (2,000) square feet of land shall be required for each worker in excess of twenty (20) people. 
(2)  The minimum street setback shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
(3)  The minimum interior side and rear yard setback shall be fifty (50) feet. 
(4)  No more than ten (10) people shall be housed in any one (1) room or compartment for sleeping purposes. Rooms or compartments for sleeping shall contain a minimum of thirty-nine (39) square feet of floor area for each person. Where stricter, applicable state or federal law shall govern. 
(5)  All water, sewer, and sanitary facilities shall be approved by the county Health Department. 
(p)  Amusement or water parks. 
(1)  Minimum lot size shall be five (5) acres. 
(2)  No principal buildings or structures, other than ticket windows, shall be located within fifty (50) feet of any property line. 
(3)  Security fencing, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, shall be provided along the entire boundary of the part of the facility being used for park activities. 
(q)  Country clubs with golf courses; golf courses. 
(1)  Outdoor swimming pools shall be surrounded by a fence or equal enclosure, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, that is locked when the pool is not open. 
(2)  There shall be a fifty-foot minimum setback between clubhouses, swimming pools, lighted tennis courts, or athletic fields and any residential districts. 
(r)  Golf driving ranges. 
(1)  The minimum distance from the tees to the end of any open-air driving area shall be one thousand (1,000) feet. The minimum distance may be reduced if the end of the driving area is controlled with netting or other measures to prevent golf balls from leaving the driving area. 
(2)  Fencing, netting, trees, berms, or other control measures shall be provided around the perimeter of the driving area to prevent golf balls from leaving the site. 
(s)  Recreational facilities, other. 
(1)  Overflow parking, in addition to required parking, shall be designated on the site plan and kept available to handle all traffic from special events. 
(2)  No principal buildings or structures, other than ticket windows, shall be located within fifty (50) feet of any property line. 
(t)  Swim and tennis clubs. 
(1)  Minimum areas shall be two (2) acres or one (1) acre, if located on common area within a development. 
(2)  There shall be a fifty-foot minimum setback between clubhouses, swimming pools, lighted tennis courts, or athletic fields and any residential districts. 
(3)  Outdoor swimming pools shall be surrounded by a fence or equal enclosure, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, that is locked when the pool is not open. 
(u)  Warehouses, self-storage. 
(1)  Minimum lot size shall be one (1) acre. 
(2)  The total area covered by buildings shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the site. 
(3)  No outside storage shall be permitted and the storage of hazardous, toxic, or explosive substances shall be prohibited. 
(4)  No business activity other than the rental of storage units shall be conducted on the site. 
(v)  Theaters, outdoor. 
(1)  No outdoor theater shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of any church, elementary or secondary school, public park, playground, library, or residentially zoned property. 
(2)  No principal buildings or structures, other than ticket windows, shall be located within fifty (50) feet of any property line. 
(w)  Sports instruction schools. Fencing, netting, trees, berms, or other control measures shall be provided around the perimeter of the recreation area to prevent balls or equipment from leaving the site. 
(x)  Fish market. No fish market may be located within three hundred (300) feet of any residential, office, institutional, or commercial use. 
(y)  Shooting ranges, indoor. The facility shall be designed to absorb sound so that no noise is plainly audible at a distance of one hundred (100) feet from the building from which the noise emanates. 
(z)  Shooting ranges, outdoor. 
(1)  The minimum lot size shall be fifty (50) acres. 
(2)  All shooting stations on a range facility shall be located a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from any property line. 
(3)  Warning signs shall be posted at one-hundred-foot intervals along the entire perimeter of the shooting range facility. 
(4)  All shooting stations shall be located at least one-quarter (1/4) mile, one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet, from any existing, occupied dwelling unit. 
(5)  Shooting range facilities shall be designed to contain all of the bullets, shot, or arrows, or any other debris, on the range facility. 
(6)  Unreasonable levels of noise outside the permitted hours of operation, as specified in subsection (26)g of this section, shall be prohibited. 
(7)  Shooting ranges shall be allowed to operate between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and 1:00 p.m. through 6:00 p.m., on Sundays. 
The owner and/or operator of the shooting range facility shall be required to carry a minimum of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) of liability insurance. Such insurance shall name the city as an additional insured party and shall save and hold the city, its elected and appointed officials, and employees acting within the scope of their duties harmless from and against all claims, demands, and causes of action of any kind or character, including the cost of defense thereof, arising in favor of a person or group's members or employees or third parties on account of any property damage or personal injury arising out of use of the range, or in any way arising out of the acts or omissions of the owner and/or operator of the range, his group, club, or its agents or representatives. The city shall be notified of any policy changes or lapses in coverage. 
(aa)  Recreational vehicle parks or campsites. 
(1)  Each space shall consist of a minimum of two thousand (2,000) square feet and shall be designated on the ground by permanent markers or monuments. 
(2)  All structures, buildings, and sewage facilities shall meet the setback requirements for the district in which they are located. 
(3)  The park shall have all-weather paved or gravel roads that directly abut all spaces. All road rights-of-way shall have a minimum width of forty (40) feet with a minimum paved width of twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  An all-weather surface area with sufficient dimensions to accommodate at least one (1) automobile and one (1) camping vehicle shall be constructed within each space. 
(5)  There shall be a minimum distance of eighteen (18) feet between each travel-trailer or structure. 
(6)  No space shall have direct vehicular access to public streets which do not exclusively serve the park. 
(7)  The park shall be developed with proper drainage ditches. All banks shall be sloped and seeded. 
(8)  Cul-de-sacs or deadend roads shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet in length. Any road designed to be permanently closed shall have a turnaround at the closed end with a minimum right-of-way diameter of eighty (80) feet. 
(9)  When the park has more than one (1) direct access to a public road, each entrance shall be no less than three hundred (300) feet apart or no closer than three hundred (300) feet to a public road intersection, unless unusual site conditions demand otherwise. 
(10)  Utilities. 
a.  The installation, alteration, or use of all utilities including, but not limited to, electrical service, plumbing fixtures, and sewage disposal systems shall conform to all applicable codes. 
b.  Each park shall obtain water from a municipal water supply when available or, when unavailable, from a source approved by the county Health Department. The water supply and pressure shall be adequate for the park requirements. Areas around faucets or drinking fountains shall be properly drained. 
c.  Each park shall have a central structure that will provide separate toilet and bathing facilities for both sexes. The minimum number of facilities per sex to be provided shall follow the schedule below: 
1.  Toilets: one (1) per ten (10) spaces. 
2.  Urinals: one (1) per twenty (20) spaces, male facilities only. 
3.  Lavatories: one (1) per ten (10) spaces. 
4.  Showers: one (1) per ten (10) spaces. 
All toilet, shower, lavatory, and laundry facilities shall be provided and maintained in a clean, sanitary condition and kept in good repair at all times. They shall be safely and adequately lighted. Facilities shall be easily accessible to all persons and conveniently located. 
d.  Each park shall be provided with an approved sewage disposal system, either by connection to a public sewer or a septic tank constructed in compliance with the regulations of the county Health Department. All sewage wastes from the park, including waste from toilets, showers, bathtubs, lavatories, washbasins, refrigerator drains, sinks, faucets, and water-using appliances not herein mentioned, shall be piped into the park's sewage disposal system. 
(11)  Solid waste disposal. 
a.  The park owner is responsible for solid waste collection. All refuse shall be collected at least twice weekly. 
b.  All refuse shall be stored in conveniently located, leakproof, rodentproof containers with tightfitting lids. One (1) such can with a capacity of at least twenty (20) gallons shall be provided for every two (2) spaces. Garbage cans shall be located no farther than one hundred (100) feet from any space. 
c.  Racks or concrete platforms shall be provided on which to store containers. Racks or platforms shall be so designed as to prevent tipping and to minimize spillage. 
(12)  All spaces shall be located on sites that are not susceptible to flooding. The spaces shall be graded to prevent any water from ponding or accumulating within the park. Each space shall be properly graded to obtain a reasonably flat site and to provide adequate drainage away from the space. 
(13)  Insect and rodent control measures to safeguard the public health shall be used in the park. 
(14)  Common area recreation areas shall be provided at a ratio of three hundred (300) square feet per space. No common recreation area shall be less than three thousand (3,000) square feet. No common recreation area shall be located in a required bufferyard. At least eighty (80) percent of the required recreation area must be level, well-drained ground usable for common recreation activities. Land that is swampy, extremely low, or wooded will not be classified as usable recreation space. 
(15)  The park may contain a retail sales counter or coin-operated machines for the park residents' use only, provided they are enclosed within a structure and there is no exterior advertising. 
(16)  Permanent sleeping quarters for guests shall not be permitted within the park. 
(17)  It shall be unlawful for a person to park or store a manufactured dwelling in a recreational vehicle park, except that one (1) manufactured dwelling may be located within the park for exclusive use by the park manager or operator. This manufactured dwelling shall be located in an area designated on the site plan. 
(bb)  Flea markets, outdoor. 
(1)  No building, structure, or sales area shall be located in any required setback area. 
(2)  No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the stalls or sales areas shall be used for the sale of goods at retail by businesses or individuals who are generally or traditionally engaged in retail trade. 
(3)  Off-street parking shall be provided as required in article XVII, parking, for retail sales, not otherwise classified. 
(cc)  Flowers, nursery stock, and florists supply. 
(1)  The growing of greenhouse or plant nursery products shall be the principal use for nursery stock facilities. Retail sales shall be considered an accessory use for nursery stock facilities provided no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the retail stock of a nursery shall be of products not grown upon the premises. 
(2)  No power equipment, such as gas or electric lawn mowers and farm implements, may be sold wholesale or retail. 
(dd)  Convenience stores, with gas pumps. 
(1)  No outside storage of materials shall be permitted. 
(2)  Aboveground tanks and treatment facilities shall be screened, to the greatest extent feasible, with shrubbery or fencing at least six (6) feet in height, to lessen their visual impact on surrounding properties. 
(ee)  Civic, trade, or business organizations. 
(1)  Any proposed use shall maintain a residential appearance to the greatest extent possible and shall be consistent in scale and environment with surrounding properties. 
(2)  Any parking area designed to serve more than four (4) vehicles shall be located in the rear of the principal structure. 
(ff)  Fortunetellers, astrologers. No such use shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of any church, elementary or secondary school, public park, playground, library, or residentially zoned property. 
(gg)  Correctional institutions. No part of any lot containing a correctional institution shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of any portion of a lot containing a church, elementary or secondary school, public park, playground, library, or residentially zoned property. 
(hh)  Hazardous and radioactive waste. No part of any lot containing a hazardous or radioactive waste facility shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any portion of a lot containing a church, elementary or secondary school, public park, playground, library, or residentially zoned property. 
(ii)  Heavy or noxious manufacturing. Heavy or noxious manufacturing includes, but is not limited to, animal feeds; animal slaughtering or rendering; asphalt plants; canned, cured, or frozen fish; industrial or commercial machinery; metal coating and engraving; petroleum and related products; pulp and paper mills; raw rubber and plastics; tires and inner tubes. 
(1)  All structures, buildings, mechanical equipment, or enclosed areas used for the operation shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any existing residence or residentially zoned property. Storage tanks shall be located a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from any existing residence or residentially zoned property. 
(2)  All unpaved storage areas shall be maintained in a manner which prevents dust from adversely impacting adjacent properties. 
(3)  Security fencing, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, shall be provided around all outside storage areas. 
(jj)  Tourist homes. 
(1)  Tourist homes shall have a minimum lot size of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(2)  Tourist homes shall be located in a house with a minimum square footage of three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
(kk)  Recycling collection points. 
(1)  Storage of recyclables at recycling collection points shall be for a period of no more than seven (7) days at a time. 
(2)  Recycling collection bins shall be screened with appropriate fencing or landscaping so as to minimize the visual impact on surrounding properties. 
(ll)  Outdoor advertising signs. 
(1)  No more than one (1) outdoor advertising sign shall be permitted on any lot. 
(2)  No outdoor advertising sign shall be larger than one hundred (100) square feet. 
(3)  The outdoor advertising sign shall not be located on a lot with another primary use. 
(4)  The outdoor advertising sign shall meet all setback requirements for the applicable zoning district. 
(mm)  Organic food products and sales. 
(1)  Minimum lot size: thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: one hundred twenty-five (125) linear feet. 
(3)  Front yard setback: thirty (30) feet. 
(4)  Side yard setback: ten (10) feet. 
(5)  Rear yard setback: twenty (20) feet. 
(6)  The lot shall front on a designated federal highway system street. 
(7)  No outside sales or storage are allowed. 
(8)  Dumpster trash containers shall be located in the rear yard and shall be screened on three sides by a solid fence or masonry wall. 
(9)  Hours of operation: Monday through Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; Sunday, 1:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
(nn)  Hospice home, inpatient (special standards in the B1H Zoning District). 
(1)  Minimum lot size: twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: one hundred (100) feet. 
(3)  Minimum front yard setback: ten (10) feet. 
(4)  Minimum side yard setback: ten (10) feet. 
(5)  Maximum height: fifty (50) feet. 
(6)  Maximum building coverage, percent of lot: forty (40) percent. 
(7)  Minimum square footage of the building: four thousand (4,000) square feet. 
Section 40-115(a) through (d) may also be used in applying special standards for this special use. 
(oo)  Corporate park. 
(1)  Loading areas shall not be located on the side of a building facing a public street. 
(2)  Accessory outside storage: 
a.  Shall not cover an area exceeding twenty-five (25) percent of the ground level of gross floor area of the principal building; 
b.  Shall be restricted to the area between the rear property line and the building; and 
c.  Shall be fully screened from the ground-level view from adjacent properties or public streets. 
(3)  Outside manufacturing, processing, or assembly shall not be permitted. 
(pp)  Drystack boat storage. 
(1)  Site plan. A site plan shall be prepared by a licensed architect engineer and contain a metes and bounds description prepared by a licensed registered surveyor in the state. 
(2)  Approval. A site plan shall be prepared and approved in accordance with article XVIII of this chapter, pertaining to site plan review. 
(3)  Lot of record. The lot of record on which the drydock boat storage is located must be adjacent and contiguous to public trust waters as defined by the Coastal Area Management Act under section 15A NC Admin., code 7H. 
(4)  Stormwater plan. A stormwater management plan is required for each drystack boat storage facility, one stormwater management plan per lot of record. The plan shall comply with the city's stormwater management provisions and demonstrate specific design components intended to minimize impact on contiguous public trust waters and coastal wetlands, as defined by 15A NC Admin., code 7H. 
(5)  Dimensional standards: 
a.  Lot size: forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet. 
b.  Minimum lot width: one hundred (100) feet. 
c.  Minimum front yard setback: fifty (50) feet. 
d.  Minimum side yard setback: twenty (20) feet. 
e.  Minimum corner lot side yard setback: twenty (20) feet. 
f.  Minimum rear yard setback: twenty (20) feet. 
g.  Maximum height. The maximum height of the drystack boat storage shall be sixty-five (65) feet. The maximum height of all accessory buildings shall be fifty (50) feet in height. In order to increase the height of the principal structure the setback from the shoreline shall be increased one (1) foot for every two (2) feet in excess of sixty-five (65) feet or thirty (30) feet from shoreline, whichever is greater. 
h.  Minimum shoreline setback: thirty (30) feet. 
i.  Recommended minimum aisle width in the building. Any aisle providing direct access to a storage rack must have the following minimum width or be designed by a professional engineer or architect: 
Boat Length (in feet) Minimum Aisle 
Width (in feet) Up to 30 65 Up to 36 70 Up to 45 75  
(6)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided at the ratio of one (1) parking space per each six drystack storage racks, enclosed or open, and one parking space for each wet slip. The number of boat racks shall exclude racks used exclusively for washing and cleaning. Off-street parking is allowed in the minimum setback requirement but no closer than ten (10) feet to any property lines and thirty (30) feet to any shoreline. In addition, the development shall comply with article XVII of this chapter, pertaining to parking. 
(7)  Bufferyards, landscaping. Bufferyards/landscaping requirements shall be in compliance with article VII of this chapter. Drystack boat storage facilities shall be a classification V-high-impact recreational use. 
(8)  Lighting. All on-site lighting must be directed away from contiguous lots of record. Illumination of 15A NC Admin., code 7H, public trust areas shall be limited to dock/pier areas. 
(9)  Navigation. The location/operation of any drystack boat storage facility must not impede safe navigation of public trust waters. 
(10)  Access. All drystack boat storage facilities must have direct access to public rights-of-way designed to accommodate vehicular traffic. 
(11)  Drystack facility types. Open drystack boat storage facilities areas are allowed; provided, however, when a building elevation fronts on a dedicated street right-of-way, the front building elevation has to be enclosed or covered with appropriate building material. 
(12)  Exterior design: The buildings exterior shall be broken up by a variation in design, materials and/or color, as approved by the Planning Board. 
(13)  Adopted plans: The Board of Adjustment may provide additional requirements as it deems necessary in order to make the proposed project compatible with the city CAMA Core Land Use Plan, and the city comprehensive plan, or any other adopted plan regulating land uses. 
(qq)  Medical, dental and related office storage and warehouse. 
(1)  Site plan. A site plan shall be prepared by a licensed architect, engineer, or registered land surveyor and contain a metes and bounds description of the subject property. 
(2)  Approval: A site plan shall be prepared and approved in accordance with article XVII. Site plan review of this chapter. 
(3)  Location: The new building shall be located within one-half (1/2) mile of the Beaufort County Hospital. 
(4)  Exterior design: The exterior of the new building shall have a brick facade and be compatible with the surrounding structures. 
(rr)  Electronic gaming operations (aka internet sweepstakes operations). 
Definition-Any business enterprise, whether as a principal or accessory use, where persons utilize electronic machines, including but not limited to computers, handheld PDA's or gaming terminals, to conduct games of chance, including sweepstakes, and where cash, merchandise or other items of value are redeemed or otherwise distributed, whether or not the value of such distribution is predetermined by electronic games played or by predetermined odds. Electronic gaming operations may include, but are not limited to, internet cafes, internet sweepstakes, electronic gaming machines, or cyber-cafes. This does not include any lottery approved by the State of North Carolina or any nonprofit organization that is otherwise lawful under state law. 
(1)  Special use permit granted under this section shall be for a period of one (1) year and must be renewed annually. It shall be the responsibility of the owner/operator to make timely application for permit renewal. 
(2)  Hours of operation. The business shall only be allowed to operate on Monday through Saturday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight and on Sunday between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
(3)  Maximum number of machines/computers/terminals for any electronic gaming business is twenty (20). 
(4)  Machines/computers/terminals must not be prohibited by State or Federal law and must have all applicable permits and licenses. 
(5)  The business must be a minimum of two thousand five hundred (2,500) linear feet from any other electronic gaming operation. 
(6)  The business must be a minimum of two thousand five hundred (2,500) linear feet from any residential structure. 
(7)  The business must be a minimum of two thousand five hundred (2,500) linear feet from any church or religious institution, public or private school, daycare facility, playground or park. 
(ss)  Tattoo parlor. 
Definitions: 
    Tattoo means the inserting of permanent markings or coloration, or the producing of scars, upon or under human skin through puncturing by use of a needle or any other method. As defined by N.C.G.S. 180A-283. 
    Tattoo parlor means any location where tattooing is engaged in or where the business of tattooing is conducted or any part thereof. For purposes of this section, tattoo establishment or studio falls within this definition. 
(1)  Special use permit granted under this section shall be for a period of one (1) year and must be renewed annually. It shall be the responsibility of the owner/operator to make timely application for permit renewal. 
(2)  Hours of operation. The business shall only be allowed to operate on Monday through Saturday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. and on Sunday between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(3)  Business must obtain all applicable permits and licenses. 
(4)  The tattoo parlor must be a minimum of five hundred (500) linear feet from any other tattoo parlor. 
(5)  The tattoo parlor must be a minimum of five hundred (500) linear feet from any residential structure. 
(6)  The tattoo parlor must be a minimum of five hundred (500) linear feet from any church or religious institution, public or private school, daycare facility, playground or park. 
(7)  The tattoo parlor will not be allowed to serve alcoholic beverages or allow the consumption of any alcoholic beverages on site. 
(tt)  Commercial marina: 
Definition means a business adjacent and contiguous with public trust waters as defined by the Coastal Area Management Act under section 15A NC Admin., Code 7H, in which its primary use is to provide in-water docking and mooring of boats. 
(1)  Site plan. A site plan shall be prepared by a licensed architect or engineer and contain a metes and bounds description prepared by a licensed registered surveyor in the state. 
(2)  Approval. A site plan shall be prepared and approved in accordance with article XVIII of this chapter, pertaining to site plan review. 
(3)  Lot of record. Commercial marinas shall be limited to one (1) per lot. The lot of record on which such use is located must be at least one (1) acre in size and must be adjacent and contiguous with public trust waters as defined by the Coastal Area Management Act under section 15A NC Admin., Code 7H. 
(4)  Stormwater plan. A stormwater management plan is required and must comply with the city's stormwater management provisions and demonstrate specific design components intended to minimize impact on contiguous public trust waters and coastal wetlands, as defined by 15A NC Admin., Code 7H. 
(5)  Dimensional standards: 
1.  Lot size: Minimum of one (1) acre. 
2.  Minimum lot width: One hundred (100) feet. 
3.  Minimum front yard setback: Fifty (50) feet. 
4.  Minimum side yard setback: Twenty (20) feet. 
5.  Minimum corner yard setback: Twenty (20) feet. 
6.  Minimum rear yard setback: Twenty (20) feet. 
7.  Minimum shoreline setback: Fifty (50) feet. 
8.  Maximum height: The maximum height of any accessory structure shall be forty-five (45) feet. 
(6)  All Marinas shall provide pump out facilities. 
(7)  Boat ramps are permitted. 
(8)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided at the ratio of one (1) parking place per every six (6) wet boat mooring slips. Off-street parking is allowed in the minimum setback requirement but no closer than ten (10) feet to any property line and forty (40) feet to any shoreline. 
(9)  Bufferyards, landscaping. Bufferyards/landscaping requirements shall be in compliance with Article VII of this chapter. This use shall be classified as a V-high impact recreational use. 
(10)  Lighting. All on-site lighting must be directed away from contiguous lots of record. Illumination of 15A NC Admin., Code 7H, public trust areas shall be limited to dock/pier areas. 
(11)  Navigation. The location of any docks and piers must not impede safe navigation of public trust waters. 
(12)  Access. All marina facilities must have direct access to public rights-of-way designated to accommodate vehicular traffic. 
(13)  Adopted plans. The Board of Adjustment may provide additional requirements as it deems necessary in order to ensure the proposed project is compatible with the city CAMA Core Land Use Plan, and the city's comprehensive plan or any other adopted plans regulating uses. 
(uu)  Shelters for the victims of domestic violence. 
(1)  The minimum lot size shall be fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
(2)  No facility shall be located within one-half (1/2) mile (two thousand six hundred forty (2,640) feet) of any existing domestic violence shelter or shelter for the homeless, as measured from the nearest property line of the lot on which the proposed facility is to be located to the nearest lot line of an existing domestic violence shelter or shelter for the homeless. 
(3)  Maximum occupancy shall be in accordance with the North Carolina State Building Code or not more than one (1) person per each five hundred (500) square feet of total lot area, whichever is less. 
(4)  Continuous on-site supervision must be maintained during all hours of operation. 
(5)  The facility must be located within a building operated by a government agency or nonprofit organization. 
(vv)  Micro-brewery and micro-distillery as follows: 
(1)  Special use permit granted under this section shall be for a period of one (1) year and must be renewed annually. It shall be the responsibility of the owner/operator to make timely application for permit renewal. 
(2)  Required to include one (1) or more accessory uses such as tap room, restaurant, brewpub, tasting room or other accessory use incidental to the micro-brewery or micro-distillery, as the case may be, and open and accessible to the public. A minimum of five hundred (500) square feet shall be provided for a tap room or tasting room. 
(3)  A micro-brewery and a micro-distillery production area cannot exceed twelve thousand (12,000) square feet of gross floor area. Production areas adaptively reusing buildings within a National Register Historic District are exempt from size limitations for all portions of the building existing at the adoption this amendment. 
(4)  The use must be a minimum of fifty (50) linear feet from any structure utilized by any church or religious institution, public or private school, and daycare facility that is a conforming use. 
(5)  Adopted plans. The Board of Adjustment may provide additional requirements as it deems necessary in order to ensure the proposed project is compatible with the city CAMA Land Use Plan, and the city comprehensive plan or any other adopted plans regulating uses. 
(ww)  Shelters for homeless women and children. 
(1)  The minimum lot size shall be fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
(2)  No facility shall be located within one-half mile (2,640 feet) of any existing domestic violence shelter or shelter for the homeless, as measured from the nearest property line of the lot on which the proposed facility is to be located to the nearest lot line of an existing domestic violence shelter or shelter for the homeless. 
(3)  Size limits. The maximum number of clients permitted to be served (eating, showering or sleeping) nightly shall not exceed the total number of beds provided within the facility or one (1) person per one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet of floor area, whichever is less. 
(4)  Continuous on-site supervision must be maintained during all hours of operation. 
(5)  The facility must be located within a building operated by a government agency or nonprofit organization. 
(6)  Security plan. The security plan shall include provisions for onsite security including lighting, security cameras, and other measures appropriate to provide for adequate health and safety of clients and management and to aid in avoiding the potential for nuisances near the site. The operator shall also demonstrate that emergency service providers including the Police Department, Sheriff's Office, the local Fire Department and the appropriate EMS have been adequately notified and will provide services to the shelter. 
(7)  Length of stay. Individual occupancy is limited to six (6) or fewer consecutive months and shall not exceed three hundred (300) days within a 12-month period. 
(8)  Onsite waiting and intake areas. A minimum of five (5) percent of the total square footage of a homeless shelter shall be designated for indoor on-site waiting and client intake areas. 
(9)  Off-street parking shall be provided, in accordance with article XVIII, Parking. 
(Code 1993, § 27-49; Ord. No. 01-12, 10-8-2001; Ord. No. 03-03, 2-10-2003; Ord. No. 04-1, § 4, 1-12-2004; Ord. No. 07-01, § 4, 1-8-2007; Ord. No. 07-08, § 2, 10-8-2007; Ord. No. 10-10, § 3, 12-13-2010; Ord. No. 11-1, § 3, 2-14-2011; Ord. No. 11-5, § 3, 3-14-2011; Ord. No. 11-12, § 4, 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 14-7, § 5, 10-6-2014; Ord. No. 17-1, § 4, 3-13-2017; Ord. No. 17-5, § 5, 12-11-2017) 
Secs. 40-121-40-138. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS, MODIFICATIONS, AND SPECIAL STANDARDS 

Sec. 40-139. - Applicability. 
    Unless otherwise provided in these regulations, the minimum standards and requirements established in this article shall apply to all uses. See also article V of this chapter, pertaining to standards and criteria for special uses. 
(Code 1993, § 27-50) 
Sec. 40-140. - Schedule of dimensional standards by zoning district. 
    The following is a schedule of dimensional standards by zoning districts: 
(a)  The schedule of dimensional standards for residential districts is as follows: 
Dimensional Standards-Residential District RA20 R15S R9S R6S RMF RMH RHD Lot Min. size, single-family (sq. ft.) 20,000 15,000 9,000 6,000 6,000 5,000 6,000 Min. size, two-family attached (sq. ft.) 9,000 9,000 9,000 Min. size, multifamily (sq. ft.) Per art. XI Per art. XI Per art. XI Min. size, if water and sewer are available (sq. ft.) 10,000 10,000 9,000 6,000 6,000 5,000 6,000 Min. width, single-family (ft.) 100 80 70 60 60 50 60 Min. width, two-family attached (ft.) 80 80 80 Min. width, multifamily (ft.) Per art. XI Per art. XI Per art. XI Min. front yard setback (ft.) 40 30 25 25 30 40* 20 Min. side yard setback (ft.) 15 10 10 8 8 8 8** Min. corner lot side yard setback (ft.) 25 20 20 20 20 20 20 Min. rear yard setback (ft.) 30 30 20 15 15 8** 15** Building Max. height (ft.) 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 Max. coverage (pct. of lot) 40 40 40 40 50 40 50 *A twenty-foot setback is required, if a lot fronts on a private street. ** Where stricter, bufferyard requirements shall prevail.  
(b)  The schedule of dimensional standards for institutional and commercial districts is as follows: 
Dimensional Standards-Institutional and Commercial Districts O & I B1H B2 B3 B4 Lot Min. size (sq. ft.) 7,500 20,000 10,000 6,000 Min. size, two-family attached (sq. ft.) Min. size, multifamily (sq. ft.) Per art. XI Min. size, if water and sewer are available (sq. ft.) 7,500 20,000 10,000 6,000 Min. width, single-family, two-family attached (ft.) 60 30* 100 100 60 Min. width multifamily (ft.) Per art. XI Min. front yard setback (ft.) 30 50 50 25 Min. side yard setback (ft.) 8** *** 20 10 *** Min. corner lot side yard setback (ft.) 15 25 25 25 Min. rear yard setback (ft.) 15 *** 20 20 10 Building    Max. height (ft.) 96 96 **** **** 50**    Max. coverage (pct. of lot) 40 40 *This requirement applies only for lots which have never been built upon, as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Lots upon which buildings have been built will not have to meet this requirement. **Where stricter, bufferyard requirements shall prevail. ***No set back required unless abutting residential district, then ten-foot setback required. ****Buildings over fifty (50) feet in height must be set back from the front lot line one (1) foot for every two (2) feet in excess of fifty (50) feet in height.  
(c)  Schedule of dimensional standards for industrial districts. 
(1)  The following table specifies dimensional standards for lots and buildings in the industrial district: 
Dimensional Standards-Industrial Districts I1 I2 AP CP Lot Min. size (sq. ft.) 20,000 20,000 217,800 217,800 Min. size, if water and sewer are available (sq. ft.) 20,000 20,000 217,800 217,800 Additional area, per additional unit (sq. ft.) n/a Min. width 100 100 100 150 Min. width, per additional unit (ft.) n/a Min. front yard setback (ft.) 25* 25* 150 30(A) Min. side yard setback (ft.) * * 100** 15(B) Min. corner lot side yard setback (ft.) 25* 25* 100 30(A) Min. rear yard setback (ft.) * * 25 25 Building Max. height (ft.) *** *** 50(C) Max. coverage (pct. of lot) 60 60 45% *A fifty-foot setback is required for a lot abutting a residential district or a public street or waterway separating the lot from a residential district. **Where stricter, bufferyard requirements shall prevail. *** Buildings over fifty (50) feet in height must be set back from the front lot line one (1) foot for every two (2) feet in excess of fifty (50) feet in height.  
(2)  The following table specifies dimensional standards for road setbacks, in feet, in the industrial district: 
Collector, subcollector setbacks 55 ft. Minor thoroughfare 60 ft. Major thoroughfare 70 ft. Minor interior setbacks Adjacent to nonresidential zoning 20 ft. Adjacent to residential zoning 50 ft. Note: Maximum height with/without additional setbacks. Increase all setbacks by one (1) foot for every one (1) foot in height between fifty (50) and eighty (80) feet, but not for additional height beyond eighty (80) feet.  
(Code 1993, § 27-51; Ord. No. 04-1, § 5, 1-12-2004) 
Sec. 40-141. - Measuring setbacks. 
(a)  Corner lot side yard and street setbacks represent the minimum distance required between the nearest exterior finished wall of all structures and any adjacent street right-of-way line. 
(b)  Front, side, and rear setbacks represent the minimum distance required between the nearest exterior finished wall of all structures and the adjacent front, side, or rear property lines. 
(c)  Setbacks from the principal building represent the minimum distance required between the nearest exterior finished wall of an accessory building and the nearest exterior finished wall of the principal structure on the lot. 
(Code 1993, § 27-52) 
Sec. 40-142. - Lot frontage requirements. 
(a)  Conformance to dimensional requirements. Unless otherwise provided, no principal and/or accessory building, structure, or use shall be erected, expanded, enlarged, increased, or initiated on any lot that does not abut a public street with a right-of-way in conformity with city dimensional requirements, as defined in section 40-140, and as set out in chapter 34, pertaining to subdivisions, or within any Planned Unit Development (PUD) District where such minimum lot frontage distance shall not be less than the minimum driveway standards applicable to the particular use in accordance with the Manual of Standard Designs and Details and article VII of this chapter, pertaining to bufferyards and landscaping requirements. The minimum distance shall be measured along the right-of-way line of the public street. 
(b)  Unimproved and/or unaccepted street exemption. A permit may be issued for improvement, construction, or use on a lot that abuts a dedicated street for the minimum distance which is an unimproved and/or unaccepted street, provided such street meets the applicable dimensional requirements of chapter 34, pertaining to subdivisions. 
(c)  Single-family exemption. A single-family dwelling may be constructed on a lot that does not abut a public street, provided such lot is at least two (2) acres in size and is provided with direct access to a public street by an easement created for the exclusive use of such dwelling. Any easement created pursuant to this exemption shall be at least forty (40) feet in width and shall not exceed three hundred (300) feet in length. Otherwise, streets must meet the requirements of subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Planned unit development and multifamily development exemption. A permit for construction or use within any Planned Unit Development or multifamily development may be allowed on a lot that does not abut a public street, provided such development is platted pursuant to chapter 34, pertaining to subdivisions; and where the original development tract or lot met the minimum lot frontage requirement and the resulting lots are provided direct access to a public street across common property or an approved private street perpetually maintained for such purposes. 
(e)  Office, commercial, and industrial exemption. A permit for construction or use within any office, commercial, and industrial development may be allowed on a lot that does not abut a public street, provided such development is platted pursuant to chapter 34, pertaining to subdivisions; and where the original development tract or lot met the minimum lot frontage requirement and the resulting lots are provided direct access to a public street across common property or a recorded access easement perpetually maintained for such purposes. 
(f)  Location. All portions of each building erected in accordance with this section shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of an approved public or private street. 
(Code 1993, § 27-53) 
Sec. 40-143. - Airport zoning; height restrictions. 
    All uses, including those listed under section 40-144, shall be limited to the height and locational standards and requirements established under article IX of this chapter, pertaining to airport zoning. 
(Code 1993, § 27-54) 
Sec. 40-144. - Height exemptions. 
(a)  The height limits of these regulations shall not apply to a church spire, belfry, cupola, or dome; an ornamental tower not intended for human occupancy; a conveyor; or a parapet wall not extended for more than three (3) feet above the roof line of the building. Where more restrictive, airport height limits shall take precedent over the requirements of this section. 
(b)  The height of the following freestanding structures may exceed the height limits of the district, provided that the public street, side, and rear setbacks are increased one (1) foot for every one (1) foot or fraction thereof in height above the district maximum. Where more restrictive, airport height limits shall take precedence over the requirements of this section. 
(1)  Monuments. 
(2)  Water towers. 
(3)  Observation towers. 
(4)  Chimneys or smokestacks. 
(5)  Flagpoles. 
(6)  Masts or aerials. 
(7)  Stadiums. 
(Code 1993, § 27-55) 
Sec. 40-145. - Visibility at intersections. 
    Visibility at intersections shall be reserved in accordance with the sight distance standards and requirements of the city and as provided by notation or description upon any map recorded, pursuant to chapter 34, pertaining to subdivisions. Within such sight distance area, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, grown, or constructed to exceed a height of twenty-four (24) inches above the centerline grade of the adjacent street intersection. 
(Code 1993, § 27-56) 
Sec. 40-146. - Residential accessory structure and building standards. 
    The following standards for residential accessory structures and buildings are listed as follows: 
(a)  Residential, detached accessory. 
(1)  Location. Residential detached accessory structures and buildings may be located only in the rear yard, not in any side or front yard. 
(2)  Setbacks. Standards for setbacks, rear and side yards: 
a.  Not less than the principal building setback for the district, except as provided under subsection (1)b2 of this section. 
b.  Structures or buildings not exceeding fifteen (15) feet in height shall be set back not less than five (5) feet, pursuant to article VII of this chapter, pertaining to bufferyards and landscaping requirements. Minimum corner lot side yard setbacks for the district shall apply for all corner lots. Minimum front yard setbacks shall apply for all double frontage lots. 
(3)  Setback from principal building. Residential detached accessory structures and buildings must be a minimum distance of eight (8) feet from the principal structure. 
(4)  Height. Residential detached accessory structures and buildings shall not exceed the height of the existing principal building or district maximum height whichever is less. 
(5)  Building footprint. The total building footprint area of all accessory buildings on a lot shall be no greater than eighty (80) percent of the gross floor area of the principal building. 
(b)  Residential; attached accessory. The location, setback, and height shall be in accordance with the district standards established for the principal building unless otherwise provided. 
(c)  List of accessory structures or buildings. Residential accessory structures and buildings may include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Fallout shelter. 
(2)  Garage. 
(3)  Greenhouse. 
(4)  Playhouse. 
(5)  Pumphouse. 
(6)  Storage shed. 
(7)  Toolshed. 
(8)  Swimming pool. 
(9)  Workshop. 
(10)  Dog pen. 
(11)  Satellite dish. 
(d)  Special requirements. Special requirements for certain accessory structures or buildings. 
(1)  Swimming pools. Pools permanently or semipermanently constructed below grade and which exceed forty (40) square feet in water surface area shall be protected by a five-foot or higher fence containing a latching gate to keep children and animals from having unsupervised access. 
(2)  Satellite dishes. 
a.  Satellite dishes may be located in rear yards or on the rear portion of the roof of a principal building. 
b.  Satellite dishes may be located in a side yard, if a variance is granted by the Board of Adjustment. In no case may a satellite dish be located in a front yard. No satellite dish can be constructed that would cause a sight obstruction. 
c.  All satellite dishes that are proposed to be located in the Historic District must be approved by the Historic Preservation Commission before installation. 
d.  A satellite television antenna shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in diameter and a ground-mount satellite television antenna shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height, including any platform or structure upon which said antenna is mounted or affixed. 
e.  There shall be no more than one (1) dish per dwelling unit in the case of a single-family-, condominium-, or townhouse-type development. There shall be no more than one (1) dish per building in the case of multifamily (rental) type housing. 
(3)  Stables and/or kennels. Stables and/or kennels: 
a.  Shall be erected no closer than one hundred (100) feet to any existing dwelling or residential district. 
b.  Shall meet the minimum dimensional standards and setbacks within the applicable district, except as provided under subsection (4)c1 of this section. 
(e)  Mobile homes, campers, office trailers, etc. Mobile homes, campers, office trailers and other manufactured homes are not allowed to be placed or installed as an accessory building. 
(Code 1993, § 27-57; Ord. No. 98-22, 12-14-1998; Ord. No. 00-13, 9-11-2000) 
Sec. 40-147. - Commercial, industrial, and office accessory structure and building standards. 
    The location, setback, and height of any commercial, industrial, or office accessory structure or building shall be in accordance with the district minimum established for the principal use and the bufferyard regulations. 
(Code 1993, § 27-58) 
Sec. 40-148. - Projections into required yards. 
(a)  The following structures are permitted in required setbacks, provided that compliance is maintained with the street visibility standards of the city: 
(1)  Landscaping features, including, but not limited to, ornamental pools, planting boxes, sculpture, arbors, trellises, and birdbaths. 
(2)  Pet shelters; at-grade patios; play equipment; outdoor furniture; ornamental entry columns and gates; flagpoles; lampposts; address posts; equipment; mailboxes; outdoor fireplaces; public utility lines, poles, pumps, and boxes; wells; fences or retaining walls subject to the requirements of subsection (b) of this section, or similar structures. 
(3)  Handicap ramps, except for porches and landings. 
(4)  Steps not connected to any above-grade structure. 
(b)  The following attached structures will be permitted to project into the specified yard for the following distance: 
(1)  The minimum required yard depths in all residential districts shall not apply to any lot in any block where lots comprising fifty (50) percent or more of the frontage on any one (1) side of the street within the block have been developed with a variation in depth of not more than eight (8) feet. In such cases, no building hereafter erected, moved, or structurally altered shall project beyond the average front yard depth so established; provided that this regulation shall not be construed as to require a front yard greater in depth than the minimum front yard setback required in the applicable district; provided, further, that no front yard depth need exceed the average of that provided for the two (2) adjoining buildings, one (1) on either side thereof, if such buildings are less than two hundred (200) feet apart, except no proposed building less than twenty (20) feet from any street line shall be permitted by this section. 
(2)  Cornices, overhanging eaves and gutters, windowsills, bay windows, or similar architectural features, chimneys and fireplaces, fire escapes, fire balconies, fire towers, open unenclosed stoops, open unenclosed decks, and open unenclosed steps may project no more than two and one-half (2 1/2) feet into any required yard, but in no case closer than three (3) feet to any property line or in compliance with state building codes. 
(3)  Open unenclosed porches, excluding screened or glassed, may project no more than five (5) feet into a front or rear yard; provided such porch does not exceed thirty-five (35) square feet in surface area. 
(4)  Open unenclosed carports which are attached to and part of the principal structure and which are unenclosed on all exterior sides, except for necessary supports, may project into interior side or rear yards but shall be no closer than fifteen (15) feet to a side or rear yard adjoining a street right-of-way and no closer than five (5) feet to a side or rear property line. 
(5)  Gas pump islands can project into any yard in accordance with the bufferyard regulations, however, no gas pump island shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to a street right-of-way line. 
(6)  Canopies and awnings can project into any yard in accordance with the bufferyard regulations or the following requirements, whichever is greater: 
a.  B1H district: not closer than five (5) feet to any street right-of-way. 
b.  All other nonresidential districts: not closer than ten (10) feet to any street right-of-way. 
c.  All residential districts: five (5) feet into any yard. 
(Code 1993, § 27-59; Ord. No. 98-21, 11-9-1998; Ord. No. 05-5, § 1, 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-149. - Special standards for certain permitted uses. 
(a)  Temporary uses. 
(1)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to recognize that there is a need for special allowances to be granted to certain temporary uses so that they may be permitted within the community. Because of the special problems related to temporary uses it is also necessary to provide specific, separate, and distinct guidelines and standards for them. It is the express intent of these provisions to minimize any potential adverse impact of such temporary uses by eliminating, to the greatest possible extent, any major problems, threats, or dangers to the public health, safety, or welfare as may exist with any or all of these temporary uses. 
(2)  Permitted temporary uses. Temporary uses shall be limited to a use of land, buildings, or structures not intended to be of a permanent duration. Such uses shall be limited to the following: 
a.  Circuses and/or carnivals. 
b.  Evangelistic and religious events. 
c.  Outdoor bazaars, cookouts and/or similar activities by churches or other nonprofit institutions or organizations. 
d.  Open lot sales area for farm produce made or grown by the farm producer or immediate family. 
e.  Open lot sales area for Christmas trees or special fund raising sales for nonprofit organizations. 
f.  Contractors' offices and/or construction sheds including mobile offices for displaces or contractors during construction on the site. 
g.  Temporary real estate offices. 
h.  Temporary special sales or flea markets in commercial or industrial districts, occasional sidewalk or parking lot sales. 
i.  Yard sales conducted outdoors by a resident in their respective yard area. 
j.  Other temporary recreational or entertainment related events or activities such as fairs or concerts. Itinerant merchants, as defined in section 16-140, shall not be considered a temporary use pursuant to this section. Itinerant merchants shall be subject to the regulations and permit requirements of chapter 16, article V, rather than the requirements of this article. 
(3)  Permit required. Any person desiring to conduct a permitted temporary use, as defined in subsection (2) of this section, must first obtain a permit from the Department of Planning and Development. Such permit will establish the requirements for the particular uses set out in subsection (3)d of this section. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of this permit is to ensure that a temporary use meets the requirements set out herein and to coordinate traffic, parking, and other inspections necessary to the safe and healthful operation of the event. 
b.  Application. Application for a temporary use permit shall be made to the Director of Planning and Development, on a form furnished by the Department of Planning and Development, at least five (5) working days prior to the start of the event. 
c.  Requirements for permit issuance. A temporary use permit shall not be issued until evidence is shown that the following requirements have been or will be complied with: 
1.  The temporary use is permitted under subsection (2) of this section. 
2.  Ample parking is provided for the temporary event, in addition to required parking for any permanent use located at the event site. 
3.  Written authorization is given from the property owner or his agent for the event to take place. 
4.  Any event held outside of a building and within five hundred (500) feet of any residence shall cease operation by 10:00 p.m. 
5.  Noise shall be controlled so no adjoining property owner or occupant is unduly disturbed by the event. 
d.  Additional conditions or requirement. The following additional conditions or requirements shall apply for each permitted temporary use: 
Use Maximum 
Duration 
(per separate 
event per site) Maximum 
Frequency of 
Event 
(per person per site) Permitted 
Districts Circuses or carnivals 14 days/year 1 per year II Evangelistic and religious events (held inside fire-retardant tent only) 14 days 1 per 3 months B1, B2, I1, I2 Outdoor bazaars 3 days 2 per year All zones (see note) Open lot farm produce sales: grown on-premises Annual renewal None All zones Open lot farm produce sales: grown off-premises Annual renewal None All nonresidential zones Christmas tree sales 45 days 1 per year All zones Special fundraising sales for nonprofit organizations 3 days 1 per month All zones Construction offices during on-site construction During construction period, annual renewal is required None All zones Temporary real estate office 1 year, annual renewal required None All residential zones Fairs or other special recreational or entertainment events 1 day, except 14 days for annual events 1 per month for 1 day events; 1 per year for 14 day events I1 Special sales or temporary flea markets 14 days 2 per year B1, B2, I1, I2 Note- No temporary tents or similar structures are allowed in the primary fire district as identified in section 6-5.  
(b)  Home occupations. 
(1)  Home occupations, as defined in article II of this chapter, may be permitted only under the following conditions: 
a.  Home occupations shall only be permitted in single-family dwelling units. 
b.  Home occupations shall constitute an accessory use to the principal use. 
c.  Home occupations shall not occupy more than one-third (1/3) of the total area of the principal use dwelling, and in no event occupy more than five hundred (500) square feet of floor area. 
d.  Home occupations shall not employ more than one (1) person other than those persons legally residing within the principal use dwelling. 
e.  Home occupations shall not be visible from any public right-of-way or adjacent property line. 
f.  Home occupations shall not involve any outside storage of related materials, parts, or supplies. 
g.  Home occupations shall have signage in accordance with article XVI of this chapter, pertaining to signs. 
h.  Home occupations shall not create any hazard or nuisance to the occupants residing or working within the principal use dwelling or to area residents or properties. 
i.  Home occupations shall not involve any external structural alterations which are not customary in residential buildings. 
j.  The sale of articles produced elsewhere than within the dwelling shall not be permitted. 
k.  Home occupations shall not be permitted within accessory structures or buildings. 
(2)  Permit required. Any person desiring to conduct a permitted home occupation, as defined in section 40-25, must first obtain a permit from the Department of Planning and Development. Such permit will establish the requirements for the particular uses set out in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of this permit is to ensure that a home occupation meets the requirements set out herein. 
b.  Application. Application for a home occupation permit shall be made to the Director of Planning and Development, on a form furnished by the Department of Planning and Development. 
c.  Requirements for permit issuance. A home occupation permit shall not be issued until evidence is shown that the following requirements have been or will be complied with. 
1.  The home occupation meets the requirements of subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
2.  Ample parking is provided for the home occupation, in addition to required parking for any permanent use located at the site. 
3.  Noise shall be controlled so no adjoining property owner or occupant is unduly disturbed by the home occupation. 
(c)  Schools, public and private. Public and private schools: 
(1)  Shall be subject to the bufferyard regulations, however, no principal or accessory building shall be located within fifty (50) feet of any adjoining property or public street right-of-way line. 
(2)  The minimum lot size shall be three (3) acres. 
(3)  The bufferyard and lot size requirements shall not apply to schools in the B1H zone. 
(4)  In the B1H zone, student drop-off area shall be provided, with stacking arrangement for cars before the drop-off space. Traffic shall not be completely blocked in either direction by cars stacked for dropoff. 
(d)  Municipal government building, uses. Municipal government building or use, including police and fire stations, libraries, and public parks or athletic fields: When municipal buildings, parks, or other recreational areas to be used for athletic events or night programs are located in a residential zone or adjoining a lot containing a permitted residential use, a public hearing shall be properly advertised and conducted before the City Council for the purposes of hearing and considering any comments by the public as to the location under consideration. 
(e)  Family care home. No family care home shall be permitted within a one-half (1/2) mile, two thousand six hundred forty (2,640) feet, radius of an existing family care home as measured from the nearest lot line of the proposed family care home to the nearest lot line of an existing family care home. 
(f)  Bona fide farms. 
(1)  Buildings and structures shall meet the minimum standards for the applicable district. Bona fide farm buildings and structures located in a residential district shall meet applicable single-family dwelling standards. 
(2)  Agricultural cultivation shall be exempt from any required setbacks, provided no structures are required or utilized within the setbacks listed under subsection (f)(1) of this section. 
(3)  Bufferyard vegetation standards shall not apply to any bona fide farm. 
(g)  Condominium-type (unit ownership) and townhouse-type development. 
(1)  Attached residential and nonresidential units constructed for individual owner occupancy shall be subject to the following: 
a.  Interior units of each structure may be constructed on common property lines (zero (0) lot line setbacks) provided the overall structure meets the front, side, and rear setbacks for the applicable use and district. If there is an offset of the wall from the interior common lot line, such offset shall be set back not less than five (5) feet. 
b.  No two (2) units shall be considered attached unless such units share a common five-foot party wall. 
c.  Common party walls shall be constructed in accordance with the state building code, G.S. chapter 47C (G.S. 47C-1-101 et seq.) (North Carolina Condominium Act) and other applicable requirements. 
d.  The overall density of the development shall be no greater than that permitted by applicable district requirements. 
e.  The maximum lot coverage for the district shall apply to the development. 
f.  Buildings, units, or lots separated by a public street right-of-way shall be considered individually for compliance under subsection (g)(1)d and e of this section. 
g.  In the case of staggered or extended common property line walls, a five (5) foot maintenance and access easement with a maximum two (2) foot eave encroachment easement within the maintenance easement shall be established on either end of the building and shall ensure ready access to both ends of the building wall for normal maintenance. The designated common area which provides such access shall meet the requirements of this section. 
h.  The minimum lot width of each townhouse lot shall be no less than sixteen (16) feet, provided that when the lot is combined with other contiguous lots within the development the combined lot widths are equal to or exceed the minimum lot width of the applicable district for the particular use. 
i.  All development regulated in accordance with this section shall be subject to the requirements, conditions, and restrictions of the subdivision regulations. 
(h)  Marinas. All marinas, as defined in article II, located within the jurisdiction of this chapter, whether they are permitted uses, special uses, or otherwise, shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Marinas shall be limited to one (1) per lot, regardless of the number of dwellings or commercial units located on such lot, and must comply in all respects with the standard and intent of the Coastal Area Management Act. 
(2)  Marinas shall not interfere with the access to any adjacent property and shall have a minimum setback of fifteen (15) feet from property lines. The minimum setback may be waived by the Board of Adjustment, if the affected property owner consents in writing to the waiver. 
(3)  Marinas shall provide pumpout facilities. This requirement may be waived by the Director of Planning and Development if a marina will not accommodate boats with heads or wastewater storage tanks. 
(4)  All marinas shall provide off-street parking as follows: 
a.  If associated with residential or preexisting development, one-half (1/2) space per slip/mooring, plus the spaces required by the associated development, as listed in article XVII of this chapter. 
b.  If associated with or developed as a business, according to the spaces required for marinas in article XVII of this chapter, in addition to any spaces required for the adjoining business. 
(5)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Basin means a facility for the harboring of boats, the construction of which involves the extraction of natural materials. 
    Dock means a wharf, pier, or platform containing spaces or slips designed for the docking of boats and accommodating boarding access to floating boats from one (1) or both sides of the boat. 
    Permanent mooring means a fixture in the river bottom such as mooring poles or buoys to which boats tie for locational stability. 
    Wet boat storage means facilities for holding unoccupied vessels in water, including permanent moorings. 
(i)  Boardinghouses and roominghouses. As defined in article II of this chapter, boardinghouses and roominghouses must meet all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The total number of unrelated occupants, in addition to the resident family, to which space is let shall not exceed four (4) persons. 
(2)  The minimum lot size shall be nine thousand (9,000) square feet. 
(3)  No boardinghouse or roominghouse shall be located within a four hundred-foot radius of another boardinghouse or roominghouse. 
(4)  One (1) parking space must be provided for each tenant, in addition to required spaces for the resident family. 
(5)  No more than two (2) required parking spaces may be located in the front yard; additional parking is to be located in the rear yard, and shall be no closer than five (5) feet to the property line. The five-foot buffer is to be used as a planting area for evergreen plant material to be located on three-foot centers to reach a height of at least four (4) feet in three (3) years. 
(6)  The driveway and the parking area is to be constructed with hard surface all-weather material such as asphalt, concrete, brick, CABC, or any other approved material. Grass and bare earth material are not acceptable. 
(7)  The total amount of land devoted to structures and parking shall not exceed sixty (60) percent of the total lot area. 
(8)  The use shall be considered an accessory use within an owner-occupied, single-family dwelling. 
(9)  In the event a single-family dwelling has been converted to a roominghouse or boardinghouse without prior approval from the city, the following procedures shall be followed: 
a.  The city will notify the owner of the violation. 
b.  Upon notification by the city, the owner will have six (6) months to be in compliance with the requirements or discontinue the use of the building. 
c.  If the owner disagrees with the ruling, they may appeal the decision to the Board of Adjustment. 
(j)  Agricultural production (livestock), animal feeder/breeder, animal services (livestock), animal services (other). Hog and poultry production is specifically prohibited. 
(k)  Minor automobile repair services. 
(1)  All wrecked or damaged motor vehicles and parts shall be screened by an opaque fence of uniform construction, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, and with a bufferyard of greater intensity, as required by the bufferyard regulations, as not to be visible from adjoining property lines and street rights-of-way. 
(2)  All vehicles on the premises for repair shall be stored at the rear of the principal structure. 
(3)  No vehicle shall be stored on the premises for more than fifteen (15) days. 
(4)  There shall be no exterior storage of items other than vehicles. No vehicles shall be stored within ten (10) feet of any street right-of-way. 
(5)  There shall be no sale of vehicles. 
(6)  Rental or utility trailers, cars, and trucks shall be permitted as accessory uses provided that all units in excess of four (4) shall be screened from adjoining street rights-of-way and property lines by an opaque fence of uniform construction, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, and with a bufferyard of greater intensity as required by the bufferyard regulations. 
(7)  Outdoor displays of products such as tires, oil, wiper blades, or other similar products shall be permitted provided they are within ten (10) feet of the principal structure and outside required bufferyards. Signage displayed in conjunction with such display shall be in accordance with the sign regulations. 
(8)  All services, except fuel sales and services related to fuel sales, such as window washing and oil checks, shall be performed within a completely enclosed building. 
(l)  Churches. 
(1)  Minimum lot requirement shall be sixty thousand (60,000) square feet. 
(2)  Not less than fifty (50) percent of available parking must be provided on site. 
(m)  Noncommercial parks and recreational facilities in the airport zoning classification. 
(1)  Minimum lot size shall be forty (40) acres. 
(2)  Minimum frontage adjacent to a dedicated and accepted street shall be five hundred (500) linear feet. 
(3)  Berms may be constructed parallel to street rights-of-way. 
(4)  Restroom facilities shall be installed and connected to municipal water and sewer lines. 
(n)  Manufactured home sales. 
(1)  A site plan shall be submitted showing office building, accessory buildings, parking, general and service driveways, bufferyards, including landscaping, and the location and orientation of the mobile home display area. 
(2)  Setbacks for homes on display shall meet building setback requirements for the zone in which the lot is located. 
(3)  All display homes located adjacent to public streets shall be skirted. 
(4)  Bufferyard E shall be installed where side and rear lot lines are adjacent to classifications I and II land uses or residentially zoned vacant land. Bufferyard D shall be installed where side and rear lot lines are adjacent to classifications III, IV, or V land uses or nonresidentially zoned vacant land. Along public streets, bufferyard A shall be installed, except no bufferyard width shall be less than six (6) feet. 
a.  Bufferyard width may not be reduced by using fencing option. 
b.  If the fencing option is used to reduce bufferyard vegetation, the fence shall face the adjoining property and the vegetation shall be installed along the outer perimeter of the fence. Acceptable fence materials include cedar, masonry, or pressure treated lumber resistant to rot. 
c.  Preference shall be given to trees or shrubs which grow to at least eight (8) feet tall. 
(5)  All mobile home sales businesses not in compliance with these standards shall become nonconforming in all districts as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived and shall be brought into compliance or removed within five (5) years after the date of adoption. 
(o)  Public school maintenance facilities in residential zoning districts. 
(1)  Minimum lot size: twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(2)  External peripheral yard setback: fifty (50) feet. 
(3)  Operation of the facility is Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m., or when emergency situations arise, i.e., hurricanes/tornadoes. 
(4)  No outside storage of materials shall be permitted. 
(p)  Mixed Uses Development in an Industrial District. 
(1)  Conversion of existing buildings are allowed provided the property is located in a local, state or national Register of Historic Places or within two hundred (200) feet of a local historic district. 
(2)  All permitted and special uses listed in section 40-93 are allowed under the zoning district classifications I1 and I2. In addition, multifamily development is allowed provided the development standards for the industrial mixed use classification can be met, as provided in this section. 
(3)  Development standards in the mixed use classification are subject to the following development standards: 
a.  Minimum lot area: one thousand (1,000) square feet per unit or eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet per lot. 
b.  Minimum lot width: seventy-five (75) feet. 
c.  Minimum side and rear yard setbacks are to be determined by the state building code. 
d.  Minimum front yard setback: This distance is to be determined by the average of the existing structures located in the same block where the building is to be located. 
e.  Parking: Article XVII of this chapter, pertaining to parking, shall apply. Parking for residential uses for this mixed use classification shall be one (1) off-street parking space for each bedroom. 
f.  Landscaping along street frontage is required. A combination of fencing, shrubs and trees shall be installed on the land. One (1) tree shall be installed per unit. Shrubs may be substituted for tree at a ratio of four (4) shrubs for each tree. Ground cover (plant material) may be substituted for grass. 
g.  The site plan shall be approved by the Planning Board prior to the building permit being issued. The site plan shall be prepared by a registered architect or engineer and drawn to scale. The site plan shall consist of the front, side and rear elevations of the building including landscaping and off-street parking. 
(q)  Automotive parking lots at grade level in the residential historic district. 
(1)  Vacant lots in residential districts cannot be used in connection or associated with commercial or industrial permitted or special uses. 
(2)  When parking lots are developed in conjunction with a permitted or a special use in the Residential Historic District (RHD), screening material in the form of a berm, fencing, and landscaping shall be constructed in accordance with article VII of this chapter, pertaining to bufferyard landscaping requirements. 
(3)  A front yard setback of ten (10) feet shall be created along the front of the parking lot and shall be maintained as open space planted with trees, shrubs, and ground cover. 
(4)  Driveways to the parking lot entrances and exists shall be constructed of concrete material along with curbing and guttering. The new curb section shall be constructed adjacent to the right-of-way line of the property. 
(r)  Light industrial uses in the B2 General Business District. 
(1)  Conversion of existing buildings in the B2 General Business District is allowed for light industrial uses. 
(2)  All permitted and special uses listed in section 40-93, allowed under the zoning district I2 (Light Industrial District), are allowed for these converted existing buildings in the B2 General Business District. 
(3)  Developmental standards for light industrial uses in the B2 General Business District are as follows: 
a.  Minimum lot area: five (5) acres. 
b.  Minimum lot width: two hundred (200) feet. 
c.  Minimum front yard setback: fifty (50) feet. 
d.  Minimum side yard setback: twenty (20) feet. 
e.  Minimum corner lot setback: twenty-five (25) feet. 
f.  Minimum rear yard setback: twenty (20) feet. 
g.  Minimum square footage of an existing building: thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. 
h.  Maximum height: fifty (50) feet. 
i.  All outside storage material shall be located at the rear of the principal building in an enclosed structure. 
j.  Bufferyards and landscaping requirements shall be met in accordance with article VII of this chapter. 
k.  Parking requirements shall be met in accordance with article XVII of this chapter. 
(s)  Forest regulations. A city shall not adopt or enforce any ordinance, rule, regulation, or resolution that regulates either: 
(1)  Forestry activity on forestland that is taxed on the basis of its present-use value as forestland under article 12 of chapter 105 of the General Statutes (G.S. ch. 105, art. 12). 
(2)  Forestry activity that is conducted in accordance with a forest management plan that is prepared or approved by a forester registered in accordance with Chapter 89B of the General Statutes (G.S. ch. 89B). 
(3)  This section shall not be construed to limit, expand, or otherwise alter the authority of a city to regulate activity associated with development. A city may deny a building permit or refuse to approve a site or subdivision plan for either a period of up to: 
a.  Three years after the completion of a timber harvest, if the harvest results in the removal of all or substantially all of the trees that were protected under city regulations governing development from the tract of land for which the permit or approval is sought. 
b.  Five years after the completion of a timber harvest, if the harvest results in the removal of all or substantially all of the trees that were protected under city regulations governing development from the tract of land for which the permit or approval is sought and the harvest was a willful violation of the city regulations. 
(4)  Regulate trees pursuant to any local act of the General Assembly. 
(5)  Adopt ordinances that are necessary to comply with any federal or state law, regulation, or rule. 
(6)  Exercise its planning or zoning authority under this article. 
(7)  Regulate and protect streets under chapter 32, pertaining to streets and sidewalks. 
(Code 1993, § 27-61; Ord. No. 98-3, 2-9-1998; Ord. No. 99-1, 1-11-1999; Ord. No. 99-2, 6-14-1999; Ord. No. 99-13, 10-11-1999; Ord. No. 00-3, 2-14-2000; Ord. No. 00-14, 9-11-2000; Ord. No. 01-4, 5-14-2001; Ord. No. 01-14, 10-8-2001; Ord. No. 02-23, 11-11-2002; Ord. No. 06-02, § 14, 2-13-2006) 
Secs. 40-150-40-166. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BUFFERYARD LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 40-167. - General. 
(a)  Purpose. Bufferyards are a combination of land and physical barriers such as fencing, plant material, and earthen berms which separate various land uses and street rights-of-way. Their purpose is to create a better quality of living for the community by encouraging the preservation of existing vegetation and stabilizing the environment's ecological balance; to establish proper separation between land uses; to provide flexibility in developing appropriate separation between land uses; and to help reduce the negative impact of glare, noise, trash mitigation, odors, overcrowding, traffic, lack of privacy, and visual blight when incompatible land uses adjoin one another. 
(b)  Exceptions. The provisions contained in the bufferyard requirements shall not apply to those uses located within the B1H Zoning District. 
(c)  Steps for determination. To determine the bufferyard required by this article, the following steps should be taken: 
(1)  Identify the classification of the proposed land use and any adjacent land use listed in section 40-169, pertaining to the bufferyard use classification list. 
(2)  Use section 40-170, pertaining to the bufferyard chart, to determine the appropriate letter designation for each abutting yard. 
(3)  Match the letter designation obtained from section 40-170, pertaining to the bufferyard chart, with the letter designation of section 40-171, pertaining to bufferyard illustrations, to determine the required bufferyard. 
(Code 1993, § 27-62) 
Sec. 40-168. - Site plan required, approval, timing of permits. 
(a)  Prior to issuance of a building permit, an applicant must propose and receive approval for a bufferyard plan in accordance with this article. The applicant must submit a site plan drawn to scale in accordance with the requirements of article XVIII of this chapter, pertaining to site plan review. 
(b)  Building permits and temporary certificates of occupancy may be issued only after a detailed site plan, including a detailed bufferyard plan, has been approved by the Department of Planning and Development. Recommendations on the proposed bufferyard may be obtained from the Department of Planning and Development. 
(c)  In order for a final certificate of occupancy to be issued, all vegetation, fencing, and berms required by this article shall be in place and written certification from the installer stating that the vegetation has been installed, in accordance with the proposed bufferyard plan, must be submitted to the Department of Planning and Development. Written certification shall serve as a request for inspection. 
(Code 1993, § 27-63) 
Sec. 40-169. - Use classification list. 
    Below are the classifications of land uses which will be utilized in conjunction with section 40-170, pertaining to the bufferyard chart, to determine the required bufferyards. 
(a)  Classification I. Single-family dwellings, individual mobile homes, two-family attached dwellings, family care homes, golf courses, nature areas, wildlife sanctuaries, and their accessory uses, including recreation. 
(b)  Classification II. Classification II land uses are as follows: 
(1)  Multifamily dwellings, dormitories, mobile home parks, fraternities and sororities, roominghouses/boardinghouses and their accessory uses, including recreation. 
(2)  Limited impact recreational uses, including, but not limited to: playgrounds, jogging trails, bicycling areas, boat-launch ramps, picnic areas, swimming pools, and tennis courts. 
(c)  Classification III. Classification III land uses are as follows: 
(1)  Institutional uses, including, but not limited to: day or youth camps, cemeteries, churches, day care centers, group care homes, libraries, museums, nursing homes, public or private schools, schools or homes for the physically or mentally handicapped, retirement homes, social or fraternal organizations, and hospitals. 
(2)  Governmental buildings or uses, including, but not limited to: offices, fire stations, police stations, garages, public utilities, and public service uses. Specifically excluded are sanitary landfills, wastewater treatment facilities, extraction activities, and animal shelters. 
(3)  Commercial and service uses, including, but not limited to: retail sales operations, hotels, laundries/dry cleaners, grocery stores not open between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., alcoholic beverage stores, restaurants (conventional, not fast food), service or business stores (catering, bakery, duplicating, photography, shoe repair, tailoring, travel agency, etc.), taxi companies, shopping centers, funeral homes, and principal use parking lots. 
(4)  Offices, including drive thru facilities. 
(5)  Utility uses, including, but not limited to: telephone facilities, cable television companies, radio and television facilities, and telecommunication towers. 
(6)  Medium impact commercial recreation uses, including, but not limited to: amusement parks, fairgrounds, miniature golf, golf driving ranges not operated in conjunction with a golf course, sports arenas, stables, indoor recreation areas such as skating rinks, tennis, swimming, handball, and racquetball, athletic clubs, exercise and dance studios, and indoor theaters. 
(7)  Plant nurseries or greenhouses that are not a part of a farm. 
(d)  Classification IV. Classification IV land uses are as follows: 
(1)  High impact recreational uses, including, but not limited to: outdoor theaters, shooting ranges (skeet, rifle, archery), go-cart racing, billiard parlors, and nightclubs. 
(2)  Road service uses, including, but not limited to: gasoline sales, convenience stores, fast food restaurants, major and minor repair facilities, boat rental/sales or service, vehicle rental/sales or service, automobile wash, retail sales involving outside storage (vehicles, storage units, etc.), bus and truck terminals, and mobile home sales. 
(3)  Veterinary offices, kennels, animal boarding, outside facilities, and animal shelters. 
(4)  Agricultural support uses including, but not limited to: farm equipment rental/sales and service and farm supply (feed, grain, and fertilizer). 
(5)  Grocery stores open between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(6)  Light industrial uses, including, but not limited to: sewing operations, wood products, laboratories, warehouses, wholesaling businesses and storage, publishing plants and printing plants, miniwarehouses, contractor's office with equipment storage yards, furniture refinishing, fuel oil, ice, coal, wood sales, lumberyards, building materials sales and storage, trade shops (including cabinet, metal, carpentry, planing, plumbing, upholstery, refinishing, and paneling), tire recapping plants, and wastewater treatment plants. 
(e)  Classification V. Classification V land uses are as follows: 
(1)  Heavy industrial uses, including, but not limited to: concrete or asphalt mixing plants, bulk material or machinery storage (unenclosed), fuel generation plants, grain elevators, farm product processing (dairies, poultry, or meat), meat packaging plants or slaughterhouses, resource recovery activities, airports, heliports, and fertilizer manufacturing. 
(2)  Mining activities. 
(3)  Automobile graveyards, junkyards. 
(Code 1993, § 27-64; Ord. No. 99-6, 6-14-1999) 
Sec. 40-170. - Chart for permitted land use classifications. 
    The bufferyard chart for land use is as follows: 
Adjacent Permitted Land Use 
Classification Adjacent Vacant Zone or Zone with 
Nonconforming Use Proposed 
Land 
Use 
Class I II III IV V Residential Nonresidential Public/Private Streets II C-note 1 B-note 1 B-note 1 B-note 1 B-note 1 C-note 1 B-note 1 A-notes 1, 3, and 4 III D-note 2 D-note 2 B-note 2 B-note 2 B-note 2 D-note 2 B-note 2 A-notes 1, 3, and 4 IV E-note 2 E-note 2 B-note 2 B-note 2 B-note 2 E-note 2 B-note 2 A-notes 1, 3, and 4 V F-note 2 F-note 2 B-note 2 B-note 2 B-note 2 F-note 2 B-note 2 A-notes 1, 3, and 4  
Notes: 
1.  Building setbacks shall be in accordance with applicable regulations for the zoning district and use. 
2.  Unless otherwise provided, setbacks shall be determined in the following manner: 
a.  Structures thirty-five (35) feet in height and under, in accordance with prescribed bufferyards. 
b.  Structures over thirty-five (35) feet in height, in accordance with prescribed bufferyards or by using the following formula, whichever is greater: D=6 + 2(S) + L/10 where D is the minimum setback distance, S is the number of stories and L is the length of the wall. Where the length of the wall is set back eight (8) feet or more, the length (L) of each segment or plane is measured separately in determining the required yard depth. (See definition of the term "story" in section 40-25.) 
c.  Setbacks for parking, storage, dumpsters, etc., shall be in accordance with prescribed bufferyards. 
3.  Bufferyards for adjacent streets may only be encroached upon for driveway accesses and signage. 
4.  The vegetation requirements of this section shall not apply to public alleys and private service easements which provide secondary access; however, structures must observe the bufferyard setback. 
(Code 1993, § 27-65) 
Sec. 40-171. - Illustration of specifications. 
    Bufferyard illustrations indicate the specifications of each bufferyard. Bufferyard requirements are stated in terms of the width of the bufferyard and the number of plant units required per each one hundred (100) linear feet of bufferyard. 
(a)  Bufferyard A. The following table lists specifications and requirements for Bufferyard A: 
Lot Size Bufferyard Width 
Required (feet) Number of Plant Units per 100 linear feet of Bufferyard Less than 25,000 sq. ft. 4 12 shrubs 25,000 sq. ft. to 175,000 sq. ft. 6 20 shrubs Over 175,000 sq. ft. 10 25 shrubs One (1) small tree may be substituted for four (4) shrubs. If more than eight (8) feet is available, then one (1) large tree may be substituted for four (4) shrubs. Plant material may be reduced by fifty (50) percent when a berm at least two (2) feet on height is provided. Shrubs used to satisfy the requirements of this bufferyard are not limited to those listed in section 40-174.  
(b)  Bufferyard B. The following table lists specifications and requirements for Bufferyard B: 
Lot Size Bufferyard Width 
Required (feet) Number of Plant Units per 100 linear feet of Bufferyard Less than 25,000 sq. ft. 4 3 small trees and 3 evergreen shrubs 25,000 sq. ft. to 175,000 sq. ft. 6 3 small trees and 3 evergreen shrubs Over 175,000 sq. ft. 10 3 small trees and 3 evergreen shrubs If more than eight (8) feet is available, then large trees may be substituted for small trees.  
(c)  Bufferyard C. The following table lists specifications and requirements for Bufferyard C: 
Lot Size Bufferyard Width 
Required (feet) Number of Plant Units per 100 linear feet of Bufferyard All sizes 10 3 small trees, 16 evergreen shrubs When a fence is used, the bufferyard width may be reduced to eight (8) feet and vegetation may be reduced to two (2) large trees.  
(d)  Bufferyard D. The following table lists specifications and requirements for Bufferyard D: 
Lot Size Bufferyard Width 
Required (feet) Number of Plant Units per 100 linear feet of Bufferyard All sizes 20 3 large trees (minimum 70 percent evergreen), 5 small trees, 16 evergreen shrubs Bufferyard vegetation may be reduced by fifty (50) percent if a fence or earth berm is provided. Bufferyard width may be reduced by fifty (50) percent if a fence is provided.  
(e)  Bufferyard E. The following table lists specifications and requirements for Bufferyard E: 
Lot Size Bufferyard Width 
Required (feet) Number of Plant Units per 100 linear feet of Bufferyard All sizes 30 5 large trees (minimum 70 percent evergreen), 7 small trees, 26 evergreen shrubs Bufferyard vegetation may be reduced by fifty (50) percent if a fence or earth berm is provided. Bufferyard width may be reduced by fifty (50) percent if a fence is provided.  
(f)  Bufferyard F. The following table lists specifications and requirements for Bufferyard F: 
Lot Size Bufferyard Width 
Required (feet) Number of Plant Units per 100 linear feet of Bufferyard All sizes 50 6 large trees, 9 small trees, 45 evergreen shrubs Bufferyard vegetation may be reduced by fifty (50) percent if a fence or earth berm is provided. Bufferyard width may be reduced by fifty (50) percent if a fence is provided.  
(g)  Fences. Fences must create a complete visual screen for at least six (6) feet in height. Acceptable materials are cedar, masonry, redwood, chainlink with slats, and pressure treated lumber resistant to rot. Fence installation should be consistent with acceptable building practices. 
(h)  Berms. 
(1)  Minimum height: five (5) feet. 
(2)  Maximum slope: two (2) feet horizontal for each one (1) foot vertical; 2:1. 
(3)  Minimum crown: width, two (2) feet. 
(Code 1993, § 27-66) 
Sec. 40-172. - Standards for bufferyards. 
(a)  Existing fencing. When there is an existing fence which creates a complete visual screen for at least five (5) feet in height on an adjoining property owner's yard, and that fence extends along a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the abutting yard in question, as determined by the Director of Planning and Development, then the developer may elect to use one (1) of the applicable alternative bufferyards. 
(1)  Bufferyard D: minimum width, ten (10) feet; required plant materials per one hundred (100) feet, two (2) large trees (minimum 70 percent evergreen); three (3) small trees, and twenty-five (25) evergreen shrubs; fence, not required. 
(2)  Bufferyard E: minimum width, fifteen (15) feet; required plant materials per one hundred (100) feet, three (3) large trees (minimum 70 percent evergreen); four (4) small trees; and twenty-five (25) evergreen shrubs; fence, not required. 
(3)  Bufferyard F shall be in accordance with the bufferyard prescribed by this section. 
(b)  Exemption. For all uses except public schools, bufferyards are not required along those areas where there are five hundred (500) feet or more separating adjoining property lines and street right-of-way lines from areas where any improvements are taking place and where land is being used for purposes including, but not limited to, storage, mining activities, and stormwater detention areas. In the case of public schools, bufferyards are not required along those areas where there are two hundred fifty (250) feet or more separating adjoining property lines and street right-of-way lines from areas where any improvements are taking place and where land is being used for purposes including, but not limited to, storage, stormwater detention areas, and recreation facilities. 
(c)  Minimum plant size. Unless otherwise indicated elsewhere in this section, all plant materials shall meet the following minimum size standards at the time of planting: 
Planting Material Type Minimum Planting Size Large tree Single-stem 11/2 inch caliper Multi-stem clump 6 feet in height Small tree 4 feet in height Evergreen shrubs 1 foot in height  
(d)  Spacing in bufferyards C, D, E, and F. Bufferyards C, D, E, and F are intended to create a complete visual screening yearround. Therefore, proposed and existing vegetation should be spaced to accomplish this purpose. No more than two (2) continuous feet of horizontal plane, as measured and viewed perpendicular from the property line, may be void of vegetation at least six (6) feet in height within ten (10) years of planting. 
(e)  Existing material. Any existing plant material which otherwise satisfies the requirements of this section may be counted toward satisfying all such requirements. For bufferyards B, C, D, E, and F, one (1) existing large or small tree may be substituted for two shrubs as required by this article. 
(f)  Seeding. All bufferyard areas that are not landscaped shall be seeded with lawn or prairie grass unless ground cover is already established. 
(g)  Encroachment. Among other things, bufferyards may not be encroached upon by vehicular areas (except common access driveways and parking lots), buildings, service walkways, exterior storage, dumpsters, or mechanical equipment unless otherwise provided. Encroachment by stormwater detention ponds may occur subject to the approval of the city. Any plant materials placed within stormwater storage areas shall be of a variety that will survive periodic flooding. Exterior lighting may project three (3) feet into required bufferyards. 
(h)  Recreational use of bufferyards. A bufferyard may be used for passive recreation; it may contain greenway, pedestrian, bicycle, or equestrian trails, provided no plant material is eliminated, the total width of the bufferyard is maintained, and all other regulations of this chapter are met. In no event, however, shall the following uses be permitted in bufferyards: playgrounds, ballfields, stables, swimming pools, tennis courts, or any other type of active recreational use. 
(i)  Easement. No vegetative screening or barriers required by this section shall be placed on property subject to utility or drainage easements without the written consent of the city and the easement holder. 
(j)  Solar access. If the development on the adjoining use is existing, and is designed for solar access, small trees shall be substituted for large trees where large trees would destroy solar access. 
(k)  Overlapping bufferyards. Whenever two (2) or more bufferyard requirements are applicable to the same use or combination of uses, then the more stringent of the bufferyard requirements shall apply. 
(l)  Drainage ditch. When a drainage ditch separates property lines, all vegetation and fencing required by this article shall be provided. However, in no case shall the required vegetation and fencing be located within five (5) feet of the outer edge of the drainage ditch. Placement of vegetation and fencing within easements shall be in accordance with subsection (i) of this section. 
(m)  Future thoroughfare. Required landscaping materials, fencing, and berms shall not encroach within future thoroughfare right-of-way. 
(n)  Shopping centers, condominium/townhouse, multifamily group, and Planned Unit Developments. Bufferyards are required only along exterior property lines of the project, however, bufferyards are required along all property lines of outparcels that have direct access onto a public, dedicated street. 
(o)  Solid wall. A building wall of solid construction (e.g., wood, masonry, etc.), that is without windows, access, protrusions, mechanical equipment, etc., may be used to satisfy the fencing requirements of this article along those areas where the building exists. There shall be no breaks or separations between fencing and building walls along property lines where a combination of fencing and building walls are used to satisfy the requirements of this section. 
(p)  Vegetation location. Required vegetation shall be installed within the minimum bufferyard area, except as provided herein. Where a drainage ditch or other natural feature prevents the installation of required vegetation within the minimum bufferyard area, such materials shall be installed within an area of equal width to the required bufferyard area. This area of equal width shall be located adjacent to and extend from the drainage ditch or other natural features. Building setbacks, parking areas, driveways, and all site improvements may encroach into the area of equal width. 
(Code 1993, § 27-67) 
Sec. 40-173. - Maintenance of bufferyard areas. 
(a)  The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining all vegetation required by this article in a healthy condition. Any dead, unhealthy, or missing vegetation shall be replaced upon written notice of noncompliance by the Department of Planning and Development to ensure compliance with all bufferyard requirements. Replacement must occur upon notification by the Department of Planning and Development of any dead, unhealthy, or missing vegetation and shall be planted in accordance with the provisions of this article. Replacement shall occur at the earliest suitable planting season. 
(b)  To ensure that landscape materials do not constitute a driving hazard, a sight distance as determined by the city and/or the North Carolina Department of Transportation shall be observed at all street intersections of driveways with streets. Within this sight triangle, no landscape material, fencing, or berms exceeding thirty (30) inches above the adjacent street intersection shall be permitted. In the case of private driveways, the sight distance shall be measured along an imaginary line five (5) feet outside and parallel to the outer edges of said driveway and along the intersecting street right-of-way. The required sight distance for private driveways shall be twenty-five (25) feet. 
(c)  If at the time of the request for a certificate of occupancy, the required bufferyard vegetation is not in place due to the unavailability of plant material, then the developer/owner may obtain a temporary certificate of occupancy from the Department of Planning and Development. Such temporary certificate of occupancy shall be limited to thirty (30) days and may be renewed not more than three (3) times. 
(d)  To ensure that fencing will be maintained in a safe and aesthetic manner, the following maintenance requirements must be observed for all fencing required by this article: 
(1)  No fence shall have more than twenty (20) percent of its surface area covered with disfigured, cracked, or missing materials, or peeling paint for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
(2)  No fence shall be allowed to remain with bent or broken supports, or be allowed to stand more than fifteen (15) degrees away from the perpendicular for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
(Code 1993, § 27-68) 
Sec. 40-174. - Acceptable vegetation. 
    The following list of vegetation shall be used to satisfy the requirements of this article: 
Small Trees: 20 Feet and Below 
Evergreen 
Scientific Name Common Name Eriobotrya Japanicus Loquat Magnolia Glauca Sweet May Magnolia  
Deciduous 
Scientific Name Common Name Acer Palmatum Japanese Maple Cornus Florida Dogwood Cornus Kousa Chinese Dogwood Cotinus Coggyria Smoke Tree Craetagus Phaenopyrum Cordata Washington Hawthorn Lagerstroemia Indica Crepe Myrtle Magnolia Stellata Star Magnolia Malus Hopa Pink Crabapple Prunus Serrulata "Kwansan" Kwansan Cherry Prunus Serruluta "Shirotae" Mt. Fugi Cherry Prunus Cerasifera Purple Leaf Plum  
Large Trees: 20 Feet and Above 
Evergreen 
Scientific Name Common Name Cryptomeria Japonica "Yoshino" Japanese Cedar Gordonia Lasianthus Loblolly Bay Magnolia Grandiflora Southern Magnolia Pinus Bungeana Lace Bark Pine Pinus Ellioti Slash Pine Pinus Strobus White Pine Pinus Taeda Loblolly Pine Pinus Thunbevgii Japanese Black Pine Pinus Virginiana Virginia Pine Tsuga Canadensis Canadian Hemlock Cedrus Deodora Deodor Cedar Chaemecyparisus Lawsoniana "Leylandi" Leyland Cypress Ilex Fosteri II Foster's Holly Ilex Aquifolium English Holly Ilex Cassine Dahoon Holly Ilex Pernyi Perny Holly Juniperous Virginiana Eastern Red Cedar Photinia Serrulata Chinese Photinia  
Large Trees: 20 Feet and Above 
Deciduous 
Scientific Name Common Name Acer Plantinoides Norway Maple Acer Rubrum Red Maple Acer Saccharum Sugar Maple Betula Nigra River Birch Betula Pendula European White Birch Ginkgo Biloba Ginkgo Gleditisia Triacanthus var. inermis Thornless Honey Locust Liquidambar Styracifula Sweet Gum Poplus Nigra "Italica" Lombardy Poplar Pyrus Calleryana "Bradford" Bradford Pear Salix Babylonica Weeping Willow Tilia Cordata Little Leaf Linden Zelkova Serratta Japanese Zelkova Fagus Grandiflora American Beech Cercis Canadensis Red Bud Quercus Virginiana Live Oak Fraxinus Americana White Ash Quercus Phellos Willow Oak Quercus Rubra Red Oak Quercus Palustous Pin Oak  
Evergreen Shrubs: 4 to 6 Feet 
Scientific Name Common Name Aucuba Japonica* Japanese Aucuba Azalea Hydrids* Azaleas Berberis Vulianae Wintergreen Barberry Gardenia Jasminoides Cape Jasmine Gardenia Ilex Crenata Convexa Convexa Japanese Holly Ilex Crenata "Hetzi" Hetzi Japanese Holly Ilex Crenata Compacta* Compacta Holly Ilex Crenata "Microphylla" Little Leaf Japanese Holly Ilex Crenara Rotundifolia Roundleaf Japanese Holly Juniperus Chinensis Pfitzeriana* Pfitzer Juniper Mahonia Bealei Leatherleaf Mahonia Myrica Pensylvanica Northern Bayberry Nandina Domestica* Nandina Pyracantha Coccinea* Scarlet Firethorn Raphiolepis Umbellata Yeddo-Hawthorn Rhodadendron Ramapo Ramapo Rhododendron Rhodadendron Hybrida* Hybrid Rhododendron Sisphonosmanthue Delavayi Delavay Tea Olive Osmanthus Delavayi Delavay Tea Olive  
*Various Varieties 
Evergreen Shrubs: 6 to 12 Feet 
Scientific Name Common Name Azalea Indica* Indian Azalea Bambusa Mulitplex Clump or Hedge Bamboo Camellia Japonica* Camellia Camellia Sasansqua Sasanqua Cleyera Japonica Cleyera Elaegnus Pungens Thorny Elaeagnus Ilex Aquifolium* English Holly Ilex Cornuta Chinese Holly Ilex Cornuta Burfordi* Burford Holly Ilex Crenata* Japanese Holly Ilex Glabra Inkberry Holly Ilex Latifolia Lusterleaf Holly Ilex Vomitoria Yaupon Holly Ilex Opaca Fosteri #2 Fosters Holly Ilex Nellie R. Stevens Nellie Stevens Holly Ligustrum Japonicum* Japanese Privet Ligustrum Lucidum Glossy Privet Ligustrum Yicaryi Yicary Golden Privet Michelia Figo Banana Shrub Myrica Cerifera Wax Myrtle Osmanthus Fortunei Fortune Tea Olive Osmanthus Heterophyllus* Holly Osmanthus (O. Ilicifolius) Photinia Fraseri Fraser Photinia (Red Tip) Photinia Glabra Red Photinia Pittosporum Tobira Pittosporum Podocarpus Macrophyllus Maki Podocarpus (Japanese Yew) Pyracantha Koidzumi* Formosa Firethorn  
*Various Varieties 
(Code 1993, § 27-69) 
Sec. 40-175. - Nonconforming bufferyards. 
(a)  The provisions contained in this section shall not apply to existing structures that do not conform with the bufferyard required by this article. Structures that do not comply with the bufferyard required by this article shall be subject to the nonconforming provisions contained in subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  Subject to subsection (a) of this section, property that does not comply with the bufferyard requirements contained in this article shall meet the provisions of this section. 
(c)  When there is noncompliance with the bufferyard required by this section, and when an applicant files the necessary forms for a building permit, certificate of occupancy, or business license, one (1) of the following two (2) situations shall apply: 
(1)  Bufferyard regulations are not applicable. This provision applies when: 
a.  There is a change of land use where the new land use is of the same or lower classification, as found in section 40-169, as the previous land use; or 
b.  Expansions are proposed which singularly or collectively are five (5) percent or less of the existing floor area, existing improved parking areas, or other impervious areas of the existing use at the time the ordinance becomes applicable. 
(2)  A portion of the prescribed bufferyard will be required in accordance with subsection (d) of this section when: 
a.  There is a change of land use where the land use is of a higher classification as found in section 40-169, as the previous land use; or 
b.  Proposed expansions are singularly or collectively more than five (5) percent of the existing floor area, existing improved parking areas, or other existing impervious areas. The provisions of this section shall in no way be deemed to require the removal of existing structures, buildings, improved parking areas, mechanical equipment, and lighting; provided, however, all other encroachments including, but not limited to, concrete islands and the like shall be removed. Such areas shall be planted in accordance with the applicable provisions of the bufferyard regulations. 
(d)  When a portion of the prescribed bufferyard is required based on subsection (c)(2) of this section, the following shall suffice for compliance with this section. 
(1)  For purposes of this subsection when there is less than eight (8) feet of bufferyard width available, small trees may be substituted for large trees. 
(2)  Where seventy-five (75) percent or more of the required bufferyard width is available, all physical barriers and plant material shall be installed. 
(3)  Where less than seventy-five (75) percent of the required bufferyard width is available, all physical barriers and a percentage of plant material equal to that of the land areas available shall be installed. 
(4)  Where less than one (1) foot of bufferyard width is available, ground cover may be substituted for the required vegetation. 
(Code 1993, § 27-70) 
Secs. 40-176-40-203. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MOBILE HOME PARKS 

Sec. 40-204. - Conformance with regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, or allow to be located, one (1) or more mobile homes on a lot owned, possessed, or otherwise controlled by him after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, unless such act conforms to one (1) of the following requirements or conditions: 
(1)  The mobile home is nonconforming, as defined in article III of this chapter; 
(2)  The mobile home is within an approved mobile home park; 
(3)  The mobile home is used in connection with an allowable temporary use; and 
(4)  The mobile home is on an individual lot within the RMH District and complies with all applicable district standards. 
(b)  The owner or operator of a mobile home park shall not permit a recreational vehicle or travel trailer (any trailer smaller than the minimum defined size for a mobile home in article II of this chapter) to locate within the boundaries of such park for periods greater than one (1) week if the recreational vehicle or travel trailer is being used or intended to be used as a dwelling. 
(c)  The storage of individual recreational vehicles and travel trailers shall be permitted provided that only one (1) such unit is stored on a lot of record and that such unit is not used for purposes of living, sleeping, or cooking while in storage. Such recreational vehicles or travel trailers may not be connected with any city utility except for electricity. No such unit may occupy more than twenty (20) percent of the minimum required open space on an individual lot. Any recreational vehicle or travel trailer stored on a lot, pursuant to this subsection, must be owned by the owner of the property on which it is located. 
(d)  These regulations shall not prohibit the parking and/or storing of any mobile home for the purpose of sale by the owner or licensed dealer, or the use of such unit by said owner or licensed dealer as a sales office and/or demonstrator unit, upon any lot or tract on which the sale of mobile homes is permitted and/or approved under this article. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to store or park any unoccupied mobile home for longer than forty-eight (48) hours except in an emergency and then only after first obtaining an emergency storage permit from the Building Inspector. No emergency storing permits shall be issued for a period longer than seven (7) days in duration. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, on a commercial basis, mobile homes or trailers within a mobile home park, except that an individual mobile home owner shall be exempt from this section in that he shall be allowed to sell the mobile home in which he maintains occupancy. 
(Code 1993, § 27-71) 
Sec. 40-205. - Procedures; required review, contents. 
(a)  Required review. No person shall construct or engage in the construction of any mobile home park or make any additions or alterations to a mobile home park until such construction, addition, or alteration has been approved and a building permit issued, subject to the following process: 
(1)  A sketch plan, following the requirements of subsection (b) of this section, is submitted to the Department of Planning and Development. 
(2)  A Technical Review Committee (TRC), made up of department heads or their designees from the Department of Planning and Development, the Electric Department, the Public Works Department, the Police Department, and the Fire and Rescue Department, reviews the plan. The TRC may take any of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the plan as submitted; 
b.  Require that the plan be resubmitted for evaluation where revision of the plan is necessary to meet with applicable city ordinances, policies, and standards; 
c.  Disapprove the plan if it cannot be approved with reasonable conditions of compliance. The reasons for such disapproval shall be set forth by the TRC. Disapproval by the TRC may be appealed to the City Manager and ultimately to the City Council, after a recommendation is given by the Planning Board. 
(3)  The plan is submitted to the Planning Board for approval. 
(4)  The Planning Board shall forward a copy of the plan with its recommendations to the City Council for their review and approval. 
(5)  If the Council approves the plan, the Department of Planning and Development shall issue a permit for the construction, additions, or alterations as shown on the approved plan. 
(6)  The Department of Planning and Development shall make an examination of the construction at any reasonable time to determine whether the work is being done in accordance with the approved plan and the specifications and requirements of this article. The owner of the mobile home park shall make available any records, test data, or other information essential to such determination. 
(7)  Where any land in the mobile home park is to be dedicated for public use, the city subdivision regulations shall be followed. 
(b)  Sketch plan requirements. Sketch plans submitted for approval must be drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet by a registered engineer, land surveyor, or architect and shall show the following information on one (1) or more sheets: 
(1)  A title, date, north arrow, engineer's scale, graphic scale, and the names and addresses of the developer and the person or firm preparing the plan; 
(2)  Name of the mobile home park; 
(3)  A vicinity sketch with a scale no less than one (1) inch equals one thousand (1,000) feet showing the site and its relationship to the surrounding area and the nearest intersection of two (2) public streets; 
(4)  Minimum setback lines with approximate dimension of mobile home lots and spaces, mobile home stands, mobile home patios, and walkways from patios to parking areas; 
(5)  The plan conforms with applicable development standards, including United States mail delivery and pickup stations; 
(6)  Show existing and finished contours at intervals of two (2) feet; in parking or paved areas, the finished grade elevation may be shown instead of contours; 
(7)  Proposed streetlighting for private drives and parking areas; 
(8)  Location of recreational facilities and open space; 
(9)  Names and locations of all proposed public or private drives, dedicated streets, and vehicular entrances and exits showing width, rights-of-way, street names, sight distance triangles at intersections, curb and gutter alignments, and location and dimensions of sidewalks, alleys, and pedestrian ways, where required (curb, gutter, and storm drainage shall be installed per city specifications); all width dimensions and improvements shown; 
(10)  Provide site data regarding total acres, total spaces, gross floor area of each building and/or addition (existing and proposed), proposed use of buildings, density ratio, total recreational acreage, and parking ratio per lot; 
(11)  Indicate type of screening to be provided; 
(12)  Show mobile home lots or spaces numbered and dimensioned; 
(13)  Provide detail of a typical mobile home space drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals ten (10) feet showing water, sewer, storm drainage, electrical connections, parking spaces, driveways, and all other improvements; 
(14)  Indicate location and extent of surface areas, lawns, and planted areas, giving sizes and number of plants and trees with common names, along with a schedule for planting; 
(15)  Show locations and dimensions of property lines, public utility easements, and all buildings (existing and proposed); 
(16)  Location of adjoining properties and buildings, with names and addresses of owners of record, and current zoning classifications; 
(17)  Location of water taps, sewer taps, septic tank locations, septic tank drain fields, and fire hydrants, showing size of lines and meters; 
(18)  Location and dimensions of proposed and existing water lines, sanitary sewer lines, and storm sewer lines; 
(19)  Location of electrical service connections, meters, and poles; 
(20)  Location and dimensions of bridges, culverts, railroads, and watercourses, including ditches; 
(21)  Drainage plans including locations and dimensions of pipes, yard drains, catchbasins, and curb inlets; 
(22)  Location and dimension of gas lines; 
(23)  Locations and dimensions of any required refuse collection container spaces; 
(24)  Locations, dimensions, and materials of walls and fences; 
(25)  Where public water or public sewer is not available, a written statement from the Beaufort County Health Department shall be submitted indicating that the mobile home park has adequate land area and suitable topography to accommodate the proposed methods of water supply and sewage disposal. 
(Code 1993, § 27-72) 
Sec. 40-206. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Mobile home parks, when constructed, altered, extended or used shall be arranged, intended and designed to be used exclusively for one (1) or more of the following uses according to the conditions specified in this article: 
(1)  Mobile homes for use as single-family dwelling units. 
(2)  Caretaker's or manager's office. 
(3)  Services for use by residents of the mobile home park only, including management office, mail pickup, restrooms, vending machines, washing and drying machines for domestic laundry, and recreation facilities accessory to the mobile home park, and other similar uses. 
(b)  There shall be no more than one (1) mobile home and its accessory structure located on any site or lot. 
(Code 1993, § 27-73) 
Sec. 40-207. - Development standards. 
(a)  Minimum area. The minimum area of any site to be developed for any mobile home park shall be five (5) acres, including right-of-way, utility easements, and recreation area. 
(b)  Maximum density. The maximum density shall be eight (8) units per net acre. 
(c)  Required number of spaces. There shall be no less than ten (10) mobile home spaces available at first occupancy. 
(d)  Space and lot minimum dimensions; stakes. 
(1)  Rental spaces. The minimum dimensions for rental spaces are as follows: 
a.  Net area: five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
b.  Width: fifty (50) feet. 
(2)  Subdivision, for sale of individual lots. The minimum dimensions for subdivisions for sale of individual lots are as follows: 
a.  Net area: six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
b.  Width: sixty (60) feet. 
(3)  Stakes. The limits of each mobile home site shall be clearly marked on the ground by permanent flush stakes. Location of spaces on the ground shall be approximately the same as shown on the approved plans. Precise description of space limits is not required either on the plans or on the ground, except when a mobile home subdivision is proposed. 
(e)  Setbacks for mobile homes; principal structures and accessory structures. For setbacks for mobile home structures see the RMH District requirements, article VI of this chapter, pertaining to modifications and standards. Sliding extensions to mobile homes which are installed by the manufacturer may extend up to four (4) feet into any side yard. 
(f)  Separation between mobile homes, mobile home stands, other structures. Separation between mobile homes, mobile home stands, other structures are as follows: 
(1)  Mobile homes: twenty-eight (28) feet. 
(2)  Mobile home stands: twenty-eight (28) feet. 
(3)  Other structures: eleven (11) feet. 
(4)  Attached structures such as awnings, storage cabinets, carports, and porches which have a floor area exceeding twenty-five (25) square feet and are roofed shall for all purposes of the separation requirements be considered to be part of the mobile home. 
(g)  Mobile home stand requirements. Mobile home stand requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Each mobile home shall be located on a permanently established stand within the limits of the staked mobile home space or lot. 
(2)  The supports of all mobile homes shall rest upon adequate concrete footing. 
(3)  The mobile home space and lot shall be graded to provide adequate storm drainage away from the mobile home. 
(4)  Singlewide stands shall consist of a rectangular plot of ground which at minimum measures fourteen (14) by eighty (80) feet. 
(5)  Doublewide stands shall consist of a rectangular plot of ground which at minimum measures twenty-eight (28) by eighty (80) feet. 
(6)  The location of each mobile home stand shall be such that placement and removal of individual units can be achieved without disturbance to other mobile homes, mobile home spaces, patios, walkways, or accessory structures. 
(h)  Patio requirements. For each mobile home, there shall be constructed a permanent patio, located adjacent to or attached to the mobile home stand. Such patio shall have the following characteristics: 
(1)  Each patio shall be at least sixty-four (64) square feet in area. 
(2)  Each patio shall have sufficient gradient to facilitate adequate drainage away from the mobile home stand. 
(3)  Each patio shall have a compacted base, and shall be of concrete or masonry construction. 
(i)  Walkway requirements. For each mobile home, there shall be constructed a permanent walkway which connects the parking area, patio, and mobile home stand. Such walkway shall be a minimum of three (3) feet wide, shall have a compacted base, and shall be of concrete or masonry construction. 
(j)  Skirting requirements. All mobile homes shall have approved skirting, extending from the bottom of the unit to the ground, which skirting shall contain an access door measuring not less than eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches. 
(k)  Parking requirements. Parking requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Number of spaces: two (2) per mobile home. 
(2)  All required spaces for each mobile home space shall be located on private driveways abutting the mobile home stand not less than forty (40) feet wide that are paved or covered with crushed stone. 
(3)  There shall be no on-street parking. All parking shall be provided in private driveways. 
(l)  Recreation area requirements, private. Requirements for private recreation area are as follow: 
(1)  Common area recreation areas shall be provided at a ratio of three hundred (300) square feet per mobile home space. No common area recreation area shall be less than three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
(2)  The recreation requirement for a mobile home park development shall not apply if the project is within one half (1/2) mile radius of a public recreation facility. 
(3)  No portion of an active recreation area shall be located within the peripheral boundary setback or less than twenty (20) feet from any mobile home stand. 
(4)  Passive recreation areas may be located in the peripheral boundary setback in accordance with the bufferyard regulations of article VII of this section. 
(5)  At least eighty (80) percent of the required recreation space must be level, well-drained ground usable for common recreation activities. Land that is swampy, extremely low, or wooded will not be classified as usable recreation space. 
(m)  Access to public streets. Requirements for access to public streets are as follows: 
(1)  Mobile home stands may be located with direct vehicular access to terminal public streets which exclusively serve the mobile home park or on private streets located entirely within the mobile home park. 
(2)  No mobile home stand shall have direct vehicular access to public streets which do not exclusively serve the mobile home park. 
(3)  When the mobile home park has more than one (1) direct vehicular access to a public street, they shall not be less than three hundred (300) feet from a public street intersection unless, in the opinion of the Director of Planning and Development, topographical or site conditions demand otherwise. 
(n)  Street requirements. Requirements for streets within mobile home parks are as follows: 
(1)  Streets within mobile home parks shall conform to the right-of-way width and pavement width requirements of chapter 34, pertaining to subdivisions, for marginal access streets. Concrete curb and guttering and storm drainage will be required to be installed along streets throughout the mobile home park development as per the city's specifications. 
(2)  Closed ends of dead-end streets shall be provided with an adequately paved vehicular turning circle at least ninety (90) feet in diameter. 
(o)  Addresses. A permanent street address shall be assigned to each mobile home stand in accordance with city and county policy. 
(p)  Bufferyard requirements. Bufferyard requirements shall be in accordance with article VII of this chapter. 
(q)  Sign requirements. Sign requirements shall be in accordance with article XVI of this chapter. 
(r)  Installation requirements. The following installation, connections, and construction shall comply with the specifications of the city: 
(1)  Water distribution; 
(2)  Sewer distribution; 
(3)  Electrical distribution and connection; 
(4)  Storm sewer including piped ditches; 
(5)  Street construction; 
(6)  Parking layout including driveways; 
(7)  Refuse collection; 
(8)  Fire protection; and 
(9)  Streetlighting. 
All installations shall comply with the applicable codes of the Beaufort County Health Department, the state, and the North Carolina Utilities Commission. 
(Code 1993, § 27-74) 
Sec. 40-208. - Garbage/trash container pad locations. 
(a)  No container pad required to service the mobile home development shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet to any mobile home stand. 
(b)  Each container pad required to service the mobile home development shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of the mobile home stands they are intended to serve. 
(c)  All container sites shall be visually screened with plant material, by fencing, and/or by site location to minimize their visual impact. 
(Code 1993, § 27-75) 
Sec. 40-209. - Compliance with subdivision standards. 
    All development regulated in accordance with this article shall be subject to the requirements, conditions, and restrictions of chapter 34, pertaining to subdivisions of the city, whether or not the subject tract is actually divided for the purpose of transferring title. 
(Code 1993, § 27-76) 
Secs. 40-210-40-226. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - AIRPORT ZONING 

Sec. 40-227. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Airport means the Washington-Warren Airport. 
    Airport elevation means the established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area. 
    Airport hazard means any structure or object of natural growth located on or in the vicinity of a public airport, or any use of land near such airport which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or takeoff at such airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing and takeoff of aircraft. 
    Airport Height Map means the map entitled Airport Property and Land Use Plan, sheet number 9. The term "Airport Height Map" shall be used interchangeably with the term "Airport Property and Land Use Plan." 
    Airport property and land use plan map means the map which governs height limits around the airport area. Such term shall be used interchangeably with the term "Airport Height Map." 
    Airport reference point means the point established as the approximate geographic center of the airport landing area and so designated. 
    Approach, transitional horizontal and conical zones, means the areas under the approach, transitional, horizontal and conical surface. 
    Height, for the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this chapter and shown on the Airport Property and Land Use Plan map, otherwise known as the Airport Height Map, sheet number 9, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
    Landing area means the area of the airport used for the landing, taking off, or taxiing of aircraft. 
    Nonconforming use means any preexisting structure, tree, natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this article or any amendment thereto. 
    Nonprecision instrument runway means a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance or area type navigation equipment for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned, and for which no precision approach facilities are planned or indicated on an FAA planning document or a military service military airport planning document. 
    Primary surface means a surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of that runway; but when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
    Runway means a defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length. 
    Structure means an object constructed or installed by humans, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, earth formations, and overhead transmission lines. 
    Tree means any object of natural vegetative growth. 
    Utility runway means a runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds maximum gross weight and less. 
    Visual runway means a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures with no straight-in instrument approach procedure and no instrument designation indicated on an FAA-approved airport layout plan, a military service approved airport layout plan, or by any planning document submitted to the FAA by competent authority. 
(Code 1993, § 27-77; Ord. No. 15-1, § 4, 3-23-2015) 
Sec. 40-228. - Administration of article provisions. 
    The Director of Planning and Development, or his designee, is hereby designated as the Administrator of this article, with the duty of administering and enforcing the regulations prescribed herein. The duties of the Administrator shall include that of hearing and deciding all permits required under section 40-234, but he shall not have or exercise any of the powers or duties delegated in this article to the Board of Appeals. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the Department of Planning and Development upon a form furnished by the departmental staff. Applications required by this article to be submitted to the Administrator shall be promptly considered and either approved or denied. Applications for action by the Board of Appeals shall be transmitted to the Administrator for review by the Board of Appeals. 
(Code 1993, § 27-78) 
Sec. 40-229. - Establishment and designation of zones. 
    In order to carry out the provisions of this article, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying within the approach zones, transitional zones, horizontal zones, and conical zones. Such areas and zones are shown on the Airport Airspace Drawing Sheet I. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(a)  Utility runway visual approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is two hundred fifty (250) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) feet at a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet from the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(b)  Runway larger than utility visual approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is five hundred (500) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet at a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet from the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(c)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum as low as three-quarter (3/4) mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is one thousand (1,000) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of four thousand (4,000) feet at a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet from the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(d)  Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is five hundred (500) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of two thousand (2,000) feet at a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet from the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(e)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than three-quarter (3/4) mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is five hundred (500) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of three thousand five hundred (3,500) feet at a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet from the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(f)  Transitional zones. These zones are hereby established as the area beneath the transitional surfaces. These surfaces extend outward and upward at ninety-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each one (1) foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional zones for these portions of the precision approach zones which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach zones and at ninety-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
(g)  Horizontal zone. For the utility runway visual approach zone and the runway larger than utility visual approach zone, the horizontal is hereby established by swinging arcs of five thousand (5,000) feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway, and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones. For the runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum as low as three-quarter-mile nonprecision instrument approach zone, the horizontal zone is hereby established by swinging arcs of ten thousand (10,000) feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway, and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones. 
(h)  Conical zone. The conical zone is hereby established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. The conical zone does include the precision instrument approach zones and the transitional zones. 
(Code 1993, § 27-79) 
Sec. 40-230. - Height limitations. 
(a)  Established. Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or maintained in any zone created by this article to a height in excess of the height limit herein established for such zone. Such height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows. Where stricter, the height limits established on the Airport Height Map shall prevail. 
(1)  Utility runway visual approach zone. Slopes upward twenty (20) feet horizontally for each one (1) foot vertically, beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(2)  Runway larger than utility visual approach zone. Slopes upward twenty (20) feet horizontally for each one (1) foot vertically, beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(3)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum as low as three-quarter (3/4) mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. Slopes upward thirty-four (34) feet horizontally for each one (1) foot vertically, beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(4)  Conical zone. Slopes upward twenty (20) feet horizontally for each one (1) foot vertically, beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of three hundred fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation. 
(5)  Transition zones. One (1) foot in height for each seven (7) feet in horizontal distance beginning at any point two hundred twenty-five (225) feet normal to and at the elevation of the centerline of noninstrument runways, extending two hundred (200) feet beyond each end thereof, extending to a height of one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation, which is one hundred eighty-five (185) feet above mean sea level. In addition to the preceding, there are established height limits of one (1) foot vertical height for each seven (7) feet horizontal distance measured from the edges of all approach zones for the entire length of the approach zones and extending upward and outward to the points where they intersect the horizontal or conical surfaces. 
(6)  Horizontal zone. One hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation or a height of one hundred eighty-five (185) feet above mean sea level. 
(b)  Areas covered by multiple limits. Where an area is covered by more than one (1) height limitation, the more restrictive limitation shall prevail. 
(Code 1993, § 27-80) 
Sec. 40-231. - Use restrictions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no use may be made of land within any zone established by this article in such a manner as to create electrical interference with radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of flyers using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, or otherwise endanger the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft. 
(Code 1993, § 27-81) 
Sec. 40-232. - Nonconforming uses, structures, and trees. 
(a)  The regulations prescribed by this article shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other changes or alterations of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives or otherwise interfere with the continuance for any nonconforming use. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, except as set forth in subsection (b) of this section and section 40-234(b). 
(b)  Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Department of Planning and Development to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport hazards. In no case, however, shall the owner of a nonconforming use be required to install, operate, or maintain such markers and lights at his own expense. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the city. 
(Code 1993, § 27-82) 
Sec. 40-233. - Variances. 
(a)  Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure or permit the growth of any tree or otherwise use his property not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this article may apply to the Board of Appeals for a variance from such regulations. Such variances shall be allowed where a literal application of enforcement of the regulations would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest but do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of this article. 
(b)  Comments shall be received from the Federal Aviation Authority and the Washington-Warren Airport Advisory Board before a variance is granted. 
(Code 1993, § 27-83; Ord. No. 15-1, § 5, 3-23-2015) 
Sec. 40-234. - Permits required for future and nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Future uses. Except as specifically provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, no material change shall be made to the use of land and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted, or otherwise established in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. Nothing contained in any of the following exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, alteration, or growth of any structure or tree in excess of any of the height limits established by this article, except as set forth in section 40-230. 
(1)  However, a permit for a tree or structure of less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground shall not be required in the horizontal and conical zones or in any approach and transitional zones beyond a horizontal distance of four thousand two hundred (4,200) feet from each end of the runway except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land, contour, or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for the respective zone. 
(2)  Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired with specific particulars to determine whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. 
(b)  Nonconforming uses. Before any nonconforming structure or tree may be replaced, substantially altered or repaired, rebuilt, allowed to grow higher, or replanted within any zone created by this article, a permit must be secured from the Department of Planning and Development authorizing such replacement, change, or repair. No such permit shall be granted that would allow the structure or tree in question to be made higher or become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives or whenever the Department of Planning and Development staff determines that a nonconforming structure has been abandoned for a continuous period of one hundred eighty (180) days or more than eighty (80) percent torn down, deteriorated, or decayed. 
(1)  No permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from this zoning chapter. 
(2)  Whether application is made for a permit under this subsection or not, the city may, by appropriate action, compel the owner of the nonconforming structure or tree, at his own expense, to lower, remove, reconstruct, or equip such object as may be necessary to conform to the regulations, or if the owner of the nonconforming structure or tree shall neglect or refuse to comply with such order for ten (10) days after notice thereof, the city may proceed to have the object so lowered, removed, reconstructed, or equipped and assess the cost and expenses thereof upon the owner of the object or property in question. Except as otherwise prohibited in this zoning chapter, all applications for permits for replacement, change, or repair of nonconforming uses shall be granted. 
(3)  Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this article and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of an airport hazard. In no case, however, shall the owner of a nonconforming use be required to install, operate, or maintain such markers and lights at his own expense. 
(Code 1993, § 27-84) 
Sec. 40-235. - Board of Appeals. 
(a)  Establishment. The Board of Adjustment shall ex officio constitute the Board of Appeals. 
(b)  Proceedings. The proceedings of the Board of Appeals shall be the same as the proceedings for the Board of Adjustment as set forth in article XIX of this chapter. 
(c)  Powers and duties. The Board of Appeals shall have and exercise the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Department of Planning and Development staff in the enforcement of this article. 
(2)  To hear and decide upon requests for variances from the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 27-85) 
Sec. 40-236. - Appeal from decision of Board of Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the Board of Appeals may appeal to the county Superior Court, as provided in G.S. 63-34. 
(Code 1993, § 27-86) 
Sec. 40-237. - Penalty for violation. 
    Each violation of this article or any regulation, order, or ruling promulgated or made pursuant to this article shall be enforced and subject to the penalties set forth in article XXI of this chapter, pertaining to administration, enforcement and penalties. Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1993, § 27-87) 
Secs. 40-238-40-258. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 

Sec. 40-259. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory structure, appurtenant structure means a structure which is located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and storage sheds are common urban accessory structures. Pole barns, hay sheds and the like qualify as accessory structures on farms, and may or may not be located on the same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building. 
    Addition (to an existing building) means an extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building or structure. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
    Area of special flood hazard. See Special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
    Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means a determination as published in the Flood Insurance Study of the water surface elevations of the base flood. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building. See Structure. 
    Chemical storage facility means a building, portion of a building, or exterior area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or chemically reactive products. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Disposal means the same as the term "disposal" is defined in G.S. 130A-290(a)(6). 
    Elevated building means a nonbasement building which has its reference level raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
    Existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is pre-FIRM. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(a)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and 
(b)  The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which the special flood hazard areas and the floodways are delineated. This official map is a supplement to and shall be used in conjunction with the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). 
    Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas have been defined as zone A. 
    Flood Insurance means the insurance coverage provided under the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are delineated. 
    Flood Insurance Study (FIS) means an examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazard areas, corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate), flood insurance risk zones, and other flood data in a community issued by FEMA. The Flood Insurance Study report includes Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), if published. 
    Flood zone means a geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
    Floodplain Administrator is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
    Floodplain regulations means this article and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which control development in floodprone areas. This term "floodplain regulations" describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
    Floodprone area. See Floodplain. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate risk of flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities, or structures with their contents. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. 
    Floor. See Lowest floor. 
    Freeboard means the additional amount of height added to the base flood elevation (BFE) to account for uncertainties in the determination of flood elevations. 
    Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term "functionally dependent facility" does not include longterm storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
    Hazardous waste management facility means a facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment, recycling, recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste as defined in G.S. article 9 of chapter 130A (G.S. ch. 130A, art. 9). 
    Highest adjacent grade (HAG) means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of the structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(a)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(b)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a Registered Historic District; 
(c)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places; 
(d)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified: 
(1)  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(2)  Directly by the Secretary of Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Lowest adjacent grade (LAG) means the elevation of the ground, sidewalk, patio slab, or deck support immediately next to the building after completion of the building. For Zone A and AO, use the natural grade elevation prior to construction. 
    Lowest floor means the subfloor, top of slab or grade of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this article. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle. 
    Market value means the building value, excluding the land, as agreed to between a willing buyer and seller, as established by what the local real estate market will bear. Market value can be established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual cash value) or adjusted assessed values. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the NFIP, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988, or other vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain, to which base flood elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are referenced. Refer to each FIRM panel to determine datum used. 
    New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    Nonconforming building or development means any legally existing building or development which fails to comply with the current provisions of this article. 
    Nonencroachment area means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot as designated in the Flood Insurance Study report. 
    Obstruction includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
    Post-FIRM means construction or other development which started on or after January 1, 1975, or on or after the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate Map for the area, whichever is later. 
    Pre-FIRM means construction or other development which started before January 1, 1975, or before the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate Map for the area, whichever is later. 
    Public safety and/or nuisance means anything which is injurious to the safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
    Recreational vehicle (RV) means a vehicle, which is: 
(a)  Built on a single chassis; 
(b)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(c)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(d)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Reference level is the portion of a structure or other development that must be compared to the regulatory flood protection elevation to determine regulatory compliance of such building. Within special flood hazard areas designated as zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, or AH, the reference level is the top of the lowest floor. 
    Regulatory flood protection elevation means the elevation to which all structures and other development located within the special flood hazard areas must be elevated or floodproofed, if nonresidential. Within areas where base flood elevations (BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE. In areas where no BFE has been established, all structures and other development must be elevated or floodproofed. 
    Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or community floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
    Retrofitting means measures, such as floodproofing, elevation, construction of small levees, and other modifications, taken on an existing building or its yard to protect it from flood damage. 
    Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Salvage yard means property used for the storage, collection, and/or recycling of any type of equipment whatsoever, whether industrial or noncommercial, and including, but not limited to, vehicles, appliances and related machinery. 
    Solid waste disposal facility means any facility involved in the disposal of solid waste, as defined in G.S. 130A-290(a)(35). 
    Solid waste disposal site means the same as the term "solid waste disposal site" is defined in G.S. 130A-290(a)(36). 
    Special flood hazard area (SFHA) is the land in the floodplain subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year, as determined in section 40-104. 
    Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The term "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as, the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the term "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any one year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. See Substantial improvement. 
    Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during any one-year period whereby the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. 
(a)  The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. 
(b)  The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any correction of existing violations of state or community health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure; provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in sections 40-262 and 40-263 is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation (WSE) means the height, in relation to mean sea level, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
    Watercourse means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Code 1993, § 27-103; Ord. No. §§ 3-9, 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 40-260. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose, and objectives. 
    The Legislature of the state has in part 6, article 21 of chapter 143 (G.S. ch. 143, art. 21, pt. 6); parts 3, 5, and 8 of article 19 of chapter 160A (G.S. ch. 160A, art. 19, pts. 3, 5 and 8); and article 8 of chapter 160A (G.S. ch. 160A, art. 8) of the North Carolina General Statutes, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council does ordain as follows: 
(a)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  The floodprone areas within the jurisdiction of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in floodprone areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
(b)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions within floodprone areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion, flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(c)  Objectives. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  To minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions; 
(5)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e., water and gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets, and bridges) that are located in floodprone areas; 
(6)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; and 
(7)  To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a special flood hazard area. 
(Code 1993, § 27-102; Ord. No. §§ 3-9, 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 40-261. - Provisions for flood management. 
(a)  Scope. This article shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction, including extraterritorial jurisdictions (ETJ) of the city, if applicable, and within the jurisdiction of any other community whose governing body agrees by resolution to such applicability. 
(b)  Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas . The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the Cooperating Technical State (CTS) agreement between the State of North Carolina and FEMA in its FIS dated July 7, 2014 for Beaufort County and associated DFIRM panels, including any digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study, which are adopted by reference and declared a part of this section. Future revisions to the FIS and DFIRM panels that do not change flood hazard data within the jurisdictional authority of the City of Washington are also adopted by reference and declared a part of this section. This includes, but is not limited to, detailed flood data: 
(1)  Generated as a requirement of section 40-262(c)(11) and (12); 
(2)  Preliminary FIRMs where more stringent than the effective FIRM; or 
(3)  Post-disaster flood recovery maps. Municipal: In addition, upon annexation to the city or inclusion in the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ), the special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and/or produced under the Cooperating Technical State agreement between the state and FEMA, as stated in this section, for the unincorporated areas of the county, with accompanying maps and other supporting data, and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(c)  Establishment of floodplain development permit. A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities within special flood hazard areas as determined in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, altered or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(f)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the City Council; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Actual flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(h)  Penalties for violation. Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Code 1993, § 27-104; Ord. No. 03-9, 4-14-2003; Ord. No. 12-5, § 1, 10-8-2012; Ord. No. 14-4, § 1, 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 40-262. - Administration. 
(a)  Designation of Floodplain Administrator. The Chief Building Official, or his designee, herein referred to as the Floodplain Administrator, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Floodplain development permit and certification requirements. 
(1)  Plans and application requirements. Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him prior to any development activities proposed to be located within floodprone areas. The following items/information shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply for a floodplain development permit: 
a.  A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain development: 
1.  The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, the location of utility systems, proposed grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and other proposed development; 
2.  The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in section 40-261(b) or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard area; 
3.  The flood zone designation of the proposed development area as determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in section 40-261(b); 
4.  The boundary of the floodway or nonencroachment area as determined in section 40-261(b); 
5.  The base flood elevation (BFE), where provided, as set forth in section 40-261(b); section 40-262(c)(11) and (12); or section 40-263(b)(5), (c), and (d); 
6.  The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
7.  Preparation of the plot plan by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. 
b.  Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a special flood hazard area including, but not limited to: 
1.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed reference level, including basement, of all structures; 
2.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
3.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed. 
c.  If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate and backup plans from a registered professional engineer or architect, certifying that the nonresidential floodproofed development will meet the floodproofing criteria in section 40-263(b)(2) and (c)(2); 
d.  A foundation plan drawn to scale which shall include details of the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this article are met. These details include but are not limited to: 
1.  Proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill, solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation on columns/piers); 
2.  Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used in floodplains, details of sufficient openings to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters, in accordance with section 40-263(b)(4). 
e.  Usage details of any enclosed space below the regulatory flood protection elevation; 
f.  Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
g.  Copy of all other local, state and federal permits required prior to floodplain development permit issuance (i.e., wetlands, erosion and sedimentation control, riparian buffers, mining, etc.); 
h.  If floodplain development permit is issued for placement of recreational vehicles and/or temporary structures, documentation to ensure section 40-263(b)(6) and (7) of this article are met; 
i.  If a watercourse is proposed to be altered and/or relocated, a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; an engineering report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation. 
(2)  Floodplain development permit data requirements. The following information shall be provided at a minimum on the floodplain development permit to ensure compliance with this article: 
a.  A description of the development to be permitted under the floodplain development permit issuance. 
b.  The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed development per available data specified in section 40-261(b). 
c.  The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the reference level and all attendant utilities. 
d.  The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the protection of all public utilities. 
e.  All certification submittal requirements within timelines. 
f.  State that no fill material shall encroach into the floodway or nonencroachment area of any watercourse, if applicable. 
g.  If in an A, AO, AE or A1-30 zone, the minimum foundation opening requirements must be met according to the state building codes. 
h.  State limitations of below-BFE enclosure uses, if applicable (i.e., parking, building access and limited storage only). 
(3)  Certification requirements. 
a.  An elevation certificate (FEMA form 81-31) or floodproofing certificate (FEMA form 81-65) is required after the reference level is completed. Within twenty-one (21) calendar days of establishment of the reference level elevation, or floodproofing, by whatever construction means, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the elevation of the reference level, or floodproofed elevation, whichever is applicable in relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work done within the twenty-one-day calendar period and prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make said corrections required shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
b.  A final as-built elevation certificate (FEMA form 81-31) or floodproofing certificate (FEMA form 81-65) is required after construction is completed and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built construction of the elevation or floodproofed elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities. Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make said corrections required shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate of compliance/occupancy. 
c.  If a manufactured home is placed within an A, AO, AE, or A1-30 zone and the elevation of the chassis is above thirty-six (36) inches in height, an engineered foundation certification is required per section 40-263(b)(3). 
d.  If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; an engineering report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit. 
e.  Certification exemptions. The following structures, if located within A, AO, AE or A1-30 zones, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing certification requirements specified in subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section: 
1.  Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of section 40-263(b)(6)a; 
2.  Temporary structures meeting requirements of section 40-263(b)(7); and 
3.  Accessory structures less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet meeting requirements of section 40-263(b)(8). 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. Duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for all proposed development within floodprone areas to ensure that the requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits (i.e., wetlands, erosion and sedimentation control, riparian buffers, mining, etc.) may be required, and if specific federal or state permits are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the floodplain development permit. 
(3)  Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina Department of Crime Control and Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(4)  Ensure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(5)  Prevent encroachments within floodways and nonencroachment areas unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of section 40-263(e) are met. 
(6)  Obtain actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the reference level, including basement, of attendant utilities of all new or substantially improved structures, in accordance with section 40-262(b)(3). 
(7)  Obtain the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which the new or substantially improved structures and all utilities have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 40-262(b)(3). 
(8)  Obtain actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of all public utilities, in accordance with section 40-262(b)(3). 
(9)  When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with sections 40-262(b)(3) and 40-263(b)(2). 
(10)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the special flood hazard areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation, as provided in this article. 
(11)  When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in accordance with section 40-261, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation (BFE) data, along with floodway data and/or nonencroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other source, including data developed pursuant to section 40-263(e)(4), in order to administer the provisions of this article. 
(12)  When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway nor nonencroachment area data has been provided in accordance with section 40-261, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data, and/or nonencroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other source in order to administer the provisions of this article. 
(13)  When the exact location of boundaries of the special flood hazard areas conflict with the current, natural topography information at the site the property owner may apply and be approved for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) by FEMA. A copy of the Letter of Map Amendment issued from FEMA will be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator in the floodplain development permit file. 
(14)  Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of this article and make these records available for public inspection. 
(15)  Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain Administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of this article and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain Administrator has a right, upon presentation of the proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action. 
(16)  Issue stop work orders as required. Whenever a building or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation of this article, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be immediately stopped. The stop work order shall be in writing and directed to the person doing the work. The stop work order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reason for the stoppage, and the condition under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop work order constitutes a misdemeanor. 
(17)  Revocation of floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the approved application, plans, or specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may also be revoked. 
(18)  Make periodic inspections throughout all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator and each member of his inspections department shall have a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter any premises within the territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action. 
(19)  Follow through with corrective procedures of section 40-262(d). 
(d)  Corrective procedures. 
(1)  Violations to be corrected. When the Floodplain Administrator finds violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his duty to notify the owner or occupant of the building in violation. The owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law pertaining to their property. 
(2)  Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or registered mail to the owner's last known address or by personal services, stating: 
a.  The building or property is in violation of the flood damage prevention article; 
b.  A hearing will be held before the Floodplain Administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten (10) days after the date of the notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and 
c.  Following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue such order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as appears appropriate. 
(3)  Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that the building or development is in violation of the flood damage prevention article, he shall make an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation within a specified time period, not less than sixty (60) days. Where the Floodplain Administrator finds that there is an imminent danger to life or other property, he may order that the corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible. 
(4)  Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action may appeal the order to the City Council by giving notice of appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the clerk within ten (10) days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The City Council shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the order. 
(5)  Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action from which no appeal has been taken, or fails to comply with an order of the City Council following an appeal, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in the discretion of the court. 
(e)  Variance procedures. 
(1)  The Board of Adjustment as established by the city, hereinafter referred to as the Appeal Board, shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(2)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal such decision to the Court, as provided in chapter 7A of the North Carolina General Statutes (G.S. ch. 7). 
(3)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(4)  In passing upon variances, the Appeal Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this article, and: 
a.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
b.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
d.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
e.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
f.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
g.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
h.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
i.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
j.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
k.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and street and bridges. 
(5)  A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be submitted with the application for a variance. 
(6)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(7)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or nonencroachment area if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(8)  Conditions for variances. The conditions for issuing variances are as follows: 
a.  Variances may not be issued when the variance will make the structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or ordinances. 
b.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
c.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
1.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increase flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
d.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and a written statement that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced reference level elevation. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. 
e.  The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the state upon request. 
(9)  A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas provided that all of the following conditions are met. A floodplain development permit may be issued for such development only if a variance is granted. 
a.  The use serves as a critical need in the community. 
b.  No feasible location exists for the use outside the special flood hazard area. 
c.  The reference level of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood protection level. 
d.  The use complies with all other applicable federal, state and local laws. 
e.  The city has notified the Secretary of the North Carolina Department of Crime Control and Public Safety of its intention to grant a variance at least thirty (30) days prior to granting the variance. 
(Code 1993, § 27-105; Ord. No. 03-9, 4-14-2003; Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 3-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-5, § 1, 10-8-2012) 
Sec. 40-263. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(a)  General standards. In all special flood hazard areas, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damages; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages; 
(4)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. These include but are not limited to HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric meter panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes, appliances (i.e., washers, dryers, refrigerators, etc.), hot water heaters, electric outlets/switches; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; 
(8)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure which is in compliance with the provisions of this article, shall meet the requirements of new construction as contained in this article; 
(9)  Nonconforming structures or other development may not be enlarged, replaced, or rebuilt unless such enlargement or reconstruction is accomplished in conformance with the provisions of this article. Nothing in this article shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and located totally or partially within the floodway, nonencroachment area, or stream setback, provided that the bulk of the building or structure below the regulatory flood protection elevation in the floodway, nonencroachment area, or stream setback is not increased and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements of this article. 
(10)  New solid waste disposal facilities, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not be permitted in special flood hazard areas. A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an allowed use or the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood protection elevation and certified according to section 40-262(b)(3). 
(b)  Specific standards. In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided, as set forth in section 40-261(b), or section 40-262(c)(11) and (12), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction . New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction . New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. Structures located in A, AO, AE and A1-30 zones may be floodproofed to the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation provided that all areas of the structure below the required flood protection elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in section 40-262(b)(3). 
(3)  Manufactured homes. Requirements for mobile homes are as follows: 
a.  New or replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation plus one (1) foot or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
b.  Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation to resist floatation, collapse, or lateral movement in accordance with the state Regulations for Manufactured/Mobile Homes, 1995 edition and any revision thereto adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to G.S. 143-143.15 or a certified engineering foundation. Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis thirty-six (36) inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength. When the elevation of the chassis is above thirty-six (36) inches in height an engineering certification is required. 
c.  All foundation enclosures or skirting shall be in accordance with section 40-263(b)(4). 
d.  An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within floodprone areas. This plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the local Emergency Management Coordinator. 
(4)  Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas that are below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall not be designed to be used for human habitation, but shall be designed to be used only for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials below the regulatory flood protection level in A, AO, AE and A1-30 zones, and meet the following design criteria: 
a.  Measures for complying with this requirement shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the foundation must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum design criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings on different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The total net area of all openings must be at least one (1) square inch for each square foot of each enclosed area subject to flooding; 
3.  If a building has more than one (1) enclosed area, each area must have openings on exterior walls to allow floodwater to directly enter; 
4.  The bottom of all required openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above the adjacent grade; and 
5.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other opening coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; 
6.  Foundation enclosures: 
i.  Vinyl or sheet metal skirting is not considered an enclosure for regulatory and flood insurance rating purposes. Therefore such skirting does not require hydrostatic openings as outlined above. 
ii.  Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires hydrostatic openings as outlined above to comply with this article. 
b.  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry into the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas. 
(5)  Additions/improvements. Requirements for additions/improvements are as follows: 
a.  Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures whereas the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to the existing structures: 
1.  Are not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more nonconforming than the existing structure. 
2.  Are substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new construction. 
b.  Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications to the existing structure shall require only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction. 
c.  Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures whereas the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modification of the existing structure: 
1.  Are not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements only must comply with the standards for new construction. 
2.  Are a substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new construction. 
d.  Where a firewall or independent perimeter loadbearing wall is provided between the addition and the existing building, the addition shall be considered a separate building and only the addition must comply with the standards for new construction. 
(6)  Recreational vehicles. Recreation vehicles placed on sites within a special flood hazard area shall either: 
a.  Be on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and has no permanently attached additions; or 
b.  Meet all the requirements for new construction, including anchoring and elevation requirements of section 40-262(b) and section 40-263(a) and (b)(3). 
(7)  Temporary structures. Prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the following requirements must be met: 
a.  Applicants must submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure in the event of a hurricane or flash flood warning notification. The plan must include the following information: 
1.  A special time period for which the temporary use will be permitted; 
2.  The name, address and phone number of the individual responsible for the removal of the temporary structure; 
3.  The timeframe prior to the event at which a structure will be removed (i.e., minimum of seventy-two (72) hours before landfall of a hurricane or immediately upon flood warning notification); 
4.  A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with a trucking company to ensure the availability of removal equipment when needed; and 
5.  Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside the special flood hazard area to which the temporary structure will be moved. 
b.  The above information shall be submitted in writing to the Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval. 
(8)  Accessory structures. When accessory structures, sheds, detached garages, etc., are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, the following criteria shall be met: 
a.  Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation, including work, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas; 
b.  Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential; 
c.  Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters; 
d.  Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with section 40-263(a)(1); 
e.  All service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be installed in accordance with section 40-263(a)(4); 
f.  Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be provided below regulatory flood protection elevation in conformance with section 40-263(b)(4)a; 
g.  An accessory structure with a footprint less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet does not require an elevation or floodproofing certificate. Elevation or floodproofing certifications are required for all other accessory structures in accordance with section 40-262(b)(3). 
(c)  Subdivisions, manufactured home parks and major developments. All subdivision, manufactured home park and major development proposals located within special flood hazard areas shall: 
(1)  Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)  Have base flood elevation (BFE) data provided if development is greater than the lesser of five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots/manufactured home sites. Such base flood elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference per section 40-261(b) to be utilized in implementing this article. 
(d)  Standard for floodplains without established base flood elevations. Within the special flood hazard areas established in section 40-261(b), where no base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements per new development shall be permitted within a distance of twenty (20) feet each side from top of bank or five (5) times the width of the stream whichever is greater, unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If section 40-263(c)(1) is satisfied and base flood elevation (BFE) data is available from other sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this article and shall be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with elevations established in accordance with section 40-262(c)(11) and (12). When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a federal, state, or other source, the reference level, including basement, shall be elevated at least two (2) feet above highest adjacent grade. 
(e)  Standards for floodplains with BFE but without established floodways or nonencroachment areas. Along rivers and streams where base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but neither floodway nor nonencroachment areas are identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or the FIS, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development, shall be permitted unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. 
(f)  Floodways and nonencroachment areas. Located within the special flood hazard areas established in section 40-261(b) are areas designated as floodways or nonencroachment areas. The floodways and nonencroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and potential projectiles. The following provisions shall apply to all development within such areas: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other developments shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood. Such certification and technical data shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit. 
(2)  If section 40-263(f)(1) is satisfied, all development shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(3)  No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except replacement manufactured homes in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the following provisions are met: 
a.  The anchoring and the elevation standards of section 40-263(b)(3); and 
b.  The no-encroachment standards of section 40-263(f)(1). 
(Code 1993, § 27-106; Ord. No. 03-9, 4-14-2003; Ord. No. 12-5, § 1, 10-8-2012; Ord. NO. 15-2, § 1, 4-13-2015) 
Sec. 40-264. - Legal status provisions. 
(a)  Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing flood damage prevention article. This article in part carries forward by reenactment of some of the provisions of the existing flood damage prevention ordinance, adopted December 12, 1977, as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to reenact and continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be enforced. The enactment of this article shall not affect any action, suit or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance of the city enacted on December 12, 1977, as amended, which are not reenacted herein are repealed. 
(b)  Effect upon outstanding building permits. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of any development or any part thereof for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain Administrator or his authorized agents before the time of passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such outstanding permit within a period of six (6) months subsequent to passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived or any revision thereto, construction or use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 27-107; Ord. No. 03-9, 4-14-2003) 
Secs. 40-265-40-286. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - MULTIFAMILY DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 40-287. - Applicability. 
    The standards established in sections 40-288 through 40-298 shall apply to new construction and conversions of all multifamily development in residential zoning districts. Multifamily development in the B1H Zoning District shall be subject to the standards established in sections 40-299 through 40-302. 
(Code 1993, § 27-108) 
Sec. 40-288. - Procedures; required review, contents. 
(a)  Required review. The developer shall submit a development plan to the Department of Planning and Development for review and approval prior to the issuance of any construction or building permits in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Site plan approval. For one (1) structure containing three (3) or more attached dwelling units and/or two (2) or more dwelling structures located on a common lot. 
(2)  Preliminary and final subdivision plat approval. Preliminary and final subdivision plat approval shall be required in accordance with chapter 34, pertaining to subdivisions. 
(b)  Contents. The contents shall be as necessary to determine and ensure compliance with the standards, conditions, and restrictions of the zoning and subdivision chapters and related laws. Specific site design elements, submission requirements, and procedures shall be in accordance with article XVIII of this chapter, pertaining to site plan review. 
(Code 1993, § 27-109) 
Sec. 40-289. - Density. 
    The minimum lot area required per dwelling unit is as follows: 
(a)  One (1) bedroom unit: two thousand three hundred (2,300) square feet (net) per unit. 
(b)  Two (2) bedroom unit or greater: two thousand nine hundred (2,900) square feet (net) per unit. 
For purposes of this section, the area within any public street right-of-way shall not be used to determine the net area. 
(Code 1993, § 27-110) 
Sec. 40-290. - Open space. 
(a)  Thirty (30) percent of the net area shall be reserved as common and/or private open space. 
(b)  Public and/or private streets, driveways, off-street parking area, and principal and accessory structures shall not be used in calculating or meeting the open space requirements. 
(c)  Recreation areas may be counted as open space provided impervious surfaces constitute no more than fifty (50) percent of such recreation area. 
(d)  Detached accessory structures shall not cover more than twenty (20) percent of any individually designated, reserved, or common area. 
(Code 1993, § 27-111) 
Sec. 40-291. - Development standards. 
(a)  Lot dimensions. Development standards for lot dimensions in multifamily developments are as follows: 
(1)  Net area: fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
(2)  Primary width: seventy-five (75) feet at the minimum building line, for the first dwelling. 
(3)  A secondary width of fifteen (15) feet shall be provided for each additional dwelling unit. 
(b)  Setbacks for principal structures. Development standards for setbacks for principal structures in multifamily developments are as follows: 
(1)  Front yard/public street right-of-way: twenty-five (25) feet. 
(2)  Private street easement: ten (10) feet. 
(3)  Group development peripheral boundary: twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  Single structure peripheral boundary: Development standards for peripheral boundaries in multifamily developments are as follows: 
a.  Side: ten (10) feet. 
b.  Rear: twenty (20) feet. 
(c)  Setbacks for accessory structures. Development standards for setbacks for accessory structures in multifamily developments are as follows: 
(1)  Public street right-of-way: twenty-five (25) feet. 
(2)  Private street easement: ten (10) feet. 
(3)  Peripheral boundary: In accordance with article VII of this chapter, pertaining to bufferyard landscaping requirements. 
(4)  No accessory structure to any multifamily structure or dwelling unit shall be located in any front yard. 
(5)  Specific accessory structures such as satellite dish antennas and swimming pools shall comply with the applicable provisions of article VI of this chapter, pertaining to dimensional standards, modifications, and special standards. 
(d)  Setbacks for recreation areas. Development standards for setbacks for recreation areas in multifamily developments are as follows: 
(1)  Active. No portion of an active recreation area shall be located within the peripheral boundary setback or less than twenty (20) feet from any dwelling unit. 
(2)  Passive. May be located within the peripheral boundary setback in accordance with the bufferyard regulations, as shown in section 40-293. 
(e)  Building separation within group developments containing two (2) or more principal structures on one (1) lot of record. 
(1)  No portion of a principal structure front or rear building wall elevation shall be located less than forty (40) feet from an adjacent principal structure front or rear building wall elevation as measured at ninety (90) degrees, except as provided herein. 
(2)  No portion of a principal structure side building wall elevation shall be located less than twenty (20) feet from an adjacent principal structure as measured at ninety (90) degrees, except as provided herein. 
(3)  Single-family and two-family attached group developments shall be exempt from subsections (e)(1) and (2) of this section, provided such structures meet all other requirements of this section. 
(4)  No portion of any principal structure shall be located less than sixteen (16) feet from any other principal structure as measured to the closest point. 
(5)  No two (2) units or structures shall be considered attached unless such units or structures share a minimum five-foot common party wall. 
(6)  Architectural extensions including, but not limited to, bay windows, chimneys, open porches and decks, roof overhangs, and balconies shall not be considered in calculating building separation provided such encroachments are not more than three (3) feet. 
(f)  Building height. No structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height above the property grade unless the required setbacks and building separations are increased one (1) foot for each one (1) foot or fraction thereof of building height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet. 
(g)  Building length. No continuous unit or series of attached units shall exceed a combined length of two hundred sixty (260) feet. 
(Code 1993, § 27-112) 
Sec. 40-292. - Recreation area requirement (private). 
(a)  Private recreation area requirements in multifamily developments shall not apply to developments that: 
(1)  Contain less than two (2) net acres; and 
(2)  Are located within a one-half (1/2) mile radius of a public recreation area. 
(b)  Common recreation areas shall be provided at a ratio of one hundred (100) square feet per dwelling unit. 
(Code 1993, § 27-113) 
Sec. 40-293. - Bufferyard requirements. 
    Bufferyard requirements shall be in accordance with article VII of this chapter, pertaining to bufferyard landscaping requirements. Bufferyard vegetation improvements may be phased to coincide with the construction of buildings, provided such phasing is set forth on the approved site plan of the development. 
(Code 1993, § 27-114) 
Sec. 40-294. - Parking requirements. 
(a)  Parking requirements in multifamily developments by number of spaces are as follows: 
(1)  One (1) bedroom unit: one and one-half (1 1/2) spaces. 
(2)  Two (2) or more bedroom unit: two (2) spaces. 
(b)  All off-street parking areas designed for three (3) or more spaces shall be in accordance with article XVII of this chapter, pertaining to parking. 
(Code 1993, § 27-115) 
Sec. 40-295. - Garbage/trash container pad locations. 
(a)  No common garbage/trash container pad shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet to any dwelling structure. 
(b)  Each common garbage/trash container pad required to service the development shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of the dwelling units such container is intended to serve. 
(Code 1993, § 27-115.5) 
Sec. 40-296. - Private streets. 
    Private streets may be allowed, pursuant to the standards of chapter 34, pertaining to subdivisions. 
(Code 1993, § 27-116) 
Sec. 40-297. - Compliance with subdivision standards. 
    All development regulated in accordance with this section shall be subject to the requirements, conditions, and restrictions of chapter 34, pertaining to subdivisions, whether or not the subject tract is actually divided for the purpose of transferring title. 
(Code 1993, § 27-117) 
Sec. 40-298. - Applicability. 
    The standards established in sections 40-299 through 40-302 shall apply only in the B1H Zoning District. 
(Code 1993, § 27-118) 
Sec. 40-299. - Development standards in B1H Zoning District. 
    The following development standards apply in the B1H Zoning District. 
(a)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area: one thousand (1,000) square feet per unit. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width: N/A. 
(c)  Minimum setbacks. Minimum front, side, and rear yard setbacks: zero (o). 
(d)  Minimum parking. Minimum parking: one-half (1/2) space per bedroom. 
(e)  Parking location requirements. All required parking and parking for which bonuses are obtained must be within eight hundred (800) feet of the building they are to serve. Leased parking shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of article XVII of this chapter, pertaining to parking. 
(f)  Off-street parking. All off-street parking areas designed for three (3) or more spaces shall be in accordance with article XVII of this chapter, pertaining to parking. 
(g)  Street frontage use requirements. All ground floor street frontage shall be developed for nonresidential uses, as permitted in the applicable zone. When new construction occurs for residential purposes, located in a flood zone, and off street parking is placed at ground level, the nonresidential provision does not apply. 
(h)  Preservation design. All applicable historic district guidelines shall be met and appropriate review shall be made by the Historic Preservation Commission, in accordance with article XV of this chapter, pertaining to special districts. 
(i)  Signage. All signs shall be erected in accordance with article XVI of this chapter, pertaining to signs, but in no event shall be mounted over existing windows, doors, or other significant architectural features. 
(Code 1993, § 27-119; Ord. No. 06-06, § 1, 3-13-2006) 
Sec. 40-300. - Residential density bonus provisions in B1H Zoning District. 
    A project shall be eligible for a residential density bonus, by way of a lot area per unit reduction, if space is provided within the project for the uses, improvements, or facilities set forth in this section: 
(a)  Off-street parking, nonresidential. The minimum ratio shall be one (1) space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross nonresidential area. 
(b)  Cultural/entertainment facilities. Such facilities shall be open to the public on a regular basis, and shall be limited to: 
(1)  Visual arts space. Facilities that provide space for the viewing of performing arts, including, but not limited to, exhibition halls, galleries, concert halls, or theaters. Such space shall occupy not less than fifteen (15) percent of the total floor area of the portion of the building used for residential purposes. 
(2)  Motion picture theaters. Facilities that provide indoor space for the showing of motion pictures. 
(c)  Pedestrian circulation improvements. Improvements to which the public is ensured access to a regular basis, or an area that is dedicated to and accepted by the city for public access purposes. Such improvements shall be directly accessible to existing pedestrian circulation areas, and limited to: 
(1)  Businesses allowing pedestrian access through at least two (2) entrances opening to different streets, sidewalks, open spaces, and/or parking lots. 
(2)  Arcades. A continuous but not necessarily enclosed space which extends along the facade of a building and has at least two (2) entrances opening directly to a street, open space, or sidewalk or which runs through a building and connects a street, open space, or sidewalk to another street, open space, or parking lot. 
(3)  Plaza. A continuous area which is open to the sky for its entire width and length, which fronts on a street, sidewalk, widening, or parking lot, and which is directly accessible to the public at all times for passive recreational purposes. The ground level of the plaza shall be constructed mainly of hard-surfaced materials, and shall be landscaped and lighted. An existing open space for which no such improvements are planned shall not qualify. 
(d)  Child or adult day care facility. 
(e)  Historic structure/rehabilitation. This bonus is applicable to those projects qualifying for the Historic Rehabilitation Tax Credit, as approved by the North Carolina Division of Archives and History and the United States Department of Interior. 
(Code 1993, § 27-120) 
Sec. 40-301. - Schedules of residential bonuses for B1H Zoning District. 
    For each amenity provided above, the project will be eligible to reduce the required lot area by the number of square feet indicated in this section. The maximum lot reduction allowed shall be two hundred fifty (250) square feet per unit. 
Project Amenity Amount of Lot Area Reduction per Unit Parking/commercial 125 square feet Cultural/entertainment 250 square feet Pedestrian circulation Front and rear access 125 square feet Arcade 250 square feet Plaza 250 square feet Day care 250 square feet Historic structure/rehabilitation 250 square feet  
(Code 1993, § 27-121) 
Sec. 40-302. - Conversion of single-family dwelling units in the Residential Historic District. 
    No existing single-family dwelling unit located in the Residential Historic District (RHD) shall be altered so as to accommodate a two-family or multifamily dwelling unit. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any single-family dwelling unit previously converted to another use, including, but not limited to, a use as a two-family or multifamily dwelling unit, shall be treated as a nonconforming situation or use for the purposes of this article. All new construction of two-family or multifamily units in the Residential Historic District (RHD) shall meet the standards set forth in this article. 
(Code 1993, § 27-122; Ord. No. 97-11, 7-14-1997; Ord. No. 00-4, 4-10-2000; Ord. No. 00-19, 11-13-2000) 
Secs. 40-303-40-312. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 40-313. - Purpose and intent; definition. 
(a)  Pursuant to article 19, part 3 of chapter 160A of the General Statutes of North Carolina (G.S. ch. 160A, pt. 3, art. 19), the City Council establishes the Planning Unit Development District (PUD) as a special use zoning district designed to provide an alternative to traditional development standards which is intended to: 
(1)  Reduce initial development costs by reducing standard minimum lot size and setback requirements while reserving areas for common use; 
(2)  Preserve the character of surrounding neighborhoods and enhance the physical appearance of the area by preserving natural features and existing vegetation, while providing recreational and open areas; 
(3)  Promote economical and efficient land use which can result in smaller networks of public facilities, utilities, and streets; 
(4)  Provide an appropriate and harmonious variety of housing and creative site design alternatives; 
(5)  Promote energy conservation by optimizing the orientation, layout, and design of structures to take maximum advantage of solar heating/cooling schemes and energy conserving landscaping; 
(6)  Encourage innovations in residential development so that the growing demands of population may be met by greater variety in type, design, and layout of buildings; and 
(7)  Provide a procedure which can relate the type, design, and layout of development to a particular site and the particular demand for housing and other facilities at the time of development in a manner consistent with the preservation of property values within established residential areas. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, a Planned Unit Development District shall be defined as a project/district which meets all of the following: 
(1)  Land under common ownership, to be planned and developed as an integral unit; 
(2)  A single development or a programmed series of development, including all lands, uses, and facilities; 
(3)  Constructed according to comprehensive and detailed plans that include streets, drives, utilities, lots, and building sites. Plans for such building locations, uses and their relation to each other shall be included and detailed plans for others uses and improvements of land showing their relation to the building shall also be included; and 
(4)  Providing a program for the provision, operation and maintenance of such areas, facilities and improvements as shall be required for perpetual common use by the occupants of the Planned Unit Development. 
(Code 1993, § 27-123) 
Sec. 40-314. - Regulation of uses; density; open space; recreation; parking; landscape; density bonus requirements. 
(a)  Minimum area requirements. The following are minimum area requirements in Planned Unit Developments: 
(1)  Planned Unit Developments shall contain not less than twenty (20) gross acres. 
(2)  Planned Unit Developments comprising less than one hundred (100) gross acres shall contain residential uses only as set forth in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(3)  Planned Unit Developments comprising one hundred (100) gross acres or more may contain all of the uses permitted by subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section provided that all nonresidential uses set forth in subsection (b)(2) of this section meet the following design requirements: 
a.  Are designed and located with the primary intention of serving the immediate needs and convenience of the residents of the Planned Unit Development; 
b.  Are located on minor streets, as defined in section 40-321; 
c.  Are not located on any public street that borders the Planned Unit Development; 
d.  Are not located within five hundred (500) feet of the peripheral boundary of the Planned Unit Development; and 
e.  Are not platted for development until a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the residential units have been constructed. 
(b)  Regulations of uses. Subject to subsection (a) of this section, a Planned Unit Development may contain the following permitted residential and nonresidential uses: 
(1)  Residential uses include: 
a.  Detached single-family dwelling; 
b.  Two-family, attached dwelling (duplex); 
c.  Attached single-family dwelling or townhouse development group; 
d.  Condominium development group; 
e.  Multifamily development group; 
f.  Family care home, subject to article VI; 
g.  Accessory building or use; 
h.  Public recreation or park facility; and 
i.  Private recreation facility. 
(2)  Nonresidential uses include: 
a.  Churches; 
b.  Elementary and secondary schools subject to the development standards established under article VI of this chapter; 
c.  Kindergartens, day care facilities; 
d.  General business, professional or medical offices; 
e.  Neighborhood convenience food stores; 
f.  Drugstores; 
g.  Grocery stores; 
h.  Accessory gasoline sales; and 
i.  Barbershops and beauty shops. 
(c)  Maximum density requirements. 
(1)  Residential density shall not exceed six (6) units per gross acre, except as further provided under the density bonus option contained in subsection (i) of this section. 
(2)  Nonresidential uses shall not exceed five (5) percent of the gross Planned Unit Development acreage. 
(d)  Open space requirements. 
(1)  Planned Unit Developments shall reserve not less than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross acreage as common open space. 
(2)  If developed in sections, the common open space requirements set forth herein shall be coordinated with the construction of dwelling units and other facilities to insure that each development section shall receive benefit of the total common open space. 
(3)  Streets, private drives, off-street parking areas and structures or buildings shall not be utilized in calculating or counting towards the minimum common open space requirement; however, lands occupied by recreational building and/or structures, bike paths and similar common facilities may be counted as required open space provided such impervious surfaces constitute no more than five (5) percent of the total required common open space. 
(4)  In the designation of common open space, consideration shall be given to the suitability of location, shape, character and accessibility of such space. 
(e)  Recreation space requirement. A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the required gross common open space in a Planned Unit Development shall be developed for recreational purposes. For purposes of this section, the term "recreation" shall include, but not be limited to, tennis courts, swimming pools, ballfields, fitness courses, and the like. 
(f)  Dedication of open space, park lands and greenways. Where land is dedicated to and accepted by the city for open space, park and recreation purposes, and greenways, such land may be included as part of the gross acreage, open space and/or recreation space requirement of this section. 
(g)  Off-street parking requirements. 
(1)  Number of spaces. 
a.  Residential parking. Planned unit developments shall provide a minimum of two and one-half (2 1/2) off-street parking spaces, so designed not to allow parked vehicles to encroach within any public right-of-way or private street easement, for each dwelling unit. Provided however, residential developments to be used exclusively by elderly occupants shall require parking in accordance with article XVII of this chapter. 
b.  Nonresidential parking. Vehicular parking in areas designated as nonresidential shall be subject to the requirements of article XVII of this chapter. 
c.  Social and recreational buildings. One (1) parking space shall be required per fifty (50) square feet of floor area in each social or recreation building. 
d.  Accessory parking. One (1) accessory parking space shall be provided for every ten (10) residential units, rounded off to the next highest whose number. For purposes of this section, the term "residential units" shall be construed to mean those uses listed under subsection (b)(1)c through e of this section. 
(2)  All off-street parking area designed for three (3) or more spaces shall be in accordance with article XVII of this section. 
(3)  All parking areas shall be landscaped and meet the general parking requirements of article XVII of this section, unless otherwise provided in this subsection. 
(h)  Bufferyard requirements. Bufferyard requirements shall be in accordance with article VII of this chapter. Bufferyard vegetation improvements may be phased to coincide with the construction of buildings, provided such phasing is set forth on the approved bufferyard plan. 
(i)  Residential density bonus provisions and standards. A density bonus rounded to the nearest whole number and not exceeding a total of twenty-five (25) percent over the allowable base density as set forth in subsection (c) of this section may be approved by the Planning Board in accordance with the standards for allowing density bonuses as listed in this section. The applicable requirements of section 40-319(c) shall be shown on the land use plan in sufficient detail to enable the Planning Board to evaluate such proposal. 
(1)  Common open space. Increasing the common open space area by ten (10) percent above the required common open space provisions may allow a bonus of five (5) percent above the allowable density of a Planned Unit Development. 
(2)  Bike paths/greenway systems. The provisions of a system of bike paths/pedestrian greenways that form a logical, safe and convenient system of access to all dwelling units, project facilities, or principal off-site pedestrian destinations may quality for a density bonus upon approval of the Planning Board. Such facilities shall be appropriately located, designed, and constructed with existing topography, land form, vegetation and other amenities associated with the Planned Unit Development. The maximum bonus allowed under this provision may be five (5) percent above the allowable density in the Planned Unit Development. 
(3)  Solar access. Where the design of a Planned Unit Development provides sixty (60) percent of dwelling units proper solar access in order that those dwelling units maximize solar energy systems for heating and cooling purposes, a bonus of fifteen (15) percent above the allowable density in a Planned Unit Development may be approved provided the design of the Planned Unit Development meets the following: 
a.  The Planned Unit Development shall be designed so that the buildings shall receive sunlight sufficient for using solar energy systems for water heating and/or space heating and cooling. Building and vegetation shall be sited with respect to each other and the topography of the site so that the maximum unobstructed sunlight reaches the south wall or roof top of the designated units employing the solar heating/cooling systems including active and/or passive systems; and 
b.  The following criteria in addition to other design elements shall be evaluated in determining proper site design for the active and/or passive solar system utilized: 
1.  Site selection; 
2.  Street pattern; 
3.  Lot orientation; 
4.  Building orientation; 
5.  Building design; 
6.  Existing and proposed vegetation; and 
7.  Shadow patterns. 
(Code 1993, § 27-124) 
Sec. 40-315. - Planned Unit Development-Residential uses dimensional standards. 
(a)  Lot area. The lot area for each detached single-family dwelling shall be no less than six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
(b)  Lot width. Lot width for each detached single-family dwelling shall be no less than fifty (50) feet. Lot width for each attached dwelling unit shall be no less than sixteen (16) feet. For purposes of this section, the term "lot width" shall include condominium unit width. 
(c)  Street setback. No principal or accessory structure shall be closer than twenty (20) feet to a public street right-of-way or private street easement or as further provided herein. 
(d)  Minimum side yard. The side yard area required for detached single-family and two-family attached dwellings may be subject to section 40-317 (zero lot line) or not less than twelve (12) feet, provided, however, that no detached single-family or two-family attached structure shall be located on more than one (1) exterior side lot line. Detached single-family and two-family attached dwellings which do not utilize the provisions of section 40-317 (zero lot line) and are not located adjacent to a structure or lot subject to section 40-317 (zero lot line) shall maintain a minimum side setback of not less than six (6) feet. The side yard area required for attached units shall be subject to the applicable provisions of section 40-317 (zero lot line) provided the end unit of an attached building group containing three (3) or more units is not less than sixteen (16) feet from an adjacent property line or building. 
(e)  Minimum rear yard. The rear yard required for detached or attached dwelling units shall be subject to section 40-317 (zero lot line) or not less than twenty (20) feet. 
(f)  Building separation within group developments containing two (2) or more principal structures on one (1) lot of record. No portion of a principal structure front or rear building wall elevation shall be located less than forty (40) feet from an adjacent principal structure front or rear building wall elevation as measured at ninety (90) degrees. No portion of a principal structure side building wall elevation shall be located less than twenty (20) feet from an adjacent principal structure as measured at ninety (90) degrees. No portion of any principal structure shall be located less than sixteen (16) feet from any other principal structure as measured to the closest point. Architectural extensions including, but not limited to, bay windows, chimneys, open porches, and decks, roof overhangs and balconies shall not be considered in calculating building separation provided such encroachments are not more than three (3) feet. 
(g)  Height. No structures or building having a zero (0) side and/or rear setback in accordance with section 40-317 (zero lot line) shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height above the property grade. No structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height above the property grade unless the required setbacks and building separations are increased one (1) foot for each one (1) foot or fraction thereof of building height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet. 
(h)  Periphery boundary setback. No portion of a Planned Unit Development including accessory structures, parking areas, or required yards shall be located less than thirty (30) feet from the peripheral boundaries of the Planned Unit Development. 
(i)  Additional attached dwelling transition setback. The scale below shall be utilized in the calculation of the minimum building setback, in addition to the periphery boundary setback as specified above, between proposed attached dwelling units including their accessory structures and existing single-family zoning districts or other predominantly single-family areas, as defined herein, that border the Planned Unit Development. For purposes of this subsection, the term "other predominately single-family areas" shall be that area within one hundred (100) feet of the external boundary of the Planned Unit Development District in which fifty (50) percent or more of the confirming land uses are single-family residential. 
Number of Units per Building Additional Setback 
(in feet) 2 20 3-5 40 6-10 60 11 or over 80  
(j)  Recreation area setback. No portion of an active lighted recreation area shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of the external boundary of the Planned Unit Development. 
(k)  Transition area setback. Where a Planned Unit Development adjoins or borders an existing single-family zoning district or single-family development sharing common frontage on the same side of a public or private street the minimum public street setback requirement of the abutting single-family zone or development shall be utilized for a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from such common border along such street. 
(l)  Building length. No continuous unit or series of attached units shall exceed a combined length of two hundred and sixty (260) feet. 
(m)  Storage area required. Every dwelling unit shall provide private storage in the amount of ten (10) percent of the gross habitable floor area. The living area, including closets and attics, shall not count toward the required private storage area. Such storage area shall be provided in the form of attached utility rooms, detached accessory structures, and private yard area available for such future use or otherwise as approved by the Planning Board. 
(n)  Detached accessory structure requirements. Detached accessory structure requirements: 
(1)  Shall not be located within any front yard setback; 
(2)  Shall not be located within five (5) feet of any other structure; 
(3)  Shall not cover more than twenty (20) percent of any side or rear yard; and 
(4)  The side or rear yard requirement for detached accessory structures shall be subject to the provisions of section 40-317 (zero (0) lot line) or not less than five (5) feet. 
(o)  Trash/garbage container requirements. 
(1)  No container pad shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet to any dwelling structure; 
(2)  Each container pad required to service the development shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of the dwelling units such container is intended to serve; and 
(3)  Each container pad shall be in accordance with other requirements of the city. 
(p)  Satellite dish antennas, swimming pools. Satellite dish antennas and swimming pools shall comply with the applicable provisions of article VI of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 27-125) 
Sec. 40-316. - Planned Unit Development-Nonresidential use dimensional standards. 
(a)  The dimensional standards for the buildings shall meet all of the setback requirements as established in each business and industrial zoning classification. 
(b)  A zero side or rear yard setback where the side or rear building line is on the side or rear lot line as permitted herein, may be permitted subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Any wall constructed on the side or rear lot line shall be a solid doorless and windowless wall. Such wall shall contain no electrical, mechanical, heating, air conditioning or other fixtures that project beyond such wall. If there is an offset of the wall from the lot line, such offset shall be subject to the provisions established in this chapter and the state building code. Roof eaves may encroach two (2) feet into the adjoining lot; 
(2)  A five-foot maintenance and access easement with a maximum eave encroachment easement of two (2) feet within the maintenance easement may be established on the adjoining lot to ensure ready access to the lot line wall at reasonable periods of the day for normal maintenance; 
(3)  No two (2) units or structures shall be considered attached unless such units or structures share a five-foot linear common party wall. Common party walls of attached units shall be constructed in accordance with the state building code, G.S. ch. 47C (North Carolina Condominium Act), and other applicable requirements. 
(c)  Private street setback. No principal or accessory structure shall be closer than twenty (20) feet to a private street easement. 
(d)  Height. No structure or building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height above the property grade. 
(e)  Building separation. No structure or building shall be located within twenty (20) feet of any other structure or building. 
(f)  Nonresidential condominium or townhouse-type development. Nonresidential condominium or townhouse-type development shall be subject to the applicable provisions of section 40-317 (zero (0) lot line), provided the overall structure meets the side, rear and public or private street setbacks as provided by this subsection. 
(Code 1993, § 27-126; Ord. No. 00-17, 10-9-2000) 
Sec. 40-317. - Zero (0) side or rear yard setbacks for detached and attached buildings or structures. 
    A zero (0) side or rear yard setback where the side or rear building line is on the side or rear lot line as permitted herein, may be permitted, subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  Any wall, constructed on the side or rear lot line shall be a solid doorless and windowless wall. Such wall shall contain no electrical, mechanical, hearing, air conditioning or other fixtures that project beyond such wall. If there is an offset of the wall from the lot line, such offset shall be subject to the provisions of section 40-315 and/or section 40-316. Roof eaves may encroach two (2) feet into the adjoining lot; 
(b)  A five-foot maintenance and access easement with the maximum eave encroachment easement of two (2) feet within the maintenance easement shall be established on the adjoining lot and shall ensure ready access to the lot line wall at reasonable periods of the day for normal maintenance; 
(c)  No two (2) units or structures shall be considered attached unless such units or structures share a five-foot common party wall; and 
(d)  Common party walls of attached units shall be constructed in accordance with the state building code, G.S. ch. 47C (North Carolina Condominium Act), and other applicable requirements. 
(Code 1993, § 27-127) 
Sec. 40-318. - Planned Unit Development (PUD) district zoning map amendments. 
    Application. A petition for a zoning map amendment to establish a Planned Unit Development (PUD) district shall be submitted to the Planning Board and City Council and administered in accordance with the provisions of this chapter for amendments. 
(a)  Criteria. In addition to other considerations, the following may be utilized by the Planning Board and City Council in evaluation of a rezoning petition to establish a Planned Unit Development zoning district: 
(1)  The total development can create a needed residential environment; 
(2)  Existing or proposed utility and other public services are adequate for the anticipated population densities; and 
(3)  The Planned Unit Development is in general conformity with the city's comprehensive land use plan. 
(b)  Zoning map designation. Following City Council approval of a rezoning petition to establish a Planned Unit Development District (PUD), the property for which approval was granted by ordinance, shall be labeled PUD on the Official Zoning Map of the city. No permits for development shall be issued within any area designated as PUD unless the provisions as set forth herein are complied with. If a land use plan special use permit application is not filed with the Planning Board, pursuant to section 40-319 within twelve (12) months of such amendment, the City Council shall reserve the right to rezone the property to the original zoning classification. 
(Code 1993, § 27-128) 
Sec. 40-319. - Special use permits. 
(a)  Application. An application for a special use permit to develop a specific Planned Unit Development shall only be considered when the property is zoned PUD. In addition to other considerations, the following may be utilized by the Planning Board in evaluation of a special use permit pursuant to G.S. 160A-388(a): 
(1)  That the proposed population densities, land use and other special characteristics of development can exist in harmony with adjacent areas; 
(2)  That the adjacent areas can be developed in compatibility with the proposed Planned Unit Development; and 
(3)  That the proposed Planned Unit Development will not adversely affect traffic patterns and flow in adjacent areas. 
(b)  Land use plat. All applications for approval of a Planned Unit Development special use permit shall be accompanied by a land use plan prepared by a registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor, submitted in accordance with chapter 34, pertaining to subdivisions and article XVIII of this chapter, pertaining to site plan review, for preliminary plats and which shall include but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  The numbers and types of residential dwelling units including density and density bonus options utilized within each section and the delineation of nonresidential areas; 
(2)  Planned primary and secondary traffic circulation patterns showing proposed and existing rights-of-way and easements; 
(3)  Common open space and recreation areas to be developed or preserved in accordance with this section. Peripheral boundary setback shall be indicated; 
(4)  Plans for water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, natural gas and underground electric utilities to be installed per city standards; 
(5)  The delineation of areas to be constructed in sections, showing acreage; 
(6)  Soil maps prepared according to the United States cooperative soil survey standards as published in the county soil survey; 
(7)  Boundary survey of the tract showing courses and distances and total acreage, including zoning, land use and lot lines of all contiguous property; 
(8)  Existing vegetation, indicating all trees having a diameter of twenty-four (24) inches or more; 
(9)  Flood hazard areas including base flood elevation; 
(10)  Topographic contours at a maximum of two-foot intervals showing existing grades; 
(11)  Site data including vicinity sketch, north arrow, engineering scale ratio, title of development, date of plan, name and address of owner/developer and person or firm preparing the plan; 
(12)  Any other information as may be required by the Planning Board; 
(13)  Copies of or statements addressing the following: 
a.  Drafts of or statements addressing any declarations of covenants of conditions or restrictions which create a homeowner's association for the perpetual ownership and maintenance of all common open space and other areas including, but not limited to, recreation areas, private streets, parking areas, landscaping and the like. A private facilities maintenance analysis to determine actual costs of maintenance of such common facilities may be required by the Planning Board in order to assess the feasibility of such private maintenance; 
b.  Drafts of or statements addressing any proposed declarations to be recorded pursuant to the North Carolina Condominium Act (G.S. ch. 47C); 
c.  Drafts of or statements addressing proposed encroachments and maintenance easements concerning zero (0) lot line building walls; 
d.  The names and current mailing address of all property owners who own property within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed development including tax map designation and parcel numbers as listed upon the tax records of the county at the time of submission of the special use permit application; 
e.  The deed book and page number showing fee simple title of all property within the Planned Unit Development as listed in the office of the Beaufort County Register of Deeds; and 
f.  Statements addressing the required findings as set forth in subsection (e) of this section. 
(c)  Preliminary plat requirements. After approval of the land use plat special use permit as set forth herein, the developer shall submit the following according to the approved schedule of development: 
(1)  All information required by and in accordance with chapter 34, pertaining to subdivisions and article XVIII of this chapter, pertaining to site plan review, for submission of preliminary plats; 
(2)  Where zero (0) lot line options, as provided under section 40-317, are proposed, the building area for such lots shall be indicated on the plat; and 
(3)  The following additional information shall be required when the uses, as listed under section 40-315(b)(2), are proposed: The contents shall be as necessary to determine and ensure compliance with the standards, conditions and restrictions of this article. 
(d)  Final plat requirements. After approval of the preliminary plat as set forth herein, the developer shall submit the following according to the approved schedule of development and the final plat must be prepared by a registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor: 
(1)  All information required and in accordance with chapter 34, pertaining to subdivisions and article XVIII of this chapter, pertaining to site plan review, for submission of the final plats; 
(2)  Where zero (0) lot line setbacks are proposed, the building area for each lot shall be indicated; and 
(3)  The following additional information shall be required: 
a.  Maintenance agreements concerning all common areas, private streets, and utilities; and 
b.  All information as required and in accordance with G.S. ch. 47C (G.S. ch. 47C), North Carolina Condominium Act. 
(e)  Procedure; required reviews. 
(1)  Land use plat review. The applicant for a special use permit to develop a specific Planned Unit Development shall submit all information as required herein to the Department of Planning and Development no later than 5:00 p.m. on the fifteenth (15th) of the month before the month the applicant wishes to have the special use permit considered by the Planning Board and the Board of Adjustment. 
a.  Contents. All information as required by subsection (b) of this section. 
b.  The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing to review the special use permit application. The Planning Board may in its discretion attach reasonable conditions to the plat to insure that the purposes of the Planned Unit Development District can be met. The Planning Board shall forward its recommendation to the Board of Adjustment for final approval of the special use permit. The Board of Adjustment shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with the requirements of articles V and XIX of this chapter. 
c.  The Planning Board and the Board of Adjustment may, in their discretion, attach conditions to the plat that exceed the minimum standards as set forth herein when it is found that such conditions are necessary to ensure that the proposed Planned Unit Development will be compatible with adjacent areas. 
d.  Required findings. Prior to approval of a special use permit, the Board of Adjustment shall make appropriate findings to ensure that the following requirements are met: 
1.  The total development, as well as each individual section of development, can exist as an independent unit capable of creating an environment of sustained desirability and stability; 
2.  The use has existing or proposed utility services which are adequate for the population densities as proposed; 
3.  The use is properly located in relation to arterial and collector streets and is designed so as to provide direct access without creating traffic which exceeds acceptable capacity as determined by the Director of Public Works on streets in adjacent areas outside the Planned Unit Development; 
4.  The use will not adversely affect the health or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed use and will not be detrimental to the public welfare if located and developed according to the plan as submitted and approved; 
5.  The use meets all required conditions and specifications; 
6.  The use will not injure, by value or otherwise, adjoining or abutting property or public improvements in the neighborhood or in the alternative, that the use is a public necessity; and 
7.  The location and character of the use if developed according to the plat submitted and approved, will be in harmony with the area in which it is to be located and in general conformity with the land use plan of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
e.  Notice; public hearing. Notice shall be given in the same manner as for amendments to this chapter. 
f.  Notice; adjoining property owners. Notice of the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment public hearing shall be delivered to all owners of property within one hundred (100) feet of the external property boundaries of the proposed development. Such notice shall be postmarked not less than seven (7) days prior to the date of the Planning Board public hearing. Failure to notify all owners shall not affect the validity of the action, provided due diligence has been exercised in the attempts to provide notice. 
g.  Action by Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment shall act on the special use permit application by taking one of the following actions: 
1.  Approve the application as submitted; 
2.  Approve the application, subject to reasonable conditions or requirements; 
3.  Table or continue the application; or 
4.  Deny the application. 
h.  If approved, the special use permit shall be binding upon the applicant, successor and/or assigns. 
i.  Voting. A four-fifths (4/5) vote in favor of any special use permit application shall be required for approval. 
j.  Appeals from Board of Adjustment action. Decisions of the Board of Adjustment on action taken concerning any special use permit to establish a Planned Unit Development shall be subject to review, as provided by law. 
(2)  Preliminary plat site plan review. After approval of the land use plan as provided herein or in conjunction therewith, the developer shall submit all information as required below to the Department of Planning and Development no later than 5:00 p.m. on the fifteenth (15th) of the month before the month the applicant wants the preliminary plat to be reviewed by the Planning Board and City Council. 
a.  The preliminary plat site plan shall be reviewed and administered pursuant to the provisions of chapter 34, pertaining to subdivisions, and article XVIII of this chapter, pertaining to site plan review for preliminary plats; 
b.  Contents. All information as required by subsection (c) of this section; 
c.  The Planning Board shall review and approve the submitted preliminary plat site plan, provided such is in conformance with the approved land use plan and the provisions of this article and forward their recommendations to the City Council for approval; and 
d.  No building permit shall be issued for any construction within any Planned Unit Development until a preliminary and final plat site plan has been approved in accordance with the provisions of this article. Building permits may be issued in accordance with the applicable provisions of this article; article XVIII of this chapter, and chapter 34, pertaining to subdivisions. 
(3)  Final plat review. After approval of the preliminary plat site plan as provided herein, the developer shall submit all information, as required as follows, to the Department of Planning and Development no later than 5:00 p.m. on the fifteenth (15th) of the month before the month the applicant wants the final plat to be reviewed by the Planning Board. 
a.  The final plat shall be reviewed and administered pursuant to the provisions of this article, article XVIII of this chapter, pertaining to site plan review, and chapter 34, pertaining to subdivisions, for final plats; 
b.  Contents. All information as required by subsection (d) of this section; 
c.  The Planning Board shall review and approve the submitted final plat site plan provided such is in conformance with the approved land use plan and the approved land use plan and the provisions of this article and forward their recommendations to the City Council for approval; and 
d.  No building permit shall be issued for any construction within any Planned Unit Development until a final plat site plan has been approved in accordance with the provisions of this article. Building permits may be issued in accordance with the applicable provisions of this article; article XVIII of this chapter, pertaining to site plan review; and chapter 34, pertaining to subdivisions. 
e.  No certificate of compliance, as defined in G.S. 160A-423, shall be issued within any Planned Unit Development until a final plat and all covenants, restrictions, easements, agreements or otherwise for such development or section thereof has been recorded in the office of the Beaufort County Register of Deeds. 
(Code 1993, § 27-129) 
Sec. 40-320. - Design criteria. 
(a)  Site planning; external relationship. Site planning in the proposed development shall provide protection of the development from potentially adverse surrounding influence and protection of surrounding areas from potentially adverse influences within the development. Consideration will be given to the location of uses, type of uses, open space, recreation areas, street design and arrangement in the evaluation of the development and its relationship with the surrounding areas. 
(b)  Site planning; internal relationship. 
(1)  Service and emergency access. Access and circulation shall be adequately provided for firefighting equipment, service deliveries and refuse collection. 
(2)  Underground utilities. Planned unit developments shall be required to have underground utilities. Such proposed utilities shall be adequate to serve the proposed development and such utilities or streets shall be extended to adjacent property if it is determined to be in the interest of the city. 
(3)  Pedestrian circulation. A pedestrian circulation system is encouraged in such development. Walkways for pedestrian use shall form a logical, safe and convenient system of access to all dwelling units, project facilities and principal off-site pedestrian destinations. Walkways to be used by substantial numbers of children as routes to schools, play areas or other destinations shall be so located and safeguarded as to minimize contact with normal automobile traffic. Street crossings shall be held to a minimum. Such walkways, where appropriately located, designed and constructed, may be combined with other easements and used by emergency or service vehicles, but not be used by other automobile traffic. In addition, bike paths may be incorporated into the pedestrian circulation system and are to be encouraged in such developments. 
(4)  Where an existing or proposed public thoroughfare as indicated on the approved thoroughfare plan of the city is adjacent to or within the proposed Planned Unit Development, plans for the project will reflect said thoroughfares in a manner conducive to good transportation planning. Existing thoroughfares shall be provided for in accordance with current policies for the protection of rights-of-way and construction of thoroughfares within the city. 
(Code 1993, § 27-130) 
Sec. 40-321. - Street design criteria. 
(a)  For the purposes of the Planned Unit Development District, three (3) types of streets shall be utilized to provide internal access to the development. The three (3) types of streets are defined as: 
(1)  Minor street: Distributors within the Planned Unit Development which provided linkage with major streets outside the Planned Unit Development District; 
(2)  Marginal access street: Those streets which connect with minor streets to provide access to individual buildings within the Planned Unit Development District; and 
(3)  Private street: Those streets that provide access to individual buildings within the Planned Unit Development District, pursuant to subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  The street design of all Planned Unit Developments shall be in conformance with chapter 34, pertaining to subdivisions and the Manual of Standard Design and Details. 
(c)  Upon approval of the Planning Board, interior roads may be allowed to be constructed as private streets, subject to the requirements of chapter 34, pertaining to subdivisions. Where such private streets are allowed, the homeowners' association shall perpetually maintain such private streets in suitable conditions and state of repair for the city to provide normal delivery of services, including, but not limited to, garbage pickup, police and fire protection. If at any time such private streets are not maintained by the homeowner's association and travel upon them becomes or will be hazardous or inaccessible to the city's service or emergency vehicles, the city may cause such repairs after a reasonable period of notification to the property owner and/or homeowners' association. In order to remove safety hazards and ensure the safety and protection for the development, the city may assess the cost of such repairs to the property owner and/or homeowners' association. The city shall have no obligation or responsibility for maintenance or repair on such private streets as a result of the normal delivery of services or otherwise by the city or others using such streets. No private street shall be allowed unless a homeowners' association is established for the purpose of providing for and perpetually maintaining such streets. All private streets shall be dedicated to the city as utility easements. 
(Code 1993, § 27-131) 
Sec. 40-322. - Utility services. 
    Where utility services are provided on private property, the following standards shall apply: 
(a)  All such utility services, such as water lines, sanitary sewer lines, gas lines, storm sewer lines, and electric lines shall be installed and maintained according to the standards and policies of the city. 
(b)  The city shall receive a general easement to allow servicing and use by the city or their representative of valves, meters, transformers, poles, fire hydrants or other approved utility service apparatus; 
(c)  The city shall furnish and maintain utility meters at approved locations; and 
(d)  Where such utility lines, valves, fire hydrants or other utility apparatus are installed by the property owner or developer and required to be maintained by the homeowners' association or property owner, the city may cause such apparatus to be repaired or replaced upon its continued disrepair and after a reasonable period of notification to the property owner. In order to remove safety hazards and ensure the safety and protection for the development, the city may assess the cost of such repairs or replacement to the property owner or homeowners' association. 
(Code 1993, § 27-132) 
Sec. 40-323. - Homeowners' association. 
(a)  No final plat shall be approved until all required legal instruments have been reviewed and approved by the City Attorney as to legal form and effect. 
(b)  If common open space is deeded to a homeowners' association, the owner or developer shall file a declaration of covenants, conditions and restriction that will govern such association. The provisions of such declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The homeowner's association must be set up before any property is sold in the development; 
(2)  Membership must be mandatory and automatic when property is purchased in the development; 
(3)  The open space restrictions must be permanent, not just for a period of years; 
(4)  The association must be responsible for liability insurance, local taxes, and maintenance of recreational and other common facilities including private streets; 
(5)  Homeowners must pay their pro rata share of the cost; the assessment levied by the association can become a lien on the property; 
(6)  The association must be able to adjust the assessment to meet changed needs; 
(7)  Covenants for maintenance assessments shall run with the land; 
(8)  Provision ensuring that control of such association will gradually be vested in the homeowners' association; and 
(9)  All lands so conveyed shall be subject to the right of the grantee to enforce maintenance and improvement of the common facilities. 
(Code 1993, § 27-133) 
Sec. 40-324. - Amendment to land use plat special use permit. 
(a)  Minor changes. Amendments to the approved land use plat that, in the opinion of the Director of Planning and Development, do not substantially change the concept of the Planned Unit Development as approved may be allowed. Such minor changes may include but not be limited to small site alterations, such as realignment of streets and relocation of utility lines due to engineering necessity. The developer shall request such amendment in writing, clearly setting forth the reasons for such changes. If approved, the land use plat shall be so amended prior to submission of any preliminary plat site plan application involving or affecting such amendment. Appeal from the decision of the Director of Planning and Development may be taken to the Board of Adjustment. 
(b)  Major changes. Amendments to the approved land use plat that in the opinion of the Director of Planning and Development do in fact involve substantial changes and deviations from the concept of the Planned Unit Development as approved shall require review pursuant to section 40-319(e). Such major changes shall include but not be limited to increased density, land use, location of use, open space, recreation space, condition of Planning Board approval and street pattern. Appeal from the decision of the Director of Planning and Development may be taken to the Board of Adjustment. 
(c)  Authority. Minor changes may be approved administratively by the Department of Planning and Development. Major changes shall require Planning Board approval. 
(d)  Variances. The City Board of Adjustment shall not be authorized to grant or approve any variance from the minimum requirements as set forth in this section or condition as approved by the Planning Board. 
(Code 1993, § 27-134) 
Secs. 40-325-40-338. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - LAND USE INTENSITY (LUI) DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 40-339-40-352. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS 

Sec. 40-353. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antenna means any structure or device used to collect or radiate electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited to, directional antennas (such as, panels, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and omni-directional antennas, such as, whips), but not including satellite earth stations. 
    Collocation means locating wireless communications equipment from more than one (1) provider on a single site. 
    Commercial wireless telecommunication services means licensed commercial wireless telecommunication services including cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services that are marketed to the general public. 
    Concealed or camouflaged tower means communication towers and associated equipment which are totally concealed within an architectural feature of a building or within a structure, or camouflaged so they are architecturally indiscernible. Examples of concealing structures are church steeples, flagpoles, light fixtures, and signs. Examples of camouflaging are towers disguised as trees, clock and/or bell towers, and public art. 
    Guyed tower means a communication tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors. 
    Lattice tower means a guyed or self-supporting open, steel frame structure, with three (3) or more sides, that is used to support telecommunications equipment. 
    Monopole tower means a communication tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires and ground anchors. 
    Public utility means persons, corporations, or governments supplying gas, electric, transportation, water, sewer, or landline telephone service to the general public. For the purpose of this article, commercial wireless telecommunication services shall not be considered public utility uses, and are defined separately. 
    Telecommunication tower or tower means a monopole, guyed, or self-supporting tower, constructed as a freestanding structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure, or equipment, that contains one (1) or more antennas intended to transmit or receive television, AM/FM radio, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, or similar forms of electronic communication. The term shall not include any structures erected solely for a noncommercial individual use such as residential television antennas, residential satellite dishes, and ham radio antennas. 
(Code 1993, § 27-148) 
Sec. 40-354. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The regulations and requirements of this article are intended to: 
(1)  Provide for the appropriate location and development of commercial wireless telecommunication towers and antennas to serve the residents and businesses of the city while protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community. 
(2)  Minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful design, siting, and vegetative screening. 
(3)  Avoid potential drainage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures. 
(4)  Maximize use of any new or existing communication tower to reduce the number of towers needed. 
(b)  This article is not intended to regulate structures erected solely for noncommercial, individual use such as residential television antennas, residential satellite dishes, and ham radio antennas. 
(c)  In addition to the regulations contained in this section, all commercial wireless telecommunication service providers shall provide written documentation that they are/will be in compliance with the FCC Federal Radio Frequency Emission Standards and that the output power from the tower shall not exceed federally approved levels for exposure to electronic magnetic force (EMF). 
(Code 1993, § 27-147) 
Sec. 40-355. - General requirements. 
(a)  A building and electrical permit is required for all towers and/or antennas, whether constructed at ground level or installed on buildings or other structures. All towers shall be constructed and operated in compliance with the state building codes. 
(b)  A set of plans bearing an engineer's seal and a site plan demonstrating compliance with these regulations must be submitted to, reviewed and approved by the Technical Review Committee of the city. 
(c)  All tower owners shall carry liability insurance against failure of the tower in an amount of, at minimum, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
(d)  All new towers and those antennas collocated on city-owned facilities or property shall require special use permits, which necessitate approval by the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment after a public hearing. Collocation of telecommunication antennas on existing noncity-owned towers where an increase in height is not required may be approved at staff level. 
(1)  A special use permit for a telecommunication tower shall expire five (5) years after the effective date of the permit approval by the Board of Adjustment. 
a.  A permittee wishing to continue the use of a specific tower must apply for a renewal of the special use permit at least six (6) months prior to the expiration of the permit. 
b.  In considering the request for the renewal of the special use permit, the Board of Adjustment shall consider the impact that any changes in technology since the original permit approval may have had on the need for the tower or the tower's design. 
c.  The tower shall be required to meet the standards of this chapter that are in effect at the time of reapplication. 
(2)  Administrative reviews and administrative appeals must occur before an applicant can go to court, in compliance with the normal regulations of this chapter. 
(e)  All telecommunications towers existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be allowed to continue their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance shall be permitted on such existing towers. New construction, other than routine maintenance on an existing tower, shall comply with the requirements of this section. 
(f)  An applicant shall ensure in a signed and notarized document that the tower and/or equipment will not cause radio, television, and similar reception at adjoining properties to be disturbed or diminished. If disturbance of reception continues for sixty (60) days after the date of the first written notification of the complaint to the tower owner, the tower's permit shall be revoked by the Planning Administrator. 
(g)  If the tower or the equipment on the site is of a type that will emit a continuous or frequent noise, the applicant shall ensure in a signed and notarized document that sufficient action will be taken to prevent such noise from being audible to surrounding residents and businesses. In such cases, tower facilities and equipment shall be operated so that noise levels are less than forty-five (45) db as measured from the property line nearest the tower facilities. 
(h)  The telecommunication service provider shall provide the city with any and all additional information the city may request as an aid in evaluating detailed technical claims the service provider or applicant may make. 
(i)  Collocation is encouraged by the city. 
(1)  If the tower is between sixty (60) and one hundred (100) feet in height, the tower shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate a minimum of one (1) additional telecommunication user with equipment at least comparable to the applicant's. If the tower exceeds a height of one hundred (100) feet, the tower shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate a minimum of two (2) additional telecommunications users with equipment at least comparable to the applicant's. 
a.  The applicant or property owner shall provide documentation from a registered engineer that the tower has sufficient structural integrity to accommodate the required number of additional users as stated above. 
b.  Additionally, a statement shall be submitted by the tower's owner regarding the intent of the owner to allow shared use of the tower under reasonable terms and the number and types of additional antennas that can be accommodated on the tower. A tower's permit shall be immediately revoked if the owner fails to honor the collocation statement. 
(2)  All new service providers shall provide the Planning Office with evidence that there are no existing towers that can provide space and/or that no existing tower will technically satisfy the applicant's needs before applying for a permit to construct a new tower. 
(Code 1993, § 27-149) 
Sec. 40-356. - Location. 
    In addition to the requirements of section 40-93, the following additional locational standards shall be observed. 
(a)  If the tower is one hundred (100) feet or more in height, it shall be located no closer than two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet from another tower greater than one hundred (100) feet in height which was constructed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this regulation is derived. 
(b)  No tower may be located within five hundred (500) feet of the RHD, Residential Historic District, or the B1H, Business Historic District. 
(c)  In residential zones, towers may be located only on property used for government buildings, schools or churches, and must be concealed or camouflaged. 
(d)  Only monopole towers are permitted in the O and I and B4 zones. 
(e)  No tower may be located on property containing a hospital, nursing home, or day care center. 
(Code 1993, § 27-150) 
Sec. 40-357. - Dimensional requirements. 
(a)  Height. Height shall be measured from the natural undisturbed ground surface below the center of the tower base to the top of the tower, including the highest antenna or piece of equipment attached thereto. 
(1)  Under no circumstances shall a building permit be issued for a tower that is taller than two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
(2)  Towers located on buildings or other structures shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the building's height. Roof-mounted antennas extending over five (5) feet above the principal building shall be located behind a facade that blends with the principal building. 
(3)  Maximum tower height, including antennas, permitted in respective zoning districts shall be determined according to the following schedule. 
Zone Maximum Height All residential 20 feet O and I 25 feet B2/B3/B4 25 feet I1/I2 250 feet  
(b)  Setbacks. Minimum yard setbacks for a tower shall be measured from the outside dimensions of the tower. 
(1)  The minimum setback from all property lines shall be equal to the tower's height. However, the setback distance may be reduced by the Board of Adjustment where a state registered engineer has certified that the tower has been designed so that the fall zone will be within a reduced setback area. 
(2)  Property located within a tower's fall area shall not be subdivided so long as the tower is standing. 
(3)  No tower or accessory building shall be located in any yard setback area of the zoning district in which it is located. In addition, no nonconcealed or noncamouflaged tower shall be located in a front or side yard of another principal. 
(4)  No tower shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet to any structure on the property, except its own storage/accessory buildings. 
(5)  Guy wire anchors shall be located no closer than twenty (20) feet from the property line and must be contained within the property, but not within any easement. 
(6)  Any associated storage/accessory building shall meet the minimum building, not accessory building, setbacks for the underlying zone. 
(7)  A tower shall be set back from other on-site and off-site towers and supporting structures such that the failure of one (1) tower will not strike another tower or its support structure. 
(c)  Security fences. Except for concealed or camouflaged towers, the base of the tower and each guy anchor must be enclosed by a fence or wall at least eight (8) feet in height unless the tower and all guy anchors are mounted on the top of a building or other structure over eight (8) feet in height. Barbed wire, razor ribbon, concertina wire and other similar security measures shall be prohibited adjacent to residentially zoned property. The Technical Review Committee shall make a determination on the fencing requirement for concealed or camouflaged towers on a case by case basis. 
(Code 1993, § 27-151) 
Sec. 40-358. - Landscaping. 
    Existing trees shall be preserved as much as possible. Minimum landscaping requirements are as follows: 
(a)  Where any tower abuts a public street, evergreen street trees shall be planted on the tower owner's property at a distance from one (1) another as to provide an opaque screen along the street right-of-way within five (5) years of planting. Where such planting requirements cannot be met, a reasonable alternative shall be met as determined by the Planning Administrator. 
(b)  Except for fence entrances, the outside perimeters of all chainlink fences enclosing the base of the tower and those enclosing guy wires shall be screened with plant material so as to provide a complete visual screen eight (8) feet high within five (5) years of planting. All other types of fences and walls shall be landscaped with two (2) small trees and six (6) evergreen shrubs per every twenty (20) feet. 
(c)  Landscaping may be required around any or all accessory structures if the appearance of the structure is determined to be objectionable by the Board of Adjustment or the Planning Administrator. 
(d)  Bufferyards. 
(1)  Bufferyards along all property lines equal to the Bufferyard D requirements of article VII of this chapter shall be provided where nonconcealed towers are located adjacent to residentially zoned or developed property. Concealed towers shall be exempt from the bufferyard landscaping requirement, however the bufferyard setback requirement shall be met. 
(2)  The normal bufferyard requirements of article VII of this chapter shall be provided for nonconcealed towers in all other locations. 
(e)  All landscaping shall be maintained in good condition by the tower owner or the property owner for the life of the tower. 
(Code 1993, § 27-152) 
Sec. 40-359. - Visual aspects. 
(a)  Towers mounted on the sides of existing structures shall be painted to match the existing structure. Towers mounted on the tops of structures and towers installed at ground level shall either be galvanized or be painted a light gray color or other color to match the background against which they are most commonly seen, as approved by the Planning Administrator, unless other coloring is required by the FAA. 
(b)  Any associated accessory/storage structure shall blend with the surrounding building in architectural character and color. 
(c)  No tower shall have constructed thereon or attached thereto in any way any platform, catwalk, crow's nest, or like structure, except during periods of construction or repair. 
(d)  Where an antenna is located on a structure such as a light standard, telephone pole, fence pole, etc., the height of the structure supporting the antenna shall not exceed the average height of similar structures in the vicinity by more than ten (10) percent. 
(e)  Before any concealed or camouflaged tower can be approved, the applicant shall submit photographs of a similar facility and use photo imagery to superimpose the facility onto the existing site as seen from affected residential property and public thoroughfares at varying distances. 
(f)  Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a tower facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of a telecommunication tower, unless inspection, repairs or additions to the tower and/or accessory structures are being made. 
(Code 1993, § 27-153) 
Sec. 40-360. - Signs. 
(a)  Signs on any portion of a tower and/or related accessory building, fence or wall shall be prohibited, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  A one-square-foot sign identifying the owner and operator of the tower and an emergency telephone number shall be placed in a clearly visible location on the premises of the tower. 
(2)  Warning signs may be placed on the premises. Equipment information signs may be placed at appropriate locations as determined by the Planning Administrator. 
(3)  A freestanding sign may be permitted only if the lot also contains the main business office of the telecommunications sever. 
(b)  A sign permit is required wherever a sign is allowed. 
(Code 1993, § 27-154) 
Sec. 40-361. - Lighting. 
    Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not display strobe lights unless such lighting is specifically required by the FAA or other federal or state authority for a particular tower, or is required for security or safety reasons. 
(a)  Any additional lighting beyond minimum FAA requirements must be approved by the Technical Review Committee. Such lighting, if approved, shall not exceed a height of fifteen (15) feet, and shall be shielded and oriented so as not to project directly onto adjacent property, and so as to minimize glare on adjacent property and streets. 
(b)  The tower owner shall provide signed and notarized documentation that any lighting requested is the minimum lighting required by the FAA or is necessary for security or safety measures. 
(c)  When incorporated into the approved design of the tower, light fixtures used to illuminate ballfields, parking lots, or similar areas must be attached to the tower. 
(Code 1993, § 27-155) 
Sec. 40-362. - Maintenance. 
    All towers and their associated accessory buildings and equipment shall be maintained in a safe, functional, and attractive condition by the tower owner. 
(a)  An inspection of the tower shall be conducted at least once a year by an expert who is regularly involved in the maintenance, inspection, and/or erection of telecommunication towers. At a minimum, this inspection shall be conducted in accordance with the tower inspection checklist provided in the EIA Standard 222, Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Support Structures. A report of the findings and any repairs made shall be furnished to the Planning Administrator. The cost of such inspection and report shall be assumed by the tower owner. 
(b)  If the Planning Administrator determines that a tower fails to comply with the state building codes or the EIA standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into compliance with such codes and standards. If the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance within the thirty (30) days, the Planning Administrator may order the removal of the tower at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1993, § 27-156) 
Sec. 40-363. - Abandonment. 
    Any tower or part of a tower that ceases to be used for communications broadcasting and/or broadcast receiving shall be removed by the tower owner at the owner's expense, along with any and all associated structures. The removal shall occur within one hundred eighty (180) days after the use is discontinued. Upon removal, the site shall be revegetated to blend with the existing surrounding vegetation. In the event that a tower is not removed in the specified time, the tower and associated structures may be removed by the city and the costs of removal assessed against the property. 
(Code 1993, § 27-157) 
Sec. 40-364. - Statutory severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this article is for any reason held to be unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed and adopted this article and each and all provisions thereof irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more of said provisions be declared unconstitutional. 
(Code 1993, § 27-158) 
Secs. 40-365-40-384. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - SPECIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 40-385. - Interchange Overlay Districts. 
(a)  Title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the Interchange Overlay District Ordinance of the City of Washington. 
(b)  Authority. The state General Statutes permit municipalities to establish overlay districts (G.S. 160A-382(a)). 
(c)  Findings. 
(1)  Highway interchanges and the areas that surround them are magnets for development. Traditionally, lands near interchanges on limited access highways generate stronger development interest and command high prices. These lands tend to be developed quickly for high revenue-producing activities. In some cases, developers attempt to maximize return on investment with little consideration to the longterm impact of their development on the surrounding community. Since the interchange areas are key gateways to the community, design considerations in the area are critically important. The area surrounding the interchanges should be subject to an overlay district that creates site design, architecture, signage, parking, landscaping, and lighting standards more stringent than in other areas of the community. 
(2)  The City Council finds that the interchange areas subject to regulation by this section have specific development pressures and unique conditions that are not found elsewhere in the city. These unique conditions of greater traffic counts and more intensive development pressures justify regulation in specific areas of the city that would not be justifiable in other areas of the city, due to the absence of such conditions. 
(d)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to encourage managed, sensible interchange development by providing protective measures that promote safety, minimize the impact to the natural environment, and promote highway beautification. This section is intended to ensure that new development will be compatible with respect to design, signage, lighting, screening, and access points. It is not meant to recommend or dictate specific land uses within the area regulated. Rather, it is intended to ensure that, if development does occur within the area, it will meet a minimum set of standards. This section is also intended to help developments within the interchange area maintain their initial appeal by protecting them from potential adjacent substandard development. 
(e)  Exemptions. The Interchange Overlay Districts Guidelines shall not apply to single-family residential dwellings. 
(f)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Access management means the systematic control of the location, spacing, design, and operation of driveways, median openings, interchanges, and street connections to a roadway. 
    Access road means a public or private or private one-way or two-way road for ingress or egress. Such access roads may be of various types, including frontage roads, rear access roads, or cul-de-sacs. 
    Interchange access road means the highest order road serving an interchange and providing access to the highway bypass. 
    Interchange overlay area means an area, consisting of a six thousand foot (6,000') circle, having a radius of three thousand feet (3,000') measured from the center point of the highway bypass interchange. Specifically, the interchange area extends 3,000 feet from the outer right-of-way boundary of the highway bypass and the interchange access road, as defined (see Figure 1). 
    Interchange overlay district. Interchange zoning controls are added to the standard zoning requirements of the underlying district (commercial, residential, etc.). The property and any improvements are subject to both the standard zoning regulations and the overlay restrictions. Overlay requirements may address any issues of concern. 
    Monument sign means a freestanding sign having the appearance of a solid base of construction materials such as brick, stucco, stonework, textured wood, tile or textured concrete materials compatible with the materials of the primary structure on the subject property. 
    Pedestal sign means a three-dimensional, self-supporting, base-mounted freestanding sign, consisting of two (2) or more sides extending up from the base, and upon which a message is painted or posted. A pedestal sign may also consist of a base-mounted cylindrical structure upon which a message is painted or posted 
    Setback means the minimum distance by which any building or improvement must be separated from a right-of-way boundary. Building setbacks are required distances from the street, right-of-way line, property lines, and building lines within which development or construction is permitted. 
    Sign means a presentation of letters, numbers, figures, pictures, emblems, insignia, lines or colors, or any combination thereof displayed for the purpose of information, direction or identification or to advertise or promote a business service, activity, interest or product or any otherwise lawful noncommercial use. 
    Traffic impact analysis or TIA , commonly referred to as a "Traffic Impact Statement," is used to determine and describe how traffic generated by new or altered land uses will be served by the existing relevant road network and what adjustments must be made to maintain the same or similar level of service. 

(g)  Applicability. This section shall apply within the interchange area boundary, as defined by this section, surrounding the intersections of US Highway 17 Bypass and West Fifth Street (US Hwy 264) and US Highway 17 Bypass and Carolina Avenue (Highway 17 Business). The development of any nonresidential property of any size, type, or density within the boundaries of the Interchange Overlay Districts shall comply with the standards set forth herein. More specifically, no building or structure shall be erected or undergo a major expansion (50 percent or more of the original or replacement value) for any purpose except in accordance with the requirements set forth herein except as allowed in this section. 
(h)  Permitted uses. This section permits all uses in the Interchange Overlay Zoning Districts, as listed as follows, in appendix 1. The uses listed shall be allowed only within the respective districts as specified herein. 
(i)  Site plan approval required. No zoning permit or building permit shall be issued by the Department of Planning and Development for a building, structure, or any improvement within the interchange overlay area boundary as defined by this section, unless the land use or building conforms to the requirements of this section. All development subject to the provisions of this section is required to submit a complete site plan consistent with the requirements of article XVIII of this chapter. In addition to the minimum requirements found in article XVIII of this chapter, the site plan shall include and meet the requirements of the Interchange Overlay Districts. All proposed development activities located in the Interchange Overlay Districts shall be reviewed and approved by the City Planning Board. 
(j)  Building design standards. 
(1)  Purpose. The standards in this section will provide consistency to the development character, thereby enabling the longterm preservation of property values and the promotion of economic development. A design framework should build on the city's architectural precedents, and convey the spirit of the city's history. All proposed development to be located within the interchange area boundaries shall meet the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Type of construction. Manufactured, mobile, metal, and nonresidential modular units shall be prohibited, except for temporary use during construction or for storage of materials during construction. No generic franchise architecture is permitted unless the development is contextual to its surroundings in design and materials. 
(3)  Building materials. 
a.  Exterior building materials should consist of decorative split-block masonry, brick, stone, wood, fiber-cement siding, or textured stucco. No more than 60 percent of the facade of any principal building facing the street should be of glass or reflective material. 
b.  The use of smooth vinyl, unpainted cinder-block walls, or metal paneling shall be prohibited, except when used on exterior walls not facing or visible from public roads or access ways. 
(4)  Building orientation. Principal buildings shall be oriented with their main entrance toward the street or access drives. 
(5)  Street walls and facades. Long continuous building walls are discouraged and no commercial, office, or institutional uses shall have a blank wall greater than 35 feet in length that may be visible from the public roadway. Industrial uses shall have a blank wall no greater than 60 feet in length. The use of masonry, belt courses of a different color and texture, projecting cornice, projecting canopy, windows and doors, decorative tile work, columns, building wall offsets such as projections, recesses, or other architectural elements as approved by the Planning Board that meet the intent of this section may be incorporated into these walls. 
(6)  Building height. The maximum building height for any commercial, industrial or office development shall be forty-five feet (45'). 
(7)  Roof pitch. Flat roofs or roof pitches less than 3:12 shall include a cornice trim along the tops of walls, roof line offsets, and/or the use of a parapet wall to avoid the appearance of strip development and create a prominent edge. 
(8)  Mechanical equipment. Mechanical or HVAC equipment shall not be installed at ground level along any portion of a building facing a state or city maintained street or internal access way unless such location is necessitated by the nature and design of the building. A solid fence or wall or landscaping shall screen any ground level mechanical equipment. All rooftop equipment shall be screened from public view in a manner consistent with the building design or compatible in appearance with roofing materials. 
(9)  Loading and service areas. Loading and service areas should be designed out of view from public roads. Dumpsters or trash-handling areas shall always be screened from adjacent properties and public view with a minimum six-foot high solid wooden fence or solid (and finished) masonry wall with a solid closeable gate. No chain link fencing may be used to comply with any part of this section. 
(10)  Accessory uses. Any accessory buildings and enclosures, whether attached or detached from the main building, shall be of similar compatible design and materials. 
(k)  Access management and parking. 
(1)  Purpose. Over time, if not carefully thought through, numerous entryways can contribute to difficult turning situations and often times lead to unsafe conditions. It is therefore the intent of this section to limit the number of access points that are permitted onto the interchange access road. These controlled access points will enable more careful design of turning movements, resulting in safer conditions. 
(2)  Access from highways. Access points along the interchange access roads to developments (such as curb cuts and driveways) shall be minimized. Prior to submission to the city for review, all plans for vehicular access to new development from the interchange access road shall be submitted to and approved by the state DOT if a state route, or the City Public Works Director, if a city road. 
a.  Two driveways are the maximum number of driveways allowed per street frontage for any parcel, tract or development, including access to any and all properties designated as outparcels or to be leased or sold for future development. 
b.  No access point shall be allowed within ten feet of the side property line of any property or development except where a mutual access agreement exists between adjoining owners. 
c.  All parcels containing more than one driveway must maintain a minimum of 100 feet of separation between them. 
d.  Shared driveways are permitted and recommended. 
e.  Vehicular and pedestrian access between adjoining lots is mandatory. Location and specifications for the interior lot access points shall be determined during Planning Board review. If at the time of construction the adjacent lot or lots are not being developed, the developer must provide stubouts to the adjacent lots. These stubouts will be located in accordance with the Planning Board's recommendation and provide for future access. 
(3)  Traffic impact analysis (TIA). A traffic impact analysis shall be submitted to, and approved by the Planning Board under the following conditions: 
a.  When the proposed development creates a major site plan review. 
b.  At the request of the Planning Board when the proposed development is expected to significantly impact the vehicular movement on the interchange access roads within the overlay districts. 
c.  Typically, the following developments are considered major and would normally require a traffic impact analysis: 
1.  55,000 square feet retail. 
2.  300 single family homes. 
3.  250,000 square feet office. 
4.  400,000 square feet industrial. 
5.  350 room hotel. 
(4)  Parking. Parking areas should be designed in a manner to provide safe and efficient circulation of traffic and provide safe access ways for pedestrians to travel vehicles to buildings. 
a.  Parking areas shall be located to the side or rear of the building when a development fronts on major roads. When parking is placed in front of the building due to physical constraints, screening shall be provided through decorative walls or fences, bushes, shrubs, or small trees that limit the view of the parking area but do not necessarily screen visibility to the building. 
b.  When feasible, all parking areas should be designed to allow linkages to adjacent developments to promote efficient traffic flow and encourage shared parking areas to reduce the use of land for parking. 
(l)  Dimensional requirements. All residentially zoned property shall be developed in accordance with the standards set forth in the underlying zoning districts. In addition, all nonresidential property shall be developed according to the following: 
(1)  The minimum building setback in the Interchange Overlay Districts shall be as follows: 
a.  From any street or access road right-of-way, 30 feet. This street setback requirement applies to all accessory structures, including gasoline pumps, underground tanks, canopies and other similar structures located on a zoning lot that adjoins an arterial or collector street as designated by the county. 
b.  From interior lot line adjoining nonresidential property, 10 feet. 
c.  From interior lot line adjoining residential property, 50 feet. 
d.  From any access easement, 15 feet. 
(2)  The Planning Board may consider an application for a reduction in building setback requirements and may reduce the minimum building setback requirements by as much as 20 percent upon making a finding that the proposed reduction of those requirements: 
a.  Will not substantially defeat the purposes for which those requirements were established; 
b.  Is necessitated by the configuration and/or topography of the land which would make it impractical to comply with the minimum setback requirements; 
c.  Is no greater than is necessary to allow for reasonable development of the property; 
d.  Will not adversely affect the value of adjoining or abutting property. 
(m)  Landscaping and bufferyard requirements. The landscaping and buffer regulations and guidelines are intended to assist property owners in the development of an attractive streetscape. All development within the Interchange Overlay Districts shall conform to the landscaping standards of article VII of this chapter and the following: 
(1)  Landscaping plan. A landscape plan showing all landscaping required under this section for any development within the interchange area boundary shall be required to be approved by the City Planning Board. No occupancy of any development shall take place until the landscaping has been installed in accordance with the approved landscaping plan. When the occupancy of a structure is desired prior to the completion of the required landscaping, a Certificate of Occupancy may be issued only if the owner or his designated agent provides to the city a form of surety in favor of the City in an amount equal to the costs of the remaining plants, related materials and installation costs. The City Attorney shall approve all sureties and related documents as to form. Should an acceptable surety be provided, then all required landscaping shall be installed and approved by the first planting season following issuance of Certificate of Occupancy or the surety shall be forfeited to the city. Landscaping shall be maintained permanently by the lot owner, and any plant material that does not live shall be replaced within one year. 
(2)  Tree requirement. All lots abutting the interchange access road shall provide a minimum of one tree for each 40 linear feet of road frontage. All trees required shall be located within 20 feet of the back of the curb. They can either be randomly or evenly spaced. All required trees planted within the setback shall be of a shade-type variety with a minimum caliper of two and one-half (2 1/2)inches at planting and an expected height at maturity of at least thirty (30) feet. 
(3)  Parking lot landscaping. Interiors of parking lots shall contain tree planting areas for every ten parking spaces. Planting islands within parking areas shall contain an area no less than 160 square feet per tree with a minimum width of eight (8) feet (excluding curb), and shall be underlain by a minimum of two feet of suitable planting soil free of construction debris. The area should include one shade tree and be designed to minimize damage to trees by parking or moving vehicles. The remaining area shall be landscaped with plantings (bushes, shrubs, flower beds). A vegetative strip of at least ten (10) feet in width shall be maintained at the perimeter of parking areas. A minimum of one (1) large tree per fifty (50) feet should line the parking areas. Grass, shrubs, bushes, pedestrian amenities, decorative walls and fences, and sidewalks may be placed in this area. 
(4)  Automatic underground irrigation system. An automatic underground irrigation system is required to support all required landscaping 
(n)  Utilities. All on-site utilities should be located underground unless technical restrictions exist for not doing so. When utilities must be located above ground, provisions shall be made to significantly reduce the visual impact of the utility from the public road right-of-way. Junction boxes, transformers, and other structures essential to utility service which, due to their function, are required to be located above-ground, shall be screened from view of public rights-of-way. 
(1)  Transformers, utility pads, and telephone boxes shall be appropriately screened with walls and/or plant materials when viewed from the public right-of-way. Screening materials shall not limit access for maintenance purposes by utility companies. 
(2)  The enclosure for above ground backflow prevention devices shall be constructed of materials compatible with the architectural materials used for the building. If pre-fabricated fiberglass enclosures are used, they shall be appropriately screened from view by walls and/or plant materials. 
(o)  Signs 
(1)  Purpose. These sign standards were developed to regulate the size, location, type, quantity, and quality of sign elements with the Interchange Overlay Districts. Signage should be compatible and consistent with the design features of the primary structure. 
(2)  Regulations. All signs proposed, installed, or replaced within the interchange area boundary after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall conform to the standards set forth herein. 
(3)  Freestanding signs. Only one freestanding sign shall be permitted per lot or per street frontage. Freestanding signs associated with commercial and/or office uses shall be monument or pedestal style signs. Signage shall be setback a minimum of five feet from all road rights-of-way. 
a.  Monument signs. Monument signs shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  The color of the base and the materials enclosing the base of a monument sign shall be consistent with the exterior color and materials of the building(s) on the property unless otherwise required by design standards specified elsewhere within this chapter. 
2.  The maximum height of a monument sign is 12 feet from the finished grade. 
3.  The total area of any one monument sign face shall not exceed 32 square feet 
4.  Landscaping shall be installed around the base of the monument sign. 
5.  Only freestanding monument style signs are permitted for multi-tenant commercial/office development. 
b.  Tower or pedestal signs. Tower or pedestal signs shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  The maximum height for a tower or pedestal sign is 20 feet from the finished grade. 
2.  The maximum area of a tower or pedestal sign shall not exceed 100 square feet. 
(4)  Building signs. Building signs shall follow the standards of the underlying zoning district, except as noted below: 
a.  Wall signs shall be no more than twenty (20) percent of the area of the wall of which the sign is a part of or to what each sign is attached. 
b.  Wall mounted signs within multi-tenant buildings or complexes shall be uniform in the type of construction materials used, size, shape and method to support the sign. 
c.  Wall signs attached to the building shall be individual letters and surface mounted. 
d.  Signs shall not be boxed with internal lighting and attached to the building. Signage painted or printed directly on the wall surface is not allowed. 
(5)  The total sign area of all signage on any one (1) lot shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet. A double-faced sign shall be considered a single sign. However, signage designed for pedestrian viewing only, such as under canopy signage or small directional signs, shall not be included in calculating the maximum allowable sign area per lot. 
(6)  Roof signs shall not be permitted. 
(7)  No flashing, blinking, fluctuating, or otherwise changing light source may be permitted, with the exception of signs providing time, temperature, and LED static gas price signs. 
(p)  Exterior lighting. 
(1)  Purpose. The intention of this subsection is to enable the city to avoid the distracting glare that too often comes with new development. 
(2)  Cut-off fixtures. All outdoor lighting fixtures, including without limitation, ground, pole, and building-mounted fixtures and canopy lighting shall be of a design and type containing shields, reflectors, fracture panels or recessed light sources such that the cutoff angle is less than ninety (90) degrees. For purposes herein, the cutoff angle is that angle formed by a line drawn from the direction of light rays at the light source and a line perpendicular to the ground from the light source above which no light is permitted. 
(3)  Illumination of neighboring residential properties prohibited. Lighting shall not illuminate neighboring residential properties. 
(4)  Illumination of public roadways prohibited. Lighting shall not be directed towards or illuminate the public roadways. 
(5)  Height. Lighting fixtures shall have a maximum height of twenty-five (25) feet, except that lighting used for outdoor recreational use shall not exceed eighty (80) feet in height. 
(6)  On-site lighting. On-site lighting may be used to accent architectural elements and provide safety and security on pedestrian walkways, at building entrances, and public areas between buildings, but shall not be used to illuminate entire portions of buildings. 
(7)  Individual site lighting. Individual site lighting standards shall blend with the architectural character of the building. 
(q)  Site elements. The intent of these standards is to create a visually attractive and inviting streetscape for residents and visitors to the area. 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be provided in commercial, institutional, office, and industrial areas along both sides of the street. Sidewalks shall be constructed from property line to property line. On corner lots, sidewalks shall be installed along both streets. Sidewalks shall be constructed consistent with the specifications of the city. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall connect the public street sidewalks to the main entrances to businesses and other buildings on the site. 
(3)  Outparcels shall be connected to each other and to the main shopping area by pedestrian walkways and/or bike access. 
(4)  The use of colored concrete, brick paving, or other decorative pavement internal to the site is encouraged. 
(5)  On-site stormwater management facility ponds shall be attractively landscaped. Should a storm water management pond be enclosed, chain link fencing is prohibited, unless, such fencing shall be green or black vinyl coated. 
(6)  All telephones, vending machines, or other machines dispensing merchandise or products, on private property shall be confined to a space built into the building or buildings, or enclosed in a separate structure compatible with the main building's architecture. These areas are to be designed with the safety of the user in mind. 
(r)  Administration and variances. This section shall be administered and enforced by the Department of Planning and Development. The Board of Adjustment, as established by this chapter, may upon application by the property owner consider and grant variances to the strict requirements set forth in this section to alleviate undue hardship that may be created by unusual physical or topographic conditions of a site, thus providing reasonable relief. 
INTERCHANGE OVERLAY DISTRICT GUIDELINES 
APPENDIX 1 
PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES 
RA20-Residential/Agricultural District-Overlay Permitted Uses Accessory Uses and Structures Forestry SF Detached Dwellings Agricultural Production (Crops) Gardens Utility Lines and Appurtenances Churches Horticultural Specialities Utility Substations Common Area Recreation Pump Stations Wayside Stand, Farm Produce Developmental Standards Athletic Fields Fire Stations Public Recreation Facilities Day Care Centers, Adult (5 or less) Home Occupation Riding Stables Day Care Centers, Child (5 or less) Police Stations Swimming Pools Family Care Homes (6 or less) Public Parks Temporary Events Special Use Permits Cemeteries/Mausoleums Flowers, Nursery Stock, Supplies Recreation Facilities (other) Clubs or Lodges Golf Courses School Administrative Facilities RA20-Residential/Agricultural District-Overlay-Cont'd. Special Use Permits Country Clubs/Golf Courses Gold Course, Miniature Sports Instructional Schools Elementary or Secondary Schools Golf Driving Ranges Swim and Tennis Clubs  
   
R15S-Residential Single-Family District-Overlay Permitted Uses Accessory Uses and Structures Pump Stations Utility Substations Agricultural Production (crops) Single-Family Detached Dwellings Underground Utility Lines Common Area Recreation Shelters, Emergency Developmental Standards Athletic Fields Fire Stations Public Recreation Facilities Day Care Centers, Adult (5 or less) Home Occupation Swimming Pools Day Care Centers, Child (5 or less) Police Stations Temporary Events Family Care Homes (6 or less) Public Parks Special Use Permits Churches Elementary or Secondary Schools Swim and Tennis Clubs Country Clubs/Golf Courses Multifamily Dwellings Two-Family Dwellings (Twin and Duplex)  
   
RMF-Residential Multifamily District-Overlay Permitted Uses Accessory Dwelling Units (attached) Common Area Recreation Tourist Homes, Bed and Breakfast Accessory Uses and Structures Gardens Two-Family Dwelling (Twin and Duplex) Auto Park Lots, Grade Level Multifamily Dwelings Utility Lines and Appurtenances Churches Single-Family Detatched Dwellings Utility Substations Developmental Standards Athletic Fields Family Care Homes (6 or less) Public Parks Boarding and Rooming House (<4) Fire Stations Public Recreation Facilities Day Care Centers, Adult (5 or less) Home Occupation Swimming Pools Day Care Centers, Child (5 or less) Police Stations Townhouse and Condo Dwellings Special Use Permits Cemeteries/Mausoleums Elementary or Secondary Schools Private Dormitories Day Care Centers, Adult (6 or more) Fraternities or Sororities Swim and Tennis Clubs Day Care Centers, Child (6 or more) Nursing Convalescent Homes  
   
RMH-Residential Mobile Home District-Overlay Permitted Uses Accessory Uses and Structures Mobile Home Parks Single-Family Detached Dwellings Auto Park Lots, Grade Level Mobile Homes Two-Family Dwellings (Twin and Duplex) Churches Multifamily Dwellings Utility Lines and Appurtenances Common Area Recreation Pump Stations Utility Substations Gardens RMH-Residential Mobile Home District-Overlay-Cont'd. Developmental Standards Athletic Fields Fire Stations Public Parks Day Care Centers, Adult (5 or less) Home Occupation Public Recreation Facilities Day Care Centers, Child (5 or less) Police Stations Swimming Pools Family Care Homes (6 or less) Special Use Permits Cemeteries/Mausoleums Swim and Tennis Clubs  
   
B2-General Business District-Overlay Permitted Uses ABC Stores Department, Variety or General Merchandise Optical Goods Sales Accessory Uses and Structures Drugs and Sundries Paint and Wallpaper Sales Account, Audit or Bookkeeping Drugstores Paper and Paper Products Ad Agencies or Representatives Durable Goods, Sundries Pet Stores Administrative or Management Services Economic, Social, Educational Research Photo Finishing Laboratories Ambulance Services Electrical Goods Photocopying and Duplicating Services Antique Stores Employment Agencies Photography Studios Apparel, Piece Goods and Notions Engineer, Architect, or Survey Physical Fitness Centers Appliance Stores Equipment Repairs, Light Police Stations Arts and Crafts Fabric or Piece Goods Stores Post Offices Auditor, Coliseums, or Stadiums Farm Implement Sales Printing and Publishing Auto Park Lots, Grade Level Finance or Loan Offices Professional and Commercial Equipment and Supplies Auto Rental or Leasing Fire Stations Pump Stations Auto Repair Services, Minor Floor Covering, Drapery or Upholstery Real Estate Offices Auto Services (Spray on Bodies) Florists Record, Tape and CD Stores Auto Supply Sales Flowers, Nurseries and Florist Supplies Rehabilitation or Counseling Services Bakeries Food Stores Restaurant, Conventional Banks, Savings or Credit Unions Funeral Homes or Crematoriums Restaurants, Fast Food Barber Shops Furniture and Home Furnishings Retreat Centers Batting Cages Furniture Sales School Administrative Facilities Beauty Shops Garden Centers or Retail Nursery Security Services Boat Sales, New Gardens Service Stations, Gasoline Bookstores Gift or Card Shops Shoe Repair and Shoeshine Shops Books, Periodicals, and Newspapers Golf Courses, Miniature Sport and Recreation Goods and Supplies Building Maintenance Services Golf Driving Ranges Sporting Goods Store Building Supply Sales (No Storage Yard) Groceries and Related Products Sports and Recreation Clubs, Indoor Cake Decorating Supply Stores Hardware Sports Instructional Schools Camera Stores Hardware Stores Stationery Store B2-General Business District-Overlay-Cont'd. Permitted Uses Candle Shops Hobby Shops Stocks, Securities and Commodities Brokers Candy Stores Home Furnishings, Miscellaneous Tanning Salons Civic, Trade, or Business Orginizations Hotels or Motels Taxidermists Clothing Alterations or Repair Insurance Agencies (On-Site) Television or Radio Studios Clothing, Shoe and Accessory Stores Internal Services Facilities Theaters, Indoor Coin-Operated Amusements Jewelry Stores Tire Sales Coin, Stamp or Collectable Shop Jewelry, Watches and Stones Tobacco Store College or University Law Offices Toys and Hobby Goods and Supplies Communications or Broadcasting Facilities Market Showrooms (Furniture) Travel Agencies Computer Maintenance and Repair Martial Arts Instruction Schools Truck Shops Computer Sales Medical or Dental Labs TV, Radio or Electronic Repairs Computer Services Medical, Dental or Related Office TV, Radio or Electronic Sales Contractors, General Building Miscellaneous Retail Sales Utility Company Offices Contractors (No Outside Storage) Motion Picture Productions Underground Utility Lines Convenience Stores (Gas Pumps) Motor Vehicle Sales, New Utility Service Facility (No Outside) Convenience Stores (No Gas) Museums or Art Galleries Utility Substations Cosmetic Shops Musical Instrument Sales 
New Boat Sales Video Tape Rental and Sales Courier Service Substations Noncommercial Research Organizations Vocational, Business or Secretarial Schools Dairy Products Stores Office Machine Sales Wallpaper and Paint Brushes Dance Schools Office Uses Not Classified Watch or Jewelry Repair Shops Developmental Standards Athletic Fields Government Offices Public Recreation Facilities Churches Libraries Swimming Pools Elementary or Secondary Schools Public Parks Temporary Events Special Use Permits Car Washes Day Care Centers, Adult (6 or >) Farmers Market Care Taker Dwellings Day Care Centers, Child (5 or <) Stitching and Embroidery Shops Clubs or Lodges Day Care Centers, Child (6 or >) Warehouses (Self-Storage) Day Care Centers, Adult (5 or <)  
   
B3-Shopping Center District-Overlay Permitted Uses ABC Stores Convenience Store (No Gas) Office Uses Not Classified Accessory Uses and Structures Cosmetic Shops Optical Goods Sales Account, Audit or Bookkeeping Courier Service Substations Paint and Wallpaper Sales Ad Agencies or Representatives Dairy Products Stores Pet Stores Administrative or Management Services Dance Schools Photo Finishing Laboratories Ambulance Services Department, Variety or General Merchandise Photocopying and Duplicating Services Antique Stores Drugstores Photography Studios B3-Shopping Center District-Overlay-Cont'd. Permitted Uses Appliance Stores Employment Agencies Physical Fitness Centers Arts and Crafts Engineer, Architect or Surveyor Police Stations Auditor, Coliseums, or Stadiums Fabric or Piece Goods Stores Pump Stations Auto Park Lots, Grade Level Finance or Loan Offices Real Estate Offices Auto Rental or Leasing Fire Stations Record, Tape and CD Stores Auto Repair Services, Minor Floor Covering, Drapery or Upholstery Restaurants, Conventional Auto Supply Sales Florists Restaurants, Fast Food Bakeries Food Stores Security Services Banks, Savings or Credit Unions Furniture Sales Shoe Repair and Shoeshine Shops Barber Shops Garden Centers or Retail Nursery Sporting Good Store Beauty Shops Gift or Card Shops Sports and Recreation Clubs, Indoor Bookstores Golf Courses, Miniature Sports Instructional Schools Building Maintenance Services Hardware Stores Stationery Store Building Supply Sales (No Storage Yard) Hobby Shops Stock, Securities or Commodities Brokers Cake Decorating Supply Stores Home Furnishings, Miscellaneous Tanning Salons Camera Stores Hotels or Motels Theaters, Indoor Candle Shops Insurance Agencies (On-Site) Tire Sales (No Outside Storage) Candy Stores Internal Service Facilities Tobacco Store Civic, Trade or Business Organizations Jewelry Stores Travel Agencies Clothing Alterations or Repair Law Offices TV, Radio or Electronic Repairs Clothing, Shoe and Accessory Stores Luggage or Leather Goods TV, Radio or Electronic Sales Coin, Stamp or Collectable Shop Martial Arts Instruction Schools Utility Company Offices Communication or Broadcasting Facilities Medical or Dental Labs Underground Utility Lines Computer Maintenance and Repair Medical, Dental or Related Offices Video Tape Rental and Sales Computer Sales Museums or Art Galleries Vocation, Business or Secretarial Schools Computer Services Noncommercial Research Organizations Watch or Jewelry Repair Shops Convenience Store (Gas Pumps) Office Machine Sales Developmental Standards Athletic Fields Libraries Swimming Pools Churches Public Parks Temporary Events Government Offices Public Recreation Facilities Special Use Permits Car Washes Farmers Market Utility Substations Clubs or Lodges Skating Rinks  
   
O and I-Office and Institutional District-Overlay Permitted Uses Accessory Dwelling Units, Attached Funeral Homes or Crematoriums Pump Stations Accessory Uses and Structures Gardens Real Estate Offices Account, Audit or Bookkeeping Hotels or Motels Rehabilitaion or Counseling Services Ad Agencies or Representatives Insurance Agencies (No On-Site) Restaurants, Conventional Administrative or Management Services Insurance Agencies (On-Site) Restaurants, Fast Food Ambulance Services Internal Service Facilities School Administrative Facilities Auto Park Lots, Grade Level Law Offices Single-Family Dwellings Banks, Savings or Credit Unions Medical or Dental Labs Specialty Hospitals Barber Shops Medical, Dental or Related Offices Stock, Securities or Commodities Brokers Beauty Shops Museums or Art Galleries Swim and Tennis Clubs Boat Repairs Noncommercial Research Organizations Tanning Salons Common Area Recreation Office Uses Not Classified Tourist Homes, Bed and Breakfast Computer Services Optical Goods Sales Travel Agencies Courier Service Substations Photocopying and Duplicating Services Utility Company Offices Drug Stores Photography Studios Underground Utility Lines Economic, Social, Educational Research Photography, Commercial Utility Substations Employment Agencies Physical Fitness Centers Video Tape Rental and Sales Engineer, Architect or Surveyor Police Stations Vocational, Business or Secretarial Schools Finance or Loan Offices Post Offices Fire Stations Developmental Standards Athletic Fields Day Care Centers, Adult (5 or less) Government Offices Public Recreation Facilities Day Care Centers, Child (5 or less) Libraries Swimming Pools Elementary or Secondary Schools Public Parks Temporary Events Special Use Permits Care Taker Dwellings Convenience Stores (Gas) Day Care Centers, Child (6 or more) Clubs or Lodges Convenience Stores (No Gas) Musical Instrument Sales Churches Day Care Centers, Adult (6 or more)  
   
I1-Heavy Industrial District-Overlay Permitted Uses Accessory Uses and Structures Fabricated Metal Products Petro and Petro Products/Wholesale Agricultural Products/Wholesale Fabricated Valve and Wire Products Pharmaceutical Preparations Agricultural Chemicals/Wholesale Farm Implement Sales Photo Equipment/Manufact. Aircraft and Parts/Manufact. Farm supplies (Grain and Storage Bins) Photo Supplies/Manufact. Alcoholic Beverages/Wholesale Fire Stations Plastics Materials/Wholesale I1-Heavy Industrial District-Overlay-Cont'd. Permitted Uses Ambulance Services Floor Coverings (ex Carpet)/Manufact. Plumbing and Heating Equipment/Wholesale Ammunition/Wholesale Flowers, Nursery Stock, Florists Suppliers Police Stations Ammunition, Small Arms/Manufact. Food and Related products, Miscellaneous Post Offices Apparel and Fin. Fabric Products Forest Products/Wholesale Pottery and Related Products/Manufact. Apparel, Piece Goods/Wholesale Fuel Oil Sales Preserved Fruits and Vegetables (No Can Manufact.) Arms and Weapons/Manufact. Furniture and Fixture Assembly Primary Metals Products and Foundries Asbestos, Abrasive/Manufact. Furniture and Fixtures/Manufact. Printing and Publishing Audio, Video and Communications Equipment/Manufact. Furniture and Home Furnishing/Wholesale Professional and Commercial Equipment and Supplies/Wholesale Auditorium, Colliseum or Stadium Furniture Framing Pump Stations Auto Supply Sales Furniture Repair Shops Railroad Terminals and Yards Auto Parking (Commercial) Gardens Recreational Vehicle Sales Automobile Renting or Leasing Glass/Manufact. Recycling Collection Points Automobile Repair, Major Glass Products from Purchased Glass Refrigerator or Large Appliance Repair Automobile Repair, Minor Go-Cart Raceways Refuse and Raw Material Hauling Auto Park Lots, Grade Level Golf Courses Rehabilitation or Counseling Services Bakery Products/Manufact. Golf Driving Ranges Research, Development or Test Services Bars Grain and Field Beans/Wholesale Resins/Wholesale Batteries/Manufact. Grain Mill Products/Manufact. Restaurants, Conventional Batting Cages Groceries and Related Products/Wholesale Restaurants, Fast Food Beverage Products (Alcoholic)/Manufact. Hardware/Wholesale Rubber and Plastics, Miscellaneous/Manufact. Beverage Products (Nonalcoholic)/Manufact. Heating Equipment and Plumbing Fixtures Sawmills and Planing Mills Bicycle Assembly Hotels or Motels School Administrative Facilities Bicycle Parts and Accessories/Manufact. Household Appliances/Manufact. Scrap and Waste Material/Wholsale Boat and Ship Building Ice/Manufact. Septic Tank Services Boat Repairs Industrial and Commercial Machinery/Manufact. Service Stations, Gasoline Boat Sales Internal Service Facilities Sewage Treatment Plants Books, Periodicals and Newspapers Jewelry and Silverware (No Plating) Manufact. Shelters, Emergency Brooms and Brushes/Manufact. Jewelry, Watches, Precious Stones Signs, Manufact. Building Maintenance Services Landscape and Horticultural Services Skating Rinks Building Supply Sales (With Storage Yard) Laundry or Dry Cleaning Plants Soaps and Cosmetics/Manufact. I1-Heavy Industrial District-Overlay-Cont'd. Permitted Uses Bulk Mail and Packaging Leather and Leather Products (No Tanning) Sport and Recreational Goods/Wholesale Burial Caskets/Manufacturing Lighting and Wiring Equipment/Manufact. Sporting Goods and Toys/Manufact. Bus Terminals Lumber and Other Construction Materials Sports Instructional Schools Car Washes Lumber Millwork and Veneer/Wholesale Stitching and Embroidery Shops Chemical and Allied Products/Wholesale Machinery, Construction and Mining/Wholesale Sugar and Confectionary Products Chemical and Allied Products/Manufact. Machinery, Equipment and Supplies/Wholesale Surface Active Agents/Manufact. Churches Machinery, Farm and Supplies/Wholesale Swim and Tennis Clubs Coffee/Manufact. Manufact. Housing and Wood Buildings Taxi Terminals Communication or Broadcasting Facilities Measurement, Analysis and Cont. Instruments Television or Radio Studios Computer and Office Equipment/Manufact. Meat/Poultry, Packing and Process Textile Products (No Dyeing and Finishing) Concrete, Cut Stone and Clay Products/Manufact. Medical or Dental Labs Textile Products (With Dyeing and Finishing) Contractors (No Outside Storage) Medical, Dental and Surgical Equipment/Manufact. Tire Recapping Contractors, General Building Contractors, Heavy Construction Medical, Dental or Related Offices Tobacco and Tobacco Products/Wholesale Contractors, Special Trade Metal Fasteners/Manufact. Tobacco Products/Manufact. Convenience Stores (Gas Pumps) Metal Processing Toys and Hobby Goods and Supplies/Wholesale Convenience Stores (No Gas) Metals/Wholesale Truck and Semi Rent and Leasing, Heavy Correctional Institutions Millwork, Pylwood and Veneer Truck and Trailer Rent and Leasing, Light Costume Jewlery and Notions/Manufact. Minerals/Wholesale Truck Driving School Courier Service Stations Motor Cycle Assembly Truck Stops Courier Services, Central Facilities Motor Vehicle Assembly Truck Washing Diary Products/Manufact. Motor Vehicle Parts and Accessories/Manufact. Trucking or Freight Terminals Dance Schools Motor VehicleSales (New and Used) Utility Company Offices Drugs/Manufact. Motor Vehicles/Wholesale Utility Equipment and Storage Yards Drugs and Sundries/Wholesale Motor Vehicles, Parts and Supplies Utility Lines and Related Appurtenances Durable Goods, Other/Wholesale Motor Vehicles, Tires and Tubes Utility Service Facility (No Outside Storage) Electrical Components/Manufact. Motorcycle Sales Utility Substations Electrical Equipment/Manufact. Moving and Storage Services Vocational, Business or Secretarial School Electrical Goods/Wholesale Musical Instruments/Manufact. Wall Paper and Paint Brushes I1-Heavy Industrial District-Overlay-Cont'd. Permitted Uses Electronic Industrial Apparatus, Assembly Paints and Varnishes/Wholesale Warehouses (General Storage/Enclosed) Electronic Industrial Apparatus, Manufact. Paper and Paper Products/Wholesales Water Treatment Plants Engineer, Architect or Survey Paper Products (No Coating or Laminating) Wood Containers/Manufact. Equipment Rental and Lease (Outside Storage) Paperboard Containers and Boxes/Manufact. Wood Products, Miscellaneous/Manufact. Equipment Repairs, Heavy Pens and Art Supplies/Manufact. Equipment Repairs, Light Pest or Termite Control Services Developmental Standards Athletic Fields Public Recreation Facilities Temporary Events Government Offices Riding Stables Public Parks Swimming Pools  
Special Use Permits Amusement or Water Parks Day Care Centers, Child (6 or more) Mining and Quarrying Animal Feeds/Manufact. Fish, Canned, Cured, Frozen Petroleum and Related Products Auto Storage and Towing Flea Market (Outdoor) Pulp and Paper Mills Boat Storage, Dry Stack Fortune Tellers, Astrologer Rubber, Plastics, Raw/Manufact. Caretaker Dwellings Hazardous Waste Disposal Shooting Ranges (Indoor) Clubs and Lodges, Private Clubs Metal, Coating and Engraving Tires and Inner Tubes/Manufact.  
   
I2-Light Industrial District-Overlay Permitted Uses Accessory Uses and Structures Farm Supplies (Grain and Storage Bins) Paper Products (No Coating or Laminating) Accounting, Audit or Bookkeeping Farmers Market Paperboard Containers and Boxes/Manufact. Ad Agencies or Reps Finance or Loan Offices Pens and Art Supplies/Manufact. Administrative or Management Services Fire Stations Pest or Termite Control Services Agricultural Products/Wholesale Fish and Seafood Sales/Wholesale Pharmaceutical Preparations Alcoholic Beverages/Wholesale Flea Market, Indoors Photo Equipment/Manufact. Apparel and Fin. Fabric Products Floor Cover, Drapery or Upholstery Photo Finishing Labs Apparel, Piece Goods/Wholesale Flowers, Nursery Stock, Florist Supplies Photo Supplies/Manufact. Audio, Video and Communications Equipment/Manufact. Food and Related Products, Miscellaneous Photocopying and Duplicating Services Auto Park Lots, Grade Level Forest Products/Wholesale Photography, Commercial Auto Parking (Commercial) Fuel Oil Sales Physical Fitness Centers Auto Supply Sales Furniture and Fixture Assembly Plastics Materials/Wholesale Automobile Renting or Leasing Furniture and Fixtures/Manufact. Plimbing and Heating Equipment/Wholesale Automobile Repair, Minor Furniture and Home Furnishing/Wholesale Police Stations I2-Light Industrial District-Overlay-Cont'd. Permitted Uses Bakery Products/Manufact. Furniture Framing Post Offices Banks, Savings or Credit Unions Furniture Repair Shops Pottery and Related Products/Manufact. Barber Shops Garden Centers or Retail Nursery Preserved Fruits and Vegetables (No Can Manufact.) Batting Cages Gardens Printing and Publishing Beauty Shops Glass Products from Purchased Glass Professional and Commercial Equipment and Supplies/Wholesale Beverage Products (Nonalcohol)/Manufact. Golf Courses Pump Stations Bicycle Assembly Golf Driving Rangers Railroad Terminals and Yards Bicycle Parts and Accessories/Manufact. Grain Mill Products/Manufact. Real Estate Offices Building Supplies Sales (No Storage Yard) Grocery and Related Products/Wholesale Recreational Vehicle Sales Boat and Ship Building Hardware/Wholesale Recycling Collection Points Boat Repairs Heating Equipment and Plumbing Fixtures Refrigerator or Large Appliance Repair Boat Sales Hotels or Motels Rehabilitation or Counseling Services Books, Periodicals and Newspapers Household Appliances/Manufact. Research, Development or Testing Services Bowling Centers Ice/Manufact. Restaurants, Conventional Brooms and Brushes/Manufact. Insurance Agencies (On-Site Claims) Restaurants, Fast Food Building Maintenance Services Insurance Agencies (No On-Site Claims) Rubber and Plastics, Miscellaneous/Manufact. Bulk Mail and Packaging Internal Service Facilities School Administrative Facilities Bus Terminals Jewelry and Silverware (No Plating)/Manufact. Security Services Car Washes Jewelry, Watches, Precious Stones Service Stations, Gasoline Churches Landscape and Horticultural Services Shelters, Emergency Coffee/Manufact. Laundry or Dry Cleaning Plants Signs, Manufacturing Communications or Broadcasting Facilities Laundry Substations Soaps and Cosmetics/Manufact. Computer and Office Equipment/Manufact. Law Offices Sport and Recreational Goods/Wholesale Computer Maintenance and Repairs Leather and Leather Products (No Tan) Sport Goods and Toys/Manufact. Computer Sales Lighting and Wiring Equipment/Manufact. Stitching and Embroidery Shops Computer Services Lumber Millwork and Veneer/Wholesale Stocks, Securities and Commodities Brokers Contractors (No Outside Storage) Machinery, Equipment and Supplies Sugar and Confectionary Products Contractors, General Building Manufactured Housing and Wood Buildings Taxi Terminals Contractors, Heavy Construction Measurement, Analysis and Control Instru. Textile Products (No Dye and Finishing) Contractors, Special Trade Medical or Dental Labs Tire Sales I2-Light Industrial District-Overlay-Cont'd. Permitted Uses Convenience Stores (Gas Pumps) Medical, Dental and Surgical Equipment/Manufact. Tobacco and Tobacco Products/Wholesale Convenience Stores (No Gas) Medical, Dental or Related Offices Toys and Hobby Goods and Supplies/Wholesale Costume Jewelry and Notions/Manufact. Metal Fasteners/Manufact. Travel Agencies Courier Service Substations Metal Processing Truck and Semi Rent and Leasing, Heavy Courier Services, Cental Facility Metals/Wholesale Truck and Trailer Rent and Leasing, Light Dairy Products, Manufact. Millwork, Plywood and Veneer Truck Driving School Dance Schools Motion Picture Productions Trucking or Freight Terminals Drugs/Manufact. Motor Vehicle Parts and Accessories/Manufact. TV, Radio or Electronic Repairs Drugs and Sundries/Wholesale Motor Vehicle Sales (New and Used) Utility Company Offices Durable Goods, Other/Wholesale Motor Vehicles/Wholesale Utility Equipment and Storage Yards Economic, Social or Educational Research Motor Vehicles, Parts and Supplies Utility Lines and Related Appurtenances Electrical Industry Apparatus, Assembly Motor Vehicles, Tires and Tubes Utility Service Facility (No Outside Storage) Electrical Industry Apparatus, Manufact. Motorcycle Sales Utility Substations Electrical Components/Manufact. Moving and Storage Services Veterinary Services (Other) Electrical Equipment/Manufact. Musical Instruments/Manufact. Vocational, Business or Secretarial School Electrical Goods/Wholesale Noncommercial Research Organizations Wall Paper and Paint Brushes Employment Agencies Office Machine Sales Warehouses (General Storage/Enclosed) Engineer, Architect or Survey Office Uses Not Classified Warehouses (Self-Storage) Equipment Repairs, Light Paint and Wallpaper Sales Water Treatment Plants Fabric or Piece Goods Stores Paints and Varnishes/Wholesale Wood Containers/Manufact. Fabricated Valve and Wire Products Paper and Paper Products/Wholesale Farm Implement Sales Developmental Standards Athletic Fields Public Recreation Facilities Swimming Pools Government Offices Riding Stables Temporary Events Public Parks Special Use Permits Automobile Towing and Storage Caretaker Dwellings Industrial and Commercial Machinery/Manufact. Boat Storage, Dry Stack  
(Ord. No. 08-7, § 1(27-161), 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 40-386. - Historic District and Commission. 
(a)  Intent. The purpose of this district is to promote and provide for land use activities which will reflect the heritage of the district through the cultural, educational, architectural and economic elements of the district. 
(b)  Commission designated. The state authorizes cities to safeguard the heritage of the city by preserving any historic site therein that embodies important elements of its cultural, social, economic, political, archaeological or architectural history and to promote the use and conservation of such site for the education, pleasure and enrichment of the residents of the city, county, and state as a whole. Pursuant to North Carolina General Statutes, chapter 160A, article 19, part 3C (G.S. ch. 160A, art. 19, pt. 3C), and the provisions of this chapter, the City Council designates a commission to be known as the Washington Historic Preservation Commission. 
(c)  Qualification of members; terms, appointments, and general duties. 
(1)  Effective February 11, 2002, the Commission shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of section 2-531(a). All members shall reside within the city limits. In addition, all members shall have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture, archaeology or related fields. The Commission shall serve without compensation except that they may be reimbursed for actual expenses incident to the performance of their duties within the limits of any funds available to the Commission. 
(2)  Commission members shall serve overlapping terms of three (3) years. 
(3)  The Commission shall select from among its members a chairperson and vice-chairperson who shall be elected annually by the Commissioners. 
(4)  Upon its first formal meeting, and prior to performing any duties under this article or under chapter 160A, article 19, part 3C of the North Carolina General Statutes (G.S. ch. 160A, art. 19, pt. 3), the Commission shall adopt rules of procedure governing the Commission's actions in accordance with the provisions of section 2-532 which are not governed by this article or the General Statutes. The Commission shall also adopt principles and guidelines for new construction, alterations, additions, moving and demolition of designated historic landmarks and properties in historic districts. The guidelines may be amended by the Historic Preservation Commission. All guidelines and amendments shall be subject to approval by the City Council. 
(d)  Attendance at meetings. Unexcused absences are subject to the provisions of section 2-531(b). The Council shall act within sixty (60) days to fill vacancies on the Commission. Absence due to sickness, death in the family or other emergencies of like nature shall be recognized as approved absences and shall not affect the member's status on the Commission, except that in the event of a long illness or any other such cause for prolonged absence, the member shall be replaced. 
(e)  Meetings. The Commission shall establish a meeting time and shall meet at least quarterly and more often as it shall determine and require. 
(f)  Minutes. The Commission shall keep permanent minutes of all its meetings, which shall be a public record. The minutes shall record attendance of Commission members and the Commission's resolutions, findings, recommendations and actions. 
(g)  Receipt of gifts and authority to acquire historic properties. The City Council shall have the right to accept gifts and donations in the name of the city for historic preservation purposes. It is authorized to make appropriations to the Commission in any amount necessary for the expenses of the operation of the Commission, and acquisition, restoration, preservation, operation, and management of historic buildings, structures, sites, areas, or objects designated as historic landmarks or within designated historic districts, or of land on which such buildings or structures are located, or to which they may be removed. 
(h)  Role of the Council. The designation of a historic landmark or district shall be effective through the adoption of an ordinance by the City Council. No landmark or district shall be recommended for designation unless it is deemed to be of special significance in terms of its historical, prehistorical, architectural or cultural importance, and to possess integrity of design, setting, workmanship, materials, feeling and/or association. The landmark or district must lie within the planning and zoning jurisdiction of the city. 
(i)  Overlay district established; boundaries; permitted uses. An overlay district is hereby established to overlap with other zoning districts established by this Code. The boundaries of the historic district are established as indicated on the Official Zoning Map of the city, which is on file for public inspection in the office of the Department of Planning and Development. All uses permitted within zoning districts established by the city, whether by permitted use or by special use, shall be permitted within this overlay district according to procedures established by this section. No historic district shall be designated until: 
(1)  An investigation and report describing the significance of the buildings, structures, features, sites or surroundings, included in any such proposed district, and a description of the boundaries of such district has been prepared; and 
(2)  The Department of Cultural Resources, acting through the State Historic Preservation Officer or his designee, shall have made an analysis of and recommendations concerning such report and description of proposed boundaries. Failure of the Department to submit its written analysis and recommendations to the City Council within thirty (30) calendar days after a written request for such analysis has been received by the Department of Cultural Resources shall relieve the municipality of any responsibility for awaiting such analysis, and said Council may at any time thereafter take any necessary action to adopt or amend its zoning chapter. 
(3)  The City Council may also, in its discretion, refer the report and the proposed boundaries to any other interested body for its recommendation prior to taking action to amend this chapter. With respect to any changes in the boundaries of such district subsequent to its initial establishment, or the creation of additional districts within the jurisdiction, the investigative studies and reports required by subsection (1) of this section shall be prepared by the Commission and shall be referred to the local planning agency for its review and comment according to procedures set forth in this chapter. Changes in the boundaries of an initial district or proposal for additional districts shall also be submitted to the Department of Cultural Resources in accordance with the provisions of subsection (i)(2) of this section. Upon receipt of these reports and recommendations the city may proceed in the same manner as would otherwise be required for the adoption or amendment of any appropriate zoning chapter provisions. 
(j)  Designation of landmarks. Upon complying with the landmark designation procedures as set forth in this article, the City Council may adopt and from time to time amend or repeal an ordinance designating one (1) or more historic landmarks. 
(1)  No property shall be recommended for designation as a landmark unless it is deemed and found by the Commission to be of special significance in terms of its historical, prehistorical, architectural or cultural importance and to possess integrity of design, setting, workmanship, materials, feeling and/or association. 
(2)  The ordinance shall describe each property designated in the ordinance, the name of the owner of the property, those elements of the property that are integral to its historical, architectural, or prehistorical value, including the land areas of the property so designated and any other information the City Council deems necessary. For each building, structure, site, area or object so designated as a historic landmark, the ordinance shall require that the waiting period set forth in part 3C of the General Statutes (G.S. pt. 3C) be observed prior to its demolition. For each designated landmark, the ordinance may also provide for a suitable sign on the property indicating that the property has been so designated. If the owner consents, the sign shall be placed upon the property. If an owner objects, the sign shall be placed on a nearby public right-of-way. 
(k)  Required landmark designation procedures. As a guide for the identification and evaluation of landmarks, the Commission shall undertake at the earliest possible time and consistent with the resources available to it an inventory of properties of historical, architectural, prehistorical and cultural significance within its jurisdiction. Such inventories and any additions or revisions thereof shall be submitted as expeditiously as possible to the Division of Archives and History. No ordinance designating a historic building, structure, site, area or object as a landmark nor any amendment thereto may be adopted, nor may any property be accepted or acquired by the Commission or the City Council, until all of the following procedural steps have been taken: 
(1)  The Historic Preservation Commission shall prepare and adopt rules of procedure, and prepare and adopt principles and guidelines, not inconsistent with this part, for altering, restoring, moving, or demolishing properties designated as landmarks. 
(2)  The Commission shall make or cause to be made an investigation and report on the historic, architectural, prehistorical, educational or cultural significance of each building, structure, site, area or object proposed for designation or acquisition. Such investigation or report shall be forwarded to the Division of Archives and History, North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources. 
(3)  The Department of Cultural Resources, acting through the State Historic Preservation Officer shall either upon request of the department or at the initiative of the Historic Preservation Commission be given an opportunity to review and comment upon the substance and effect of the designation of any landmark pursuant to this part. Any comments shall be provided in writing. If the department does not submit its comments or recommendation in connection with any designation within thirty (30) days following its receipt of the investigation and report of the Commission, the Commission and the City Council shall be relieved of any responsibility to consider such comments. 
(4)  The Historic Preservation Commission and the City Council shall hold a joint public hearing or separate public hearings on the proposed ordinance. Reasonable notice of the time and place thereof shall be given. All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public in accordance with the North Carolina Open Meetings Law. 
(5)  Following the joint public hearing or separate public hearings, the City Council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the proposed ordinance. 
(6)  Upon adoption of the ordinance, the owners and occupants of each designated landmark shall be given written notification of such ordinance and all amendments thereto shall be filed by the Commission in the office of the Register of Deeds of the county in which the landmark are located, and the copy shall be made available for public inspection at any reasonable time. Each designated landmark shall be indexed according to the name of the owner of the property in the grantee and grantor indexes in the Register of Deeds office, and the Commission shall pay a reasonable fee for filing and indexing. A second copy of the ordinance and all amendments thereto shall be given the city Building Inspector. The fact that a building, structure, site, area, or object has been designated a landmark shall be clearly indicated on all tax maps maintained by the city for such period as the designation remains in effect. 
(7)  Upon the adoption of the landmarks ordinance or any amendment thereto, it shall be the duty of the Commission to give notice thereof to the tax supervisor of the county in which the property is located. The designation and any recorded restrictions upon the property limiting its use for preservation purposes shall be considered by the tax supervisor appraising it for tax purposes. 
(l)  Powers of the Commission. The Commission shall be authorized within the planning and zoning jurisdiction of the city to: 
(1)  Undertake an inventory of properties of historical, prehistorical, architectural and/or cultural significance; 
(2)  Recommend to the City Council structures, buildings, sites, areas or objects to be designated by ordinance as "historic landmarks" and areas to be designated by ordinance as "historic districts"; 
(3)  Acquire by any lawful means the fee or any lesser included interest, including options to purchase, to any such properties designated as landmarks, to hold, manage, preserve, restore and improve the same, and to exchange or dispose of the property by public or private sale, lease or otherwise, subject to covenants or other legally binding restrictions which will secure appropriate rights of public access and promote the preservation of the property; 
(4)  Restore, preserve and operate historic properties; 
(5)  Recommend to the City Council that designation of any area as a historic district or part thereof of any building, structure, site, area or object as a historic landmark be revoked or removed; 
(6)  Conduct an educational program with respect to historic landmarks and district within its jurisdiction; 
(7)  Cooperate with the state, federal and local government in pursuance of the purpose of this article; to offer or request assistance, aid, guidance or advice concerning matters under its purview or of mutual interest. The City Council or the Commission, when authorized by the Council, may contract with the state or the United States of America, or any agency of either, or with any other organization provided the terms are not inconsistent with state or federal law; 
(8)  Enter, solely in performance of its official duties and only at reasonable times, upon private lands for examination or survey thereof. However, no member, employee, or agent of the Commission may enter any private building or structure without express consent of the owner or occupant thereof; 
(9)  Prepare and recommend the official adoption of a preservation element as part of the city's comprehensive plan; 
(10)  Review and act upon proposals for alterations, demolition, or new construction within historic districts, or for the alteration or demolition of designated landmarks pursuant to this section; 
(11)  Negotiate at any time with the owner of a building, structure, site, area or object for its acquisition or its preservation when such action is reasonable, necessary or appropriate; and 
(12)  Approve all design plans and sketches so to ensure that they meet the guidelines of the Downtown Washington Facade Improvement Grant Program as established by the City Council. 
(m)  Certificate of appropriateness-Required. From and after August 14, 1978, no exterior architectural features of any building or structure shall be altered, restored, erected or moved within the district until a certificate of appropriateness is issued by the Historic Preservation Commission, or under special circumstances, its staff person. For the purposes of this article, the term "exterior features" shall include the architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including the kind and texture of the building material, the size and scale of the building, and the type and style of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, and other appurtenant features. In the case of outdoor advertising signs, the term "exterior features" shall be construed to mean the style, material, size and location of all such signs. Such exterior features may, at the discretion of the City Council, include historic signs; color; and significant landscape, archaeological, and natural features of the area. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (m)(2) of this section, the Commission shall have no jurisdiction over interior arrangement and shall take no action under this section except to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, moving, or demolition of buildings, structures, appurtenant features, or outdoor advertising signs or other significant features in the district or of the landmark which would be incongruous with the special character of the landmark or district. 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (m)(1) of this section, the jurisdiction of the Commission over interior space shall be limited to specific interior features of architectural, artistic or historical significance in publicly owned landmarks; and of privately owned historic landmarks for which consent for interior review has been given by the owner. Said consent of any owner for interior review shall bind future owners and/or successors in title, provided such consent has been filed in the office of the Register of Deeds of the county and indexed according to the name of the owner and the specific nature of the Commission's jurisdiction over the interior. All of the provisions of this article are applicable to the construction, alteration, moving, and demolition by the state, its political subdivisions, agencies and instrumentalities, provided however that they shall not apply to interiors of buildings or structures owned by the state. The state and its agencies shall have a right of appeal to the North Carolina Historical Commission or any successor agency assuming it responsibilities under G.S. 121-12(a) from any decision of the local Commission. The decision of the North Carolina Historical Commission shall be binding upon both the state and the Historic Preservation Commission. 
(3)  The city and all public utility companies shall be required to obtain a certificate of appropriateness prior to initiating work in a historic district for any changes in the character of street paving sidewalks, trees, utility installations, lighting, walls, fences, structures and buildings on property, easements or streets owned or franchised by the city or public utility companies. 
(n)  Certificate of appropriateness-Requirements for issuance An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be obtained from and when completed, filed with the responsible staff person. 
(o)  Certificate of appropriateness-Application contents. The application shall, in accordance with the Commission's Rules of Procedure, contain data that is reasonably necessary to determine the nature of the application. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall not be considered complete until all required data has been submitted. Applications shall be considered by the Commission at its next regular meeting, provided the applications have been filed, complete in form and content, at least fifteen (15) calendar days before the regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission. Otherwise, they shall be deferred until the next meeting or considered at a special called meeting of the Commission. Nothing shall prevent the applicant from filing with the application additional relevant information bearing on the application. 
(p)  Notification of Commission and affected property owners. Upon receipt of an application the responsible staff person shall notify the Commission at least seven (7) days before the regularly scheduled meeting. Prior to any action taken on a certificate of appropriateness application, the owners of any property likely to be materially affected by the application shall be notified in writing, and the applicant and such owners shall be given an opportunity to be heard. 
(q)  Public hearing. When an application is presented to the Commission a public hearing may be held when deemed necessary. All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public, in accordance with the North Carolina Open Meetings Law, chapter 143, article 33C of the General Statutes (G.S. ch. 143, art. 33C). 
(r)  Action on an application. The action on an application shall be approval, approval with amendments, or denial. 
(1)  Prior to any final action on an application, the review criteria in subsection (m) of this section shall be used to make findings of fact indicating the extent to which the application is or is not congruous with the historic aspects of the district or landmark. 
(2)  All applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be reviewed and acted upon within a reasonable time as defined by the Rules of Procedure, and not exceeding ninety (90) days from the date the application is filed. As part of its review procedure the Commission may view the premises and seek the advice of the Department of Cultural Resources or other such experts as it may deem necessary under the circumstances. 
(s)  Appeals. An appeal may be taken to the Board of Adjustment from the Commission's action in granting or denying any certificate, which appeal: 
(1)  May be taken by any aggrieved party; 
(2)  Shall be taken within times prescribed by the Commission in the Rules of Procedure; and 
(3)  Shall be in the nature of certiorari. Any appeal from the Board of Adjustment's decision in any such case shall be heard by the Superior Court of the county. 
(t)  Submission of new applications. If a certificate of appropriateness is denied, a new application affecting the same property may be submitted only if substantial change is made in plans for the proposed construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, or moving. 
(u)  Review criteria for certificates of appropriateness. To provide reasonable standards to assist in the review of the application for a certificate of appropriateness, the Commission shall take into account the following elements to ensure that they are consistent with the historic or visual character or characteristics of the district: 
(1)  The height and width of the building in relation to the height and width of adjacent, opposite and surrounding buildings. 
(2)  The setbacks and placement of the building in relation to the setback of adjacent, opposite and surrounding buildings. 
(3)  Exterior construction materials, including textures, but not to include color. 
(4)  Architectural detailing such as lintels, cornices, brick bond and foundation materials. 
(5)  Roof shapes, forms and materials. 
(6)  Proportions, shapes, positions and locations, patterns and sizes of any elements of fenestration. 
(7)  General form and proportions of buildings and structures. 
(8)  Appurtenant fixtures and other features such as lighting and fencing. 
It is the intention of these regulations to ensure, so far as possible, that buildings or structure shall be in harmony with other buildings or structures located herein. It is not the intent of these regulations to require the reconstruction or restoration of individual or original buildings. 
(v)  Minor works. A certificate of appropriateness application, when determined to involve a minor work, may be reviewed and approved by the responsible staff person in the Department of Planning and Development, according to specific review criteria and guidelines. The term "minor works" is defined as those exterior changes that do not involve substantial alterations, additions or removals that could impair the integrity of the property and/or the district as a whole. Such minor works shall be limited to those listed in the Commission's Rules of Procedure. No application involving a minor work may be denied without the formal action of the Commission. 
(w)  Certain changes not prohibited. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature of a historic landmark or in a historic district which does not involve a change in design, materials, or outer appearance thereof, nor to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, or demolition of any such feature which the Building Inspector or similar official shall certify is required by the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent a property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances, or regulations. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the maintenance or, in the event of an emergency, the immediate restoration of any existing above-ground utility structure without approval by the Commission. 
(x)  Conflict with other laws. Whenever any ordinance adopted for the designation of landmarks or districts requires a longer waiting period or imposes higher standards with respect to a designated landmark or district than are established under any other statute, charter provision, or regulation, this article shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute, charter provision or regulation require a longer waiting period or impose higher standards than are established under this article, such other statute, charter provision, ordinance, or regulation shall govern. 
(y)  Enforcement and remedies. Compliance with the terms of the certificate of appropriateness shall be enforced by the responsible staff person. Failure to comply with the certificate of appropriateness shall be a violation of this chapter and is punishable according to established procedures and penalties for such violations. 
(1)  A certificate of appropriateness shall expire one (1) year after the date of issuance if the work authorized by the certificate has not commenced. 
(2)  If after commencement, the work is discontinued for a period of six (6) months the permit shall immediately expire. 
(3)  No work authorized by any certificate which has expired shall thereafter be performed until a new certificate has been secured. 
In case any building, structure, site area or object designated as a historic landmark or located within a historic district established pursuant to this article is about to be demolished whether as a result of deliberate neglect or otherwise, materially altered, remodeled, removed or destroyed, except in compliance with this article, the city, the Commission, or other party aggrieved by such action may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful demolition, destruction, material alteration, remodeling or removal, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such a building, structure, site, area or object. Such remedies shall be in addition to any others authorized for violation of a municipal ordinance. 
(z)  Delay in demolition of landmarks and buildings. 
(1)  An application for a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the demolition or destruction of a designated landmark or a building, structure, or site within the district may not be denied, except as provided in subsection (z)(3) of this section. However, the effective date of such a certificate may be delayed for a period of up to three hundred sixty-five (365) days from the date of approval. The maximum period of delay authorized by this section shall be reduced by the Commission where it finds that the owner would suffer extreme hardship or be permanently deprived of all beneficial use of or return from such property by virtue of the delay. During such period the Commission shall negotiate with the owner and with any other parties in an effort to find a means of preserving the building or site. If the Commission finds that a building or site within the historic district has no special significance or value toward maintaining the character of the district, it shall waive all or part of such period and authorize earlier demolition or removal. If the Commission has voted to recommend designation of a property as a landmark or designation of an area as a district, and final designation has not been made by the City Council, the demolition or destruction of any building, site or structure located on the property of the proposed landmark or in the propose district may be delayed by the Commission for a period of up to three hundred sixty-five (365) days or until the City Council takes final action on the designation, whichever occurs first. 
(2)  The City Council may enact an ordinance to prevent the demolition by neglect of any designated landmark or any building or structure within an established historic district. Such ordinance shall provide appropriate safeguards to protect property owners from undue economic hardship. 
(3)  An application for a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the demolition or destruction of a building, site, or structure determined by the State Historic Preservation Officer as having statewide significance, as defined in the criteria of the National Register of Historic Places, may be denied, except where the Commission finds that the owner would suffer extreme hardship or be permanently deprived of all beneficial use or return by virtue of the denial. 
(Code 1993, § 27-162; Ord. No. 02-3, 2-11-2002; Ord. No. 02-22, 11-11-2002; Ord. No. 03-04, 2-10-2003) 
Cross reference- Removal of members, § 2-531(b). 
Sec. 40-387. - Prevention of demolition by neglect of buildings and structures in the historic district. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Certificate of appropriateness shall mean a certificate issued by the Historic Preservation Commission certifying that the changes proposed to a structure located within the historic district meet the historic design guidelines. 
    Historical significance shall mean a structure located within the historic district determined by inventory to have been constructed during the period of significance of the historic district and that possesses historic integrity. 
    Historic district shall mean an area established by the city through zoning that has local historical significance. Properties within this area must meet local design guidelines. 
    Historic Preservation Commission or Commission shall mean the Commission established by the city to protect and preserve local historical resources. The Commission evaluates the appropriateness of exterior changes to buildings and new construction proposed for properties located within the historic district. 
    Demolition by neglect shall mean and include the failure by the owner or such other person who may have legal possession, custody, and control of any building or structure (including walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, pavement, paths, or any other appurtenant feature), either designated as an historic landmark or found to have historical significance, to keep the exterior features free of decay, deterioration, and structural defects, in order to ensure that the same shall be preserved. The term "demolition by neglect" shall also include the failure of such owner, or other person having such legal possession, custody, and/or control, to repair, upon written request by the city, such exterior features as are found to be deteriorating, or to correct any condition contributing to deterioration, including, but not limited to, the following defined and prohibited conditions of neglect and defects: 
(1)  Deterioration of exterior walls, foundations, or other vertical supports that cause leaning, sagging, splitting, listing, or buckling. 
(2)  Deterioration of flooring or floor supports, roofs, or other horizontal members that cause leaning, sagging, splitting, listing, or buckling. 
(3)  Deterioration of external chimneys causing leaning, sagging, splitting, listing, or buckling. 
(4)  Deterioration or crumbling of exterior plasters or mortars. 
(5)  Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, and foundations, including broken windows or doors. 
(6)  Defective protection or lack of weather protection for exterior walls and roof coverings, including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint and/or other protective coverings. 
(7)  Rotting, holes, and other forms of decay. 
(8)  Deterioration of exterior stairs, porches, handrails, window and door frames, cornices, entablatures, wall facings, and architectural details that causes the delamination, instability, loss of shape and form, or crumbling. 
(9)  Heaving, subsidence, or cracking of sidewalks, steps or pathways. 
(10)  Deterioration of fences, gates, and/or accessory structures. 
(11)  Deterioration of any exterior feature so as to create, or permit the creation of, any hazardous or unsafe conditions to life, health, or other property. 
    Planning director shall mean and include the duly appointed Director of Planning and Development of the city, his designee, or his agent. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  In order to promote the purposes of the historic district, this section requires the owners of certain historic properties to maintain their properties and not allow them to fall into a state of disrepair constituting demolition by neglect. The requirements of this section are applicable only to properties located in the historic district. 
(2)  The planning director, upon his own motion or upon the petition of the Commission, may require the correction of deterioration, making of repairs, or the remedy of any condition constituting demolition by neglect to any historic landmark or structure located within the historic district so that such structure or landmark shall be preserved and protected in accordance with the purposes of the historic district. 
(c)  Procedures for hearing. 
(1)  Whenever the Planning Director receives a petition or other sufficient information to believe a property including structure is undergoing or constitutes demolition by neglect, the Planning Director shall, if the preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, within seven days issue and cause to be served upon the owner and such other persons who may have legal possession, custody, and control thereof, a complaint stating the charges and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the Commission at the Commission's regular meeting place, at a fixed date and time not less than 30 days after the serving of such complaint; that the owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to answer such charges and to give testimony at the place and time established in the complaint. The purpose of the hearing is for the Commission to receive evidence, determine if the property is undergoing or constitutes demolition by neglect, and, if so, issue an order to remedy the same. At this hearing, the owner or party in interest will also be allowed the opportunity to present a claim of undue economic hardship as provided hereinafter. 
(2)  If, after such notice and hearing, the Commission determines that the property including structure is undergoing or constitutes demolition by neglect according to the standards hereinabove and does not find undue economic hardship as provided for hereinafter, it shall cause the Planning Director to prepare and serve upon the owner and parties in interest a written order including findings of fact in support of its determinations and order to repair, within the time specified by the Commission, those elements deteriorating, contributing to deterioration, deteriorated, or otherwise undergoing or constituting demolition by neglect. Said order shall serve as a certificate of appropriateness for such repair consistent with its terms. 
(d)  Safeguards from undue economic hardship. 
(1)  When a claim of undue economic hardship is made owing to the effects of this section, the owner and parties in interest shall present the information provided under subsection (d)(2) of this section to the Commission. The Commission may require that an owner and parties in interest furnish such additional information as is relevant to its determination of undue economic hardship. The Commission may direct staff to furnish additional information that the Commission believes is relevant. The Commission shall also state which form of financial proof it deems relevant and necessary to a particular case. In the event that any of the required information is not reasonably available to the owner and parties in interest or cannot be obtained by the owner, the owner shall describe the reasons why such information cannot be obtained. 
(2)  When a claim of undue economic hardship is made owing to the effects of this section, the owner and parties in interest must provide evidence during the hearing upon the claim, describing the circumstances or hardship. 
a.  The minimum evidence shall include for all properties: 
1.  Nature of ownership (individual, business, or nonprofit) or legal possession, custody and control. 
2.  Financial resources of the owner and parties in interest. 
3.  Estimated costs of repairs. 
4.  Assessed value of land and improvements (existing). 
5.  Real estate taxes for the previous two years. 
6.  Amount paid for the property, date of purchase, and party from whom purchased, including a description of the relationship between the owner and the person from whom the property was purchased, or other means of acquisition of title, such as by gift or by inheritance. 
7.  Annual debt service, if any, for the previous two years. 
8.  Any listing of the property for sale or for rent, the price asked, and offers received, if any. 
9.  Any financial or practical circumstance deemed relevant by the owner or parties in interest. 
b.  In addition, for all income producing properties, the owner and parties in interest must also provide the following: 
1.  Annual gross income from the property for the previous two years. 
2.  Itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two years, including proof that adequate and competent management procedures were followed. 
3.  Annual cash flow, if any, for the previous two years. 
(3)  No later than the close of the second meeting of the Commission following the Commission's hearing on the claim, the Commission shall cause to be made a finding of undue or no undue economic hardship and shall enter the reasons for such finding into the official record. 
(4)  In the event of a finding of undue economic hardship, the finding shall be accompanied by a recommended plan to relieve the economic hardship. This plan may include, but is not limited to, the following: property tax relief as may be allowed under state law; loans or grants from the city, county, or other public, private, or nonprofit sources; acquisition by purchase or eminent domain; building code modifications; changes in applicable zoning regulations; or obtaining a variance proving sufficient to mitigate the undue economic hardship. The Commission shall report such finding and the recommended plan to the Planning Director. The Planning Director shall cause to be issued an order for such property to be repaired within the time specified according to the provisions of the recommended plan which shall serve as a certificate of appropriateness for such repair consistent with its terms. 
(e)  Stay of proceedings. An approved Certificate of Appropriateness and arrangements to bring the property into compliance agreed upon by the property owner and other parties of interest and the Commission will stay all proceedings under this section so long as progress, as determined in the sole discretion of the Commission, is made consistent with the terms of the Certificate of Appropriateness. 
(f)  Remedies. 
(1)  lf the owner of said property fails to comply with an order to repair issued hereunder, the owner shall be subject to such remedies and penalties as may be provided for by state law and/or sections 40-581 through 40-584. 
(2)  Any notice or order served hereunder shall satisfy the notice requirement for issuance of a civil penalty under section 40-582. 
(3)  Protective action. The Commission may order that a building be secured temporarily by boarding up, temporary reinforcement or other appropriate measures and that an intrusion alarm system and fire detection system be installed and actively monitored by connection to a licensed alarm company which remains in ready contact with the Police and Fire Departments. 
(4)  Administrative fees. 
a.  No administrative fees shall be charged for the first inspection following an order to repair in order to ascertain compliance with any notices or orders issued hereunder. For each inspection, beginning with the second inspection, an administrative fee shall be assessed as written. 
b.  In addition to any other charge, any owner of a building or structure designated as an historic landmark or found to have historical significance located within the historic district shall be subject to the administrative fee, upon any additional hearings hereunder disclosing defects defined in this section within the same 12-month period beginning on the date of the violation and ending on the same date in the following year. The property may also be assessed any costs incurred in obtaining service including legal publication of notice of compliant charges, hearing notice and findings of fact and orders related to the dwelling. 
(5)  Order of Abatement. In addition to any other remedy provided for hereunder, the Commission may apply for and the Court may enter an Order of Abatement. An Order of Abatement may direct that improvements or repairs be made, or that any other action be taken that is necessary to bring the property into compliance with this section. Whenever the party is cited for contempt by the Court and/or the Commission executed the Order of Abatement, the Commission and/or City shall have a lien, in the nature of a mechanic's and materialman's, on the property for the cost of executing the Order of Abatement. 
(g)  Methods of service. Complaints or orders issued by the Planning Director or his designee shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered or certified mail. If the whereabouts of such person(s) is/are unknown, the same cannot be ascertained by the Planning Director in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the Planning Director makes an affidavit to that effect and in said affidavit affirms the steps taken to determine and locate the person(s) of interest, then the serving of such complaint or order may be made by publishing the same once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper generally circulated within the City. Where such service is by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises thereby affected. 
(h)  Appeals. Findings and orders made by the Planning Director or his designee or by the Commission may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment. To perfect such an appeal, the application must be filed by an aggrieved party with the Board of Adjustment within ten days following receipt of the order for repair of the property or other determination. Appeals shall be in the nature of certiorari. 
(i)  Other city powers. Nothing contained within this section shall diminish the city's power to declare a building to be unsafe or a violation of the minimum housing code. 
(Ord. No. 06-23, § 1(27-162.1), 11-14-2006) 
Secs. 40-388-40-402. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - SIGNS 

Sec. 40-403. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Banner means a suspended sign made of a flexible material such as canvas, sailcloth, plastic or waterproof paper. 
    Building facade means the face of a building oriented in the same direction, or within a forty-five-degree angle of the same direction, including roof and wall. 
    Flags means devices generally made of flexible materials such as cloth, paper or plastic, and displayed on a flagpole. 
    Freestanding sign means a sign that is attached to, erected on, or supported by some structure (such as a pole, mast, frame, or other structure) that is not itself an integral part of or attached to a building or other structure whose principal function is something other than the support of a sign. A sign that stands without supporting elements, such as, a sandwich sign, is considered a freestanding sign, but is also considered a portable sign, as defined in this section. 
    Internally illuminated sign means a sign where the source of the illumination is inside the sign and light emanates through the message of the sign, rather than being reflected off the surface of the sign from an external source. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, signs that consist of or contain tubes that are filled with neon or some other gas that glows when an electric current passes through it and are intended to form or constitute all or part of the message of the sign, rather than merely providing illumination to other parts of the sign that contain the message, shall also be considered internally illuminated signs. 
    Nonconforming sign means any sign which was lawfully erected in compliance with applicable code provisions and maintained prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is adopted, and which fails to conform to all applicable standards and restrictions of this article. 
    Off-premises signs means a sign that draws attention to or communicates information about a business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction, or other activity that is conducted, sold, or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located. Such signs are not permitted, except those specifically exempt in accordance with section 40-406. 
    On-premises signs means a sign that draws attention to or communicates information about a business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction, or other activity that is conducted, sold, or offered at or on the premises on which the sign is located. 
    Outdoor advertising sign means a poster panel or painted bulletin off-premises sign, commonly referred to as a billboard. 
    Portable sign means a sign that is designed to be moved from place to place and which is not permanently installed or permanently anchored to either the ground or a wall. 
    Projecting signs means a sign that is attached to and projects more than twelve (12) inches from a building facade or wall. 
    Sign means any device that is sufficiently visible to persons not located on the lot where such device is located to accomplish the objective of directing attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment or other activity sold or offered exclusively on the premises where the sign is located, or of communicating information to them. 
    Temporary sign means a sign that is used in connection with a circumstance, situation, or event that is designed, intended, or expected to take place or to be completed within a reasonably short or definite period after the erection of such sign, or is intended to remain on the location where it is erected or placed for a period of not more than thirty (30) days. If a sign display area is permanent but the message displayed is subject to periodic changes, that sign shall not be regarded as temporary. 
    Wall sign means any sign attached to, painted on, or erected against any wall of a building or structure so that the exposed face of the sign is on a place parallel to the plane of said wall and which does not extend more than twelve (12) inches from the wall. Wall signs also include any sign erected against, installed on or painted on a penthouse above the roof of a building as long as the wall of the penthouse is on a plane parallel to the wall of the building. Wall signs also include a sign attached to, painted on, or erected against a false wall or false roof that does not vary more than thirty (30) degrees from the plane of the adjoining wall elevation. 
    Window sign means a window sign is a sign attached directly onto the outside of the window of a building. 
(Code 1993, § 27-164; Ord. No. 02-21, 11-11-2002) 
Sec. 40-404. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article shall be to allow certain signs of a residential and commercial nature in areas designated for such uses in a manner which will best provide and ensure: 
(a)  The health, safety, and general welfare of the public. 
(b)  The adequate supply of light and air to adjacent properties. 
(c)  Adequate and proportionate advertisement displays which promote and protect the economic vitality of the community. 
(d)  That signage displayed adjacent to and visible from a public right-of-way will not distract or confuse the motoring public, thereby causing a public hazard. 
(e)  That the aesthetic quality of the city is maintained for the benefit of all the citizens of the city, county, and the state as a whole. 
(Code 1993, § 27-163) 
Sec. 40-405. - Permit required. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in sections 40-406 and 40-407, no sign may be erected, moved, enlarged, or substantially altered, except in accordance with the provisions of this section. Mere repainting or changing the message of the sign shall not, in and of itself, be considered a substantial alteration, unless a change of use or occupancy occurs. If a change of use or occupancy occurs, or if a sign is replaced, then a sign permit shall be required. 
(b)  Sign permit approval is a separate process from building permit approval. Although detailed sign plans may be included in site plans for a building permit, a separate sign permit must be obtained before any sign can be constructed. 
(c)  Signs may be erected, moved, enlarged, or substantially altered only in accordance with a sign permit issued by the city. Violations of this provision shall be handled in accordance with article XXI of this chapter, pertaining to administration, enforcement, penalties. 
(Code 1993, § 27-165) 
Sec. 40-406. - Signs excluded from regulation. 
    The following signs are exempt from regulation under this article, except for those restrictions stated in this section: 
(a)  Signs not exceeding four (4) square feet in area that are customarily associated with residential use and that are not of a commercial nature, such as signs giving property identification names or numbers or names of occupants, signs on mailboxes or paper tubes, and signs posted on private property relating to private parking or warning the public against trespassing, danger from animals, or other dangers. 
(b)  Signs erected by or on behalf of or pursuant to the authorization of a governmental body, including legal notices, identification and informational signs, and traffic, directional, or regulatory signs. 
(c)  Official signs of a noncommercial nature erected by public utilities. 
(d)  Flags, pennants, or insignia of any governmental or nonprofit organization when not displayed in connection with a commercial promotion or as an advertising device. 
(e)  Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings or works of art, so long as such features or works do not contain letters, trademarks, moving parts, or lights. 
(f)  Signs directing and guiding traffic, such as entrance and exit signs, on private property that do not exceed four (4) square feet each. 
(g)  Church bulletin boards and church identification signs that do not exceed thirty-six (36) square feet in area. 
(h)  Signs painted on or otherwise permanently attached to currently licensed motor vehicles and trailers that are not primarily used as signs. 
(i)  Sign proclaiming religious, political, or other noncommercial messages that do not exceed one (1) per lot per abutting street and sixteen (16) square feet in area. 
(j)  Signs located on the interior of buildings, courts, lobbies, stadiums, or other structures that are not intended to be seen from the exterior of said building or structure. 
(k)  Memorial and historical plaques or markers. 
(l)  Sign painted to or attached to vending machines, or similar devices which indicate the contents of the machine, the price, or operating instructions. 
(m)  Government flags. 
(1)  A county, city, consolidated city-county, or unified government shall not prohibit an official governmental flag from being flown or displayed if the official governmental flag is flown or displayed: 
a.  In accordance with the patriotic customs set forth in 4 USC 5-10, as amended; and 
b.  Upon private or public property with the consent of either the owner of the property or of any person having lawful control of the property. 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, and welfare, reasonable restrictions on flag size, number of flags, location, and height of flagpoles are not prohibited, provided such restrictions shall not discriminate against any official governmental flag in any manner. 
(3)  For purposes of this section, the term "official governmental flag" shall mean any of the following: 
a.  The flag of the United States of America. 
b.  The flag of nations recognized by the United States of America. 
c.  The flag of the state. 
d.  The flag of any state or territory of the United States. 
e.  The flag of a political subdivision of any state or territory of the United States. 
(Code 1993, § 27-166) 
Sec. 40-407. - Temporary signs, permit exemptions and additional regulations. 
(a)  The following temporary signs are permitted without a sign permit. However, such signs shall conform to the requirements set forth below as well as all other applicable requirements of this article, except those contained in section 40-410, pertaining to total allowable sign surface area, and section 40-413, pertaining to the number of freestanding and wall signs: 
(1)  Signs containing the message that the real estate on which the sign is located (including buildings) is for sale, lease, or rent, together with information identifying the owner or agent. Such signs may not exceed four (4) square feet in area and shall be removed immediately after sale, lease, or rental. For lots of less than five (5) acres, a single sign on each street frontage may be erected. For lots of five (5) acres or more in area and having a street frontage of more than four hundred (400) feet, a single sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area may be erected on each street frontage. 
(2)  Construction site/opening soon identification signs. Such signs may identify the project, the owner or developer, architect, engineer, contractor and subcontractors, funding source, and may contain related information. Not more than one (1) such sign may be erected per site, and it may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. Such signs shall not be erected prior to the issuance of a building permit and shall be removed within ten (10) days after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy. One (1) "opening soon" sign may be permitted per building site provided such sign does not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and is erected for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. 
(3)  Signs attached temporarily to the interior of a building window or glass door. Such sign, individually or collectively, may not cover more than seventy-five (75) percent of the surface area of the transparent portion of the window or door to which they are attached. In the B1H and RHD districts, signs placed in windows, from the interior, shall occupy no more than twenty (20) percent of the area of the displaying window. Such signs shall be removed within thirty (30) days after placement. 
(4)  Displays, including lighting, erected in connection with the observance of holidays. Such signs shall be removed within ten (10) days following the holidays. 
(5)  Signs advertising upcoming theatrical events or concerts are permitted and may be displayed no more than thirty (30) days before the event and will be removed within five (5) days after the event. These signs will not exceed six (6) square feet in size. 
(b)  Other temporary signs, not listed in subsection (a) of this section, shall be regarded and treated in all respects as permanent signs. 
(Code 1993, § 27-167; Ord. No. 11-4, § 2, 3-14-2011) 
Sec. 40-408. - Determining the number of signs. 
(a)  For the purpose of determining the number of signs, a sign shall be considered to be single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related, and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of elements, each element shall be considered a single sign. 
(b)  Without limiting the generality of subsection (a) of this section, a multi-sided sign shall be regarded as one (1) sign. 
(Code 1993, § 27-168) 
Sec. 40-409. - Computation of sign area. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, the area, in square feet, of any sign shall be computed by the smallest square, triangle, rectangle, circle or combination thereof which will encompass the entire sign. In computing the sign area in square feet, standard mathematical formulas for known or common shapes will be used. In the case of irregular shapes, straight lines drawn closest to the extremities of the shape will be used. 
(b)  Where a sign has two (2) or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign, except that where two (2) such faces are placed back-to-back and are at no point more than one and one-half (1 1/2) feet from one another. The area of the sign shall be taken as the area of the larger face if the two (2) faces are of unequal area; if the areas of the two (2) faces are equal, then the area of one (1) of the faces shall be taken as the area of the sign. 
(Code 1993, § 27-169) 
Sec. 40-410. - Total allowable sign surface area. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided in this article, the total surface area devoted to all signs on any lot shall not exceed the limitations set forth in this section, and all signs except temporary signs shall be included in this calculation. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided in this article, the maximum sign surface area permitted on any lot in any residential district is four (4) square feet. In the RHD District, the maximum sign surface area permitted on any lot is two (2) square feet. The maximum sign surface area allowed for approved home occupations is set out in section 40-415(e). 
(c)  Subject to the other provisions of this article, the maximum sign surface area permitted on any lot in a B1H district shall be five (5) percent of the area of the building facade plus twenty (20) percent of the area of the front display window. However, in no case may the total sign surface area exceed one hundred (100) square feet. 
(d)  Subject to the other provisions of this section, the maximum sign surface area permitted on any lot in an O and I or B4 district shall be determined by multiplying the number of linear feet of street frontage by seventy-five one-hundredths (0.75) of a foot. However, in no case may the total sign surface area exceed two hundred (200) square feet. 
(e)  Subject to the other provisions of this article, the maximum sign surface area permitted on any lot in a B2, B3, I1, or I2 district shall be determined by multiplying the number of linear feet of street frontage of the lot by one and one-half (1 1/2) feet. However, in no case may the total sign surface area exceed four hundred (400) square feet. 
(f)  Within a Planned Unit Development (PUD), the maximum sign surface area permitted for each use shall be determined by multiplying the number of linear feet of street frontage of the development by one and one-half (1 1/2) feet. However, in no case may the total sign surface area for each use exceed four hundred (400) square feet. 
(g)  If a lot has frontage on more than one (1) street, then the total surface area permitted on that lot shall be the sum of the sign surface area allotments related to each street on which the lot has frontage. However, the total sign surface area that is oriented toward a particular street may not exceed the portion of the lot's total sign surface area allocation that is derived from frontage on that street. 
(h)  Whenever a lot is situated such that it has no street frontage on any lot boundary and an applicant desires to install on such a lot a sign that is oriented toward a street, then the total sign surface area permitted on that lot shall be the sign surface area that would be allowed if the lot boundary closest to the street toward which such sign is to be oriented fronted on such street. The applicant shall be restricted to using only one (1) street and the closest lot boundary to this street for determining the total permitted sign surface area. However, the applicant shall be given the opportunity to determine the one (1) street used in the calculation. 
(i)  The total sign area delineated in this section may be allocated among the various types of permissible signs at the discretion of the sign permit applicant. However, the maximum sign area allocated to any one (1) particular type of sign is outlined in sections 40-411 and 40-412. Therefore, the total sign area determined by this section may not be attained in some cases because of the sign area cap for individual freestanding or wall signs. For example, a use in the B1H District with one hundred (100) feet of lot frontage, five hundred (500) square feet of building facade, and a front display window area of fifty (50) square feet would be allowed a total sign area of thirty-five (35) square feet. A maximum wall sign of twenty-five (25) square feet (500 feet building facade surface area × 5 percent=25 square feet) and a maximum window sign of ten (10) square feet (50 feet display window area × 20 percent=10 square feet) would be allowed. Consequently, the limited amount of building facade area in this case would prevent the total sign surface area from being attained. The amount of total permissible sign area not utilized for freestanding and wall signs could, however, be applied to other types of allowable signs. 
(j)  The maximum sign surface area permitted in the AP Zone shall be determined by multiplying the number of linear feet by one-half (1/2) foot. However, in no case may the total sign area exceed one hundred (100) square feet. 
(Code 1993, § 27-170; Ord. No. 01-01, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 40-411. - Freestanding sign surface area. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, a side of a freestanding sign is any plane or flat surface included in the calculation of the total sign surface area, as provided in section 40-409. For example, wall signs typically have one (1) side. Freestanding signs typically have two (2) sides (back-to-back), although four-sided and other multi-sided signs are also common. 
(b)  Subject to subsection (c) of this section, a single side of a freestanding sign may not exceed one-half (1/2) of a square foot in surface area for every linear foot of street frontage along the street toward which such sign is primarily oriented. However, in no case may a single side of a freestanding sign exceed two hundred (200) square feet. 
(c)  Freestanding, on-premises signs are permitted in the B1H District, provided the single side of the sign shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area. 
(d)  With respect to freestanding signs that have no discernible sides, such as, spheres or other shapes not composed of flat planes, no such freestanding sign may exceed the maximum surface area allowed under subsection (b) of this section for a single side of a freestanding sign. 
(Code 1993, § 27-171; Ord. No. 02-21, 11-11-2002) 
Sec. 40-412. - Wall sign surface area. 
(a)  The sign surface area on any sign located on a wall of a structure may not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total surface area of the wall on which the sign is located. 
(b)  The sign surface area of any sign located on a wall of a structure on any lot within the B1H Zoning District may not exceed five (5) percent of the total surface area of the wall on which the sign is located. The sign surface of any wall sign mounted on a residential building, including those put to commercial use, shall be small, less than one (1) square foot, identification panels at the primary entrance. 
(c)  Wall surface area is calculated by multiplying the vertical distance of the building wall (measured at the average finished grade) times the horizontal distance of the building wall. 
(Code 1993, § 27-172) 
Sec. 40-413. - Number of freestanding and wall signs. 
(a)  Except as authorized by this section, no lot may have more than one (1) freestanding sign. 
(b)  If a lot is located on a lot that has frontage on two (2) or more public streets, then the lot may have not more than one (1) freestanding sign along each side of the lot bordered by such streets. 
(c)  No more than one (1) wall sign per establishment per street frontage is allowed. 
(Code 1993, § 27-173; Ord. No. 02-21, 11-11-2002) 
Sec. 40-414. - Location and height requirements. 
(a)  No portion of any freestanding sign shall extend closer than two (2) feet to a street right-of-way line or property line. 
(b)  No sign may extend above any parapet or be placed upon any roof surface, except that for purposes of this section, roof structures constructed at an angle of seventy-five (75) degrees or more from horizontal shall be regarded as wall space. This subsection shall not apply to displays, including lighting, erected in connection with the observation of holidays on the roofs of structures. 
(c)  No wall sign attached flat to a building may project more than twelve (12) inches from the building wall. Projecting signs may, however, exceed the twelve (12) inch requirement, as long as there is only one (1) projecting sign per separate business establishment, the projecting sign does not project more than five (5) feet from the building wall, the projecting sign does not exceed six (6) square feet in area, and the bottom edge of the projecting sign is located at least eight (8) feet above the sidewalk. In the B1H and RHD zoning districts, projecting signs may be located only underneath an awning, may be no larger than three (3) square feet in area and must have a clearance of eight (8) feet from the sidewalk. 
(d)  No sign or supporting structure may be located on or over the traveled portion of any public right-of-way unless the sign is attached to a structural element of a building and an encroachment permit has been obtained from the city. 
(e)  No part of a freestanding sign, as measured from ground level, may exceed a height as set out in the following table: 
District Height RHD 8' All other residential districts 15' AP 10' O and I 15' B1H 8' B2, B3, B4, I1, I2 25'  
(Code 1993, § 27-174; Ord. No. 02-21, 11-11-2002) 
Sec. 40-415. - Special provisions for certain signs. 
(a)  Subdivision entrance, subdivision directory, and multifamily development entrance signs. At any entrance to a subdivision or multifamily development, there may be not more than one (1) sign identifying such subdivision or development. A single side of any such sign may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. In cases where such signs are mounted on decorative functional or nonfunctional walls, the wall area shall not be utilized to calculate total sign surface area. No subdivision directory sign shall be located on any major or minor thoroughfare as shown on the city thoroughfare plan. Such signage shall be allowed in addition to the maximum sign allowance for the lot on which such signage is located. 
(b)  Grand opening/going out of business signs. No such sign shall be displayed for more than ten (10) days. No maximum sign surface area requirement shall be established for such signs. Such signs shall be exempt from the provisions of section 40-417. 
(c)  Directory signs. Such signs may be allowed provided they do not exceed twenty (20) square feet in display area, six (6) feet in height, and are located no closer than ten (10) feet from the property line. There shall be no more than two (2) directory signs on any lot. Such signs shall contain no commercial advertisement. Such signage shall be allowed in addition to the maximum sign allowance for the lot on which such signage is located. 
(d)  Restaurant menu reader boards. Restaurant menu reader boards not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in area or six (6) feet in height. Such displays shall be set back not less than twenty (20) feet from any property line. One (1) menu reader board shall be allowed per each drive-through facility, and such display shall contain no commercial advertisement that can be viewed from any adjacent street right-of-way or property line. Such signage shall not be included in the calculation of or count toward the total allowable sign surface area. 
(e)  Home occupation signs. Signs displayed in connection with an approved home occupation shall not exceed two (2) square feet in total sign surface area. 
(f)  Banners. A series of banners along the frontage of the B2 General Business District, I1 Heavy Industrial District, and the I2 Light Industrial District are permitted subject to the following development standards: 
(1)  The spacing between the centerline of each banner shall be a minimum of twenty (20) linear feet installed along the front property line. 
(2)  The maximum height of each banner shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
(3)  The maximum size of each banner shall be four (4) feet wide by eight (8) feet long. 
(4)  The outer edge of the banner when fully extended shall not project over any street right of way or easement. 
(5)  No advertisement or wording is allowed on any banner. 
(6)  When a banner becomes faded and torn it is the responsibility of the owner to replace the banner in a systematic manner. 
(g)  Temporary nonprofit and governmental organization signs. Temporary sign(s), including banners, erected in conjunction with a special event sponsored and conducted by a nonprofit or governmental organization shall be allowed subject to all of the following conditions: 
(1)  It is the intention of this subsection that no such sign shall be displayed in conjunction with a commercial promotion or as an advertising device for a commercial establishment, product or service. 
(2)  Not more than one (1) on-premises and six (6) off-premises signs shall be allowed in conjunction with any event. No sign shall be erected on any lot without the consent of the property owner. 
(3)  No such sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of sign surface area. 
(4)  There shall be not more than one (1) special event sign allowed on any lot. 
(5)  The maximum frequency of any special event display shall not exceed two (2) occurrences within any 12-month period, and the maximum duration of such display shall not exceed thirty (30) days. Each sign shall be removed within seven (7) days following the event. For purposes of this subsection, the duration of each separate event display shall be measured in continuous days. 
(6)  Each display shall contain the name and current phone number of the event sponsor printed on the noncommunication side/surface of the sign. 
(7)  Such sign shall be located completely on private property. No portion of the sign or its support structure shall be located on or across any public street right-of-way or private street easement. (Exception: A suspended banner shall be allowed above West Main Street at the intersection of Van Norden Street. Any variation from the allowable square footage at this location shall be approved by the Planning and Development Department.) 
(8)  Such sign shall not be located within any sight distance triangle as defined in this Code or as provided by notation or description upon any map recorded pursuant to the subdivision regulations. 
(9)  No such sign shall be suspended from or attached to any public utility pole, apparatus, structure or support/guy wire, any public or private traffic control or directional sign, structure or device, or any tree or shrub located on public or private property. 
(10)  No such sign shall be erected or maintained which obstructs any traffic control sign or device or warning sign located on public or private property. 
(h)  Portable, on-premises signs. Portable, on-premises signs are allowed in the B1H District and may be placed in front of each business entrance so as not to obstruct any sidewalk area or public right-of-way. A single side of a portable, on-premises sign shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in area, and shall be removed at the close of the working day. 
(i)  Static light emitting diode (LED) fuel price signs. Gas stations shall be permitted one freestanding sign which may include a maximum of three fuel rate/price signs. The dimensions of each of the fuel rate/price signs shall not exceed eight (8) square feet each. Such a sign shall state the fuel price completely when displayed and can use either changeable copy or LED methods to display the fuel price. The static LED sign is for fuel pricing purposes only. Such fuel signs shall not display messages and shall display numerals only. 
(j)  Electronically illuminated signs . Signs that contain a fixed, non-flashing message screen are permitted provided that screen changes occur no more than once every hour. In addition, no more than fifty (50) percent of the maximum allowable sign area of any free-standing or wall sign may be designated as an electronic illuminated sign/screen, up to a maximum sign area of fifty (50) square feet. Brightness of said signs/screens shall not be at an intensity that would impair the vision, day or night, of oncoming traffic. All such signs shall be reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator prior to installation consistent with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 27-175; Ord. No. 00-11, 8-14-2000; Ord. No. 02-21, 11-11-2002; Ord. No. 08-6, § 1, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 4-14-2008; Ord. No. 14-3, § 1, 5-12-2014) 
Sec. 40-416. - Sign illumination. 
(a)  Unless otherwise prohibited by this chapter, signs may be illuminated if such illumination is in accordance with this section. 
(b)  No sign within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residential zone may be illuminated between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless the impact of such lighting beyond the boundaries of the lot where it is located is entirely inconsequential. 
(c)  Lighting directed toward a sign shall be shielded so that it illuminates only the face of the sign and does not shine directly into a public right-of-way or residential premises. 
(d)  Subject to subsection (f) of this section, illuminated tubings or strings of lights that outline property lines, sales areas, roof lines, doors, windows, or similar areas are prohibited. 
(e)  Subject to subsection (f) of this section, no sign may contain or be illuminated by flashing or intermittent lights or lights of changing degrees of intensity, except signs indicating the time, date, or weather conditions. 
(f)  Subsections (d) and (e) of this section do not apply to temporary signs erected in connection with the observance of holidays. 
(g)  Internally illuminated signs shall not be permitted in any residential zone. Signs illuminated by floodlight may be allowed in residential zones provided the light falls within the boundaries of the sign face. 
(Code 1993, § 27-176; Ord. No. 99-18, 12-13-1999) 
Sec. 40-417. - Miscellaneous restrictions and prohibitions. 
(a)  No temporary nor permanent sign shall be attached to a tree or to a city utility pole. No temporary nor permanent sign shall be placed on any public street right-of-way, except that political signs may be posted in the right-of-way in accordance with section 32-10 and signs attached to a structural element of a building may be erected in the right-of-way in accordance with section 40-414(d) above. 
(b)  No sign may be located so that it substantially interferes with the view necessary for motorists to proceed safely through intersections or to enter onto or exit from public streets or private roads. 
(c)  Signs that revolve or are animated or that utilize movement or apparent movement to attract the attention of the public are prohibited. Without limiting the preceding, banners, streamers, animated display boards, pennants, and propellers are prohibited, but signs that move only occasionally because of wind are allowed if their movement is not a primary design feature of the sign and is not intended to attract attention to the sign. The restrictions of this subsection shall not apply to signs specified in section 40-406(d) or to signs indicating the time, date, and weather conditions. 
(d)  No sign may be erected so that by its location, color, size, shape, nature, or message it would tend to obstruct the view of or be confused with official traffic signs or other signs erected by units of government. 
(e)  Freestanding signs shall be securely fastened to the ground or to some other substantial supportive structure so that there is virtually no danger that either the sign or the supportive structure may be moved by the wind or other forces of nature and cause injuries to persons or property, in conformity with the state building code. 
(f)  Canopy signs are permitted when suspended or attached to the underside of a canopy provided such signs do not exceed six (6) square feet in area and are located at least eight (8) feet above the sidewalk. 
(g)  The sign area of a sign permanently painted, affixed, or placed in a building window which is visible from a street right-of-way shall be restricted to no more than forty (40) percent of the total window area. In the B1H and RHD districts, signs painted on storefront windows shall take up no more than ten (10) percent of the window and signs placed in windows, from the interior, shall occupy no more than twenty (20) percent of the area of the displaying window. The sign area of such signs shall not be included in the total sign surface area established in accordance with the provisions of section 40-410. 
(h)  Off premises signs are not permitted, except for those signs specifically exempt from regulation in accordance with section 40-406. 
(i)  All temporary or portable signs, as defined in section 40-403, except for those specifically exempted in sections 40-406 and 40-407 or those specifically allowed in section 40-415(g), are not permitted. 
(j)  Any sign made up of or containing strobe lights, ziplights, flashing lights or rotating beacons, flags, streamers, banners, pennants, or strings of lights, or permanently installed or situated merchandise, except for those specifically exempted in sections 40-406 and 40-407, are not permitted. 
(k)  Off-premises, outdoor advertising signs, commonly known as billboards, are not permitted. 
(l)  No sign shall contain statements, words or pictures which describe or display specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, or which contain words or phrases which are classified as vulgar or vulgar slang in the current edition of The New College Edition of the American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language or are otherwise commonly known to be obscene. The phrase "god damn"is also specifically prohibited for use in signs. 
(Code 1993, § 27-177; Ord. No. 02-21, 11-11-2002) 
Sec. 40-418. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Signs in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived which do not conform to the provisions of this article, but which were constructed, erected, affixed, or maintained in compliance with all previous regulations, shall be regarded as nonconforming signs. Although it is not the intent of this section to encourage the continued use of nonconforming signs, nonconforming signs, except those specifically listed in section 40-422, shall be allowed to continue and a decision as to the continued existence and use or removal of such signs shall be controlled as set forth hereinafter. In the event an off-premises outdoor advertising sign, as more specifically provided for in section 40-422(b), has not been voluntarily removed in compliance therewith or the Director of Planning and Development has not initiated removal of such sign under section 40-422(b), or other applicable law, the use or removal of such sign shall also be controlled as set forth hereinafter. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to waive or in any way nullify the obligation to remove such signs in accordance with section 40-422(b), or waive or in any way nullify the authority of the Director of Planning and Development to initiate removal of such signs under section 40-421, 40-422(b) or other applicable law. 
(1)  No nonconforming sign shall be changed to another nonconforming sign. The term "changing" includes replacing a sign panel within an existing frame with another panel of identical size or shape. 
(2)  No nonconforming sign shall have any changes made in the words or symbols used or the message displayed on the sign unless the sign is specifically designed for periodic change of message. 
(3)  No nonconforming sign shall be structurally altered so as to change the shape, size, type, or design. 
(4)  No nonconforming sign shall be reestablished after the activity, business, or use to which it relates has been discontinued or changed to another use. Such signs shall be removed in accordance with section 40-421. 
(5)  No nonconforming sign shall be reestablished and all remains of the sign must be removed in accordance with section 40-421 if the sign is damaged or destroyed, such that the estimated expense of repairs exceeds fifty (50) percent of the estimated total value of the sign at the time of damage or destruction. If damaged by less than fifty (50) percent of the estimated total value, but repairs are not made within three (3) months of the time such damage occurs, the nonconforming sign shall not be allowed to continue and must be removed in accordance with section 40-421. 
(6)  No nonconforming sign shall be relocated. 
(7)  Normal maintenance and repair of a nonconforming sign is permitted providing the shape, size, type, or design of the sign is not altered. 
(8)  No nonconforming sign shall be changed or altered to allow any illumination of such nonconforming sign. 
(b)  Signs located on premises which come into the extraterritorial planning and zoning jurisdiction of the city after the effective date of this article, which signs do not comply with the provisions of this article, shall be subject to the requirements listed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Any nonconforming sign which is structurally altered, relocated, or replaced shall immediately be brought into compliance with all the provisions of this article, and be subject to section 40-421, pertaining to sign removal and discontinued signs. 
(Code 1993, § 27-178; Ord. No. 06-24, §§ 1, 2, 12-11-2006) 
Sec. 40-419. - Shopping center signs. 
(a)  Shopping center developments, regardless of the zoning district in which located, shall conform to the sign regulations contained in this section. 
(b)  Wall signs for individual businesses in shopping center developments shall be calculated as provided in subsection (c) of this section. The intent of these provisions is to allow each separate business establishment to have a reasonable means of identification. Because shopping centers include many individual businesses, the cumulative total wall sign area permitted by subsections (c) and (d) of this section may exceed the total sign area authorized in section 40-410. 
(c)  One (1) wall sign per separate business establishment per street frontage is permitted. Allowable wall sign area is determined as follows: 
(1)  The sign surface area on any sign located on a wall of a structure may not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total surface area of the wall on which the sign is located or one-half (1/2) of a square foot of sign area for each linear foot of building frontage, whichever is less. In no case may any wall sign exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area. 
(2)  For shopping centers located in the B1H District, the sign surface area on any sign located on a wall of a structure may not exceed five (5) percent of the total surface area of the wall on which the sign is located. 
(d)  One freestanding sign per street frontage in shopping centers shall be permitted in accordance with section 40-411(b). 
(Code 1993, § 27-179) 
Sec. 40-420. - Sign maintenance. 
    Should any sign become in danger of falling or is deemed otherwise unsafe in the opinion of the Director of Planning and Development, the owner thereof, or the person or firm maintaining the same, shall upon written notice from the Director of Planning and Development, immediately in the case of imminent danger and in any case within ten (10) days, secure said sign in a manner to be approved by the Director of Planning and Development in conformity with the provision of the state building code, or remove such sign. If such sign is not removed by the owner, the Director of Planning and Development or his designated agent may initiate legal procedures to obtain the necessary court orders to remove such signs at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 27-181) 
Sec. 40-421. - Sign removal and discontinued signs. 
(a)  The Director of Planning and Development shall order the removal of any sign maintained in violation of the provisions of this article for which removal procedures are herein prescribed accordingly: The Director of Planning and Development shall give ninety (90) days' written notice to the owner or lessee to remove the sign or to bring it into compliance with this article. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign within ninety (90) days after the ninety-day written notice has been given, the Director of Planning and Development or his duly authorized representative may institute removal proceedings according to the procedures specified in G.S. 160A-175. 
(b)  Any temporary or portable sign erected in violation of the provisions of section 40-407 may be removed immediately, at the direction of the Department of Planning and Development. Any sign so removed shall be retained at a designated municipal facility until recovered by the sign owner following payment to the city of a fee per sign, as established from time to time by ordinance. Any sign not recovered within ten (10) days shall be destroyed. 
(c)  Upon the discontinuance of a business or occupancy of an establishment for a consecutive period of one hundred eighty (180) days, the Department of Planning and Development shall require the removal of the on-premises sign advertising or identifying the establishment. The Department of Planning and Development shall give thirty (30) days' notice to the property owner to remove the sign. Failure to remove the sign within the thirty (30) day period shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall be remedied in accordance with article XXI of this chapter, pertaining to administration, enforcement, penalties. 
(Code 1993, § 27-182; Ord. No. 03-08, 3-10-2003) 
Sec. 40-422. - Amortization of certain signs. 
(a)  The following signs shall become nonconforming in all districts, unless otherwise specified, as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived and shall be removed within six (6) months after the date of adoption: 
(1)  All temporary or portable signs, as defined in section 40-403, except for those specifically exempted in sections 40-406 and 40-407. Portable signs shall not be permanently anchored to make them conforming, unless the lot or business on which they are located does not have a freestanding sign, in which case one (1) portable sign per street frontage lot may be permanently anchored and thus serve as the allowed freestanding sign for that lot or business. 
(2)  Any sign made up of or containing strobe lights, ziplights, flashing lights or rotating beacons, flags, streamers, banners, pennants, or strings of lights, or permanently installed or situated merchandise, except for those specifically exempted in section 40-406 and section 40-407. 
(b)  The following signs shall become nonconforming in all districts, unless otherwise specified, as of the ordinance from which this article is derived and shall be removed within five (5) years after the date of adoption: Off-premises, outdoor advertising signs, commonly known as billboards, in all districts, except the I1 industrial district. 
(Code 1993, § 27-183) 
Secs. 40-423-40-437. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - PARKING 

Sec. 40-438. - Purpose. 
(a)  In order to ensure proper and uniform development of public and private loading areas in the city and its extraterritorial area, to relieve traffic congestion in the streets, and to minimize any detrimental effects of off-street parking areas on adjacent properties, the procedures and standards set forth in this article shall apply. 
(b)  The requirements contained in these regulations shall be considered as the minimum standards. 
(c)  The owner, developer, or operator of any existing or proposed use, along with the Director of Planning and Development shall evaluate anticipated needs to determine if they are greater than the minimum requirements herein specified. 
(Code 1993, § 27-184) 
Sec. 40-439. - Off-street parking and loading required. 
    No permit for new construction, expansion, development, occupancy, or related activity shall be issued for any use, unless such use is in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 27-185) 
Sec. 40-440. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to nonresidential land uses within the B1H District. 
(Code 1993, § 27-186) 
Sec. 40-441. - Parking plan required. 
(a)  A parking plan which conforms to the provisions of this article shall be submitted to the Department of Planning and Development for site plan review in accordance with the specific submission standards of article XVIII. 
(b)  Parking plan approval shall be required prior to the approval of any site plan, building permit, use permit, privilege license, change of use permit, zoning compliance permit, temporary use permit, or occupancy permit. 
(c)  The Director of Planning and Development shall have final approval authority concerning the site design and construction standards of all off-street parking lots. 
(Code 1993, § 27-187) 
Sec. 40-442. - Compliance with bufferyards. 
    Off-street parking lots and drives shall comply with the provisions of article VII of this chapter, pertaining to bufferyard landscaping requirements. Bufferyard vegetation improvements may be phased to coincide with the construction of buildings, provided such phasing is set forth on the approved bufferyard plan. 
(Code 1993, § 27-188) 
Sec. 40-443. - Combination of required parking spaces. 
(a)  The required parking space for any number of separate use may be combined in one (1) lot, but the required space assigned to one (1) use may not be assigned to another use, except that one-half (1/2) of the parking spaces required for churches, theaters, stadiums, assembly halls, or any other use whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays, may be combined with a use which will be closed or which will guarantee significantly less parking demands at night and on Sundays than during normal business hours with prior approval by the Director of Planning and Development. 
(b)  A use which is deficient in required parking spaces shall not designate existing parking to any other use. 
(c)  When more than one (1) use is included within any one (1) lot or building, the minimum number of required spaces shall be the sum total of all the required spaces for the individual uses. 
(Code 1993, § 27-189) 
Sec. 40-444. - Nonconforming parking; expansion of floor area; other units of measurement. 
    When a building or use deficient in off-street parking spaces as defined by these regulations is increased in floor area, number of dwelling units, seating capacity, number of participants or employees, addition of secondary principal or accessory use, or any other unit of measurement used to calculate required parking, one (1) of the following shall apply: 
(a)  Where such increase is fifty (50) percent or less of the original measurement, additional parking spaces shall be provided to meet the requirements of this article as if the increase were a new and separate use. 
(b)  Where such increase is more than fifty (50) percent of the original measurement, additional parking spaces shall be provided to make all combined existing and proposed uses conform to the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 27-190) 
Sec. 40-445. - Surface material. 
(a)  All parking spaces and lots associated with multifamily residences or businesses, except as provided herein, shall be constructed with a hard surfaced all weather material such as asphalt, concrete, brick, CABC or any other approved materials. Grass and bare earth areas shall not be acceptable. The parking area shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary, and neat condition. All spaces shall be marked clearly to be recognizable to the general public. 
(b)  Parking areas serving individual single-family dwellings, churches, and seasonal, recreational, or temporary activities shall be exempt from the surface material requirement of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 27-191) 
Sec. 40-446. - Cross-district parking. 
    Pursuant to section 40-447(a), any parking area and/or driveway utilized in conjunction with any use, whether required or otherwise, which is located wholly or partly within a zoning district which is different than the zoning district in which the principal use is located, may be permitted in accordance with the following: 
(a)  Parking and driveways for residential uses, and nonresidential uses permitted in residential zoning districts, shall be permitted in residential zoning districts which allow the specific use and in all nonresidential zoning districts. 
(b)  Parking and driveways for nonresidential uses shall be permitted in all nonresidential zoning districts and prohibited in all residential zoning districts, except as provided in subsection (1) of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 27-192) 
Sec. 40-447. - Parking area location criteria. 
(a)  All uses, except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, shall provide off-street parking on the same parcel of land as the use it is intended to serve. For purposes of this section, the term "common areas within townhouses, condominiums, or planned unit projects" shall be construed as meaning the same parcel of land. Parking permitted within the right-of-way of a public street shall not be considered to fulfill or partially fulfill the minimum parking requirements. 
(b)  Remote parking may be allowed for any use which cannot provide parking on the same parcel of land as the principal use, provided such use complies with all of the following requirements: 
(1)  The use does not comply with the current on-site parking requirement. 
(2)  No new construction, expansion, or enlargement of the existing or proposed use is requested which would intensify or create an on-site nonconforming parking situation. 
(3)  The existing on-site parking facility cannot be improved to conform with current requirements. 
(4)  The remote parking facility shall comply with subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  Churches may be exempt from subsection (b)(2) of this section, provided that: 
(1)  Fifty (50) percent of the required parking spaces shall be located on the same parcel of land as the principal use; and 
(2)  Any remote parking facility shall comply with subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Remote parking facilities shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  No portion of the remote parking facility shall be located more than (400) feet from the associated principal use site. 
(2)  Use of a remote parking facility not under the same ownership shall require a parking encumbrance agreement approved by the Director of Planning and Development, with a copy of the agreement filed with the Department of Planning and Development and with the office of the Beaufort County Register of Deeds. 
(3)  The remote parking facility shall not be utilized or occupied by any other use or for any other purpose other than as parking for the associated principal use. 
(4)  The remote parking facility shall be located within a district which permits the associated principal use or within a district which allows principal use parking lots. 
(5)  Where the associated principal use is listed as being subject to special use permit approval of the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment, the proposed remote parking facility for the principal use shall be considered an expansion of the principal use and the expansion shall be subject to such approval. 
(6)  If the parcel which contains the remote parking facility is disposed of, or committed to some other use which displaces the parking required by this article, then the certificate of occupancy for the principal use shall be revoked. 
(7)  The remote parking facility shall not be located across a major or minor thoroughfare from the associated principal use. 
(Code 1993, § 27-193) 
Sec. 40-448. - Improvement standards. 
(a)  All off-street parking areas designed for two (2) or less spaces shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Shall be surfaced in accordance with section 40-445. 
(2)  Shall have adequate ingress and egress. All uses, excluding single-family detached and two-family attached (duplex), shall be subject to section 40-448(b). 
(3)  All entrances and exits shall conform to the driveway regulations of the city or the North Carolina Department of Transportation, whichever is more restrictive. 
(4)  Shall be in accordance with article VII of this chapter, pertaining to bufferyard landscaping requirements, and article XV of this chapter, pertaining to special districts. 
(5)  Driveways, in the absence of a garage or carport, shall be considered as providing off-street parking for single-family and two-family dwellings. The area to which the driveway approach provides access shall be sufficiently large to store any vehicles using the driveway completely off the right-of-way, on private property. Parking of vehicles shall not be permitted on sidewalks. 
(6)  All off-street parking areas shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks, bikeways, streets or any dedicated right-of-way. To prevent vehicles from driving across these areas, except at an approved driveway approach, and to prevent parking or maneuvering vehicles from overhanging upon such areas, there shall be a six (6) inch raised curb or stop bar constructed between such areas and the parking area. 
(b)  All off-street parking areas designed for three (3) or more spaces shall meet the following requirements. These requirements shall not apply to single-family dwellings. 
(1)  Shall be surfaced in accordance with section 40-445. 
(2)  Shall conform to the minimum standards found in the City of Washington Manual of Standard Designs and Details, Series 55, Parking. 
(3)  Shall be in accordance with article VII of this chapter, pertaining to bufferyard landscaping requirements, and article XV, pertaining to special districts. 
(4)  Sight distance requirements as established by the Director of Public Works shall be observed. 
(5)  All entrances and exits shall conform to the driveway regulations of the city or the North Carolina Department of Transportation, whichever is more restrictive. 
(6)  All parking areas will be adequately drained in accordance with the storm drainage regulations set forth by the city. 
(7)  All parking areas shall be arranged such that ingress and egress is by forward motion of the vehicle only. 
(8)  Each off-street parking space for each use shall be within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the use it is intended to serve, except as provided by the remote parking facility standards, listed under section 40-447(d). 
(9)  No parking space shall be closer than fifteen (15) feet to a multifamily dwelling structure. 
(10)  Parking areas shall be designed with careful regard to orderly arrangement and topography, and shall, to the greatest extent possible, be integrated naturally into their physical setting. 
(11)  All uses shall provide off-street parking on the same parcel of land as the use it is intended to serve, except as provided by the remote parking facility standards, listed under section 40-447(d). Parking may be allowed within parking bays located on private streets. 
(12)  One-third (1/3) of the required spaces may be in parking bays within the easements of private streets, except on the turnaround portion of a cul-de-sac; provided that: 
a.  Any bay shall contain no more than ten (10) spaces; and 
b.  Each bay shall be separated from any other bay by a distance of at least ten (10) feet; 
c.  No more than one-fourth (1/4) of the total frontage on any private street shall be devoted to parking bays; 
d.  Parking bays directly adjoining private streets will be permitted on one (1) side of the street at a time only. Such parking areas may be alternated from one (1) side of the street to the other. 
(13)  No parking space shall be utilized for dead storage, repair work, or other similar activity. 
(14)  All off-street parking areas shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks, bikeways, streets or any dedicated right-of-way. To prevent vehicles from driving across these areas, except at an approved driveway approach, and to prevent parking or maneuvering vehicles from overhanging upon such areas, there shall be a six (6) inch raised curb or stop bar constructed between such areas and the parking area. 
(15)  Parking areas so designed to serve ten (10) or more vehicles may designate a maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of the spaces for use by compact cars only. These spaces shall conform to the minimum standards found in the City of Washington Manual of Standard Design and Details. These spaces shall be identified in a manner which will prohibit its occupancy by any larger vehicle. 
(16)  Parking areas shall provide internal vegetation in an amount equal to five (5) percent of the impervious surface area and a perimeter planting area. Such vegetation shall be in the form of islands or peninsulas and shall contain minimum vegetation in accordance with article VII of this chapter. Each island shall contain a minimum of thirty (30) square feet of soil or other permeable surface, shall not be less than five (5) feet in length, and shall be surrounded by a six (6) inch raised curb or stop bar. Required bufferyards, pursuant to article VII of this chapter, pertaining to bufferyard landscaping requirements, shall not be counted for meeting the five (5) percent requirement for interior landscaped areas. 
(17)  Parking aisles shall contain no more than fifteen (15) consecutive parking spaces without the introduction of an additional interior planted area, in order to avoid long, uninterrupted parking aisles. This requirement is not applicable if a single parking aisle abuts a required bufferyard or an interior landscaped area separates the aisle from a primary traffic lane. 
(18)  The ends of parking aisles shall be clearly separated and defined by interior planted areas when they abut and are perpendicular to a primary traffic lane. The use of interior planted areas at the end of parking aisles are not required when the aisles abut and are perpendicular to required bufferyards. 
(19)  Primary traffic lanes are to be clearly defined and shall not provide direct access from individual parking spaces or parking aisles. 
(20)  No access shall be provided from a secondary traffic lane into a primary traffic lane at any point closer to the street right-of-way than twenty (20) feet in addition to the required bufferyard. 
(21)  Mechanical equipment, dumpsters, delivery or service entrances, and similar site elements shall be screened with plant material, by fencing, and/or by site location in such a manner that their visual impact from adjacent street rights-of-way is minimal. 
(22)  Appropriate directional painting and/or traffic control signage shall be used to encourage reasonable vehicular flow. Stop signs shall be required at all points where traffic lanes exit a parking lot greater than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet in area into a public street, unless controlled by other devices. All internal and external traffic signs, markings, and devices shall be clearly displayed and conform to North Carolina Department of Transportation standards. 
(23)  Primary traffic lanes shall be required as follows: 
a.  One (1) lane for each lot containing one hundred (100) to one hundred ninety-nine (199) parking spaces. 
b.  A minimum of two (2) primary lanes for lots containing in excess of two hundred (200) parking spaces. 
c.  Where the parking lot abuts two (2) or more streets, a minimum of one (1) primary lane shall exit the parking lot into each street. 
(24)  When the front footage of any building exceeds two hundred fifty (250) feet, a fire lane shall be provided along this frontage. The fire lane shall not be considered as part of the traffic lane, shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and shall be clearly marked. 
(25)  All off-street parking areas for buildings that are subject to the North Carolina State Building Code, Volume I, General Construction, shall comply with all of the requirements set forth therein including those for parking spaces for the physically handicapped. 
(26)  Driveways. No centerline of any entrance driveway leading from a major thoroughfare shall be closer than twenty-five (25) feet to a side lot line. Driveway centerlines on any one (1) lot must be separated by at least fifty (50) feet. The width of any driveway leading from a public street shall not exceed forty (40) feet at its intersection with the curb or street line. The Board of Adjustment may not grant a variance from the width provision. 
(c)  Off-street loading areas shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Every commercial, office, and industrial use, except those located in the B1H District, shall provide space for off-street loading and unloading of delivery, shipment, or transport vehicles. 
(2)  Space designated for compliance with off-street parking requirements shall not be used to comply with these requirements and vice-versa. 
(3)  Off-street loading areas shall be, at minimum, twelve (12) feet by thirty (30) feet with a vertical clearance of sixteen (16) feet above the finished grade of the space. 
(4)  All off-street loading areas shall be arranged and marked to provide for orderly and safe unloading and loading, and shall not hinder the free movement of vehicles and pedestrians. All loading and unloading maneuvers shall take place on private property. All loading areas shall be designed to prevent backing maneuvers from or into the street unless otherwise approved by the Director of Public Works. 
(5)  Design standards, minimum number of loading spaces required are as follows: 
a.  Retail operations, including restaurant and dining facilities within hotels and office buildings: one (1) space for each five thousand (5,000) square feet of floorspace or major fraction, fifty-one (51) percent or greater, thereof, not to exceed two (2) spaces. 
b.  Office buildings and hotels: one (1) space per one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of space or major fraction thereof, not to exceed two (2) spaces. 
c.  Industrial and wholesale operations: one (1) space for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor space or major fraction thereof, not to exceed four (4) spaces. 
(Code 1993, § 27-194) 
Sec. 40-449. - Schedule of required parking spaces. 
    Off-street parking spaces shall be provided for all land uses in the following proportions: 
Uses Spaces Required Residential Uses: Boardinghouses and roominghouses, bed and breakfasts, fraternities or sororities, dormitories 1 per bedroom, plus 1 per employee on the largest shift plus residential requirements. No more than 2 spaces may be in the front yard Congregate care facilities, family care homes, group care facilities 1 per 4 beds, plus 1 per employee and visiting specialist, plus 1 per vehicle used in operation Land Use Intensity (LUI) Developments Per article XIII of this chapter Multifamily dwellings (including condominiums) 0-1 bedroom units 1.50 per unit 2 bedroom units 1.75 per unit 3+ bedroom units 2.50 per unit Planned Unit Development (PUD) residential, social, or recreational and residential accessory Per article XII of this chapter Planned Unit Development (PUD) nonresidential Per this article in accordance with the specific use Shelters for the homeless 1 per resident staff member, plus 1 per nonresident staff member on largest shift, plus 1 per vehicle used in operation Single-family detached, duplexes, two-family dwellings, and manufactured dwellings 2 per dwelling unit, on the same zone lot Townhouse dwellings 2.6 per dwelling unit, on the same zone lot Accessory Uses Accessory dwelling units 1 additional space, on the same zone lot Home occupations Minimum 1 space, maximum 3 spaces in addition to required residential spaces, except for barbershops or beauty shops Migrant labor housing 1 per 4 workers Recreational Uses: Amusement parks, fairgrounds, skating rinks 1 per 200 sq. ft. of activity area Athletic fields 25 per field Batting cages, driving ranges, miniature golf, shooting ranges 1 per cage, tee, or firing point Billiard parlors, tennis courts 3 per table or court Bowling centers 4 per lane Day care, child or adult 1 per employee, plus 1 per 10 attendees, on the same zone lot Elementary and middle schools, kindergartens 3 per room used for offices, plus 3 per classroom Government offices, post offices 1 per 150 sq. ft. of public service area plus 1 per employee on largest shift Hospitals 1 per 4 in-patient or out-patient beds, plus 1 per employee on largest shift, plus 1 per staff doctor Libraries, museums, and art galleries 1 per 450 sq. ft. gross floor area for public use, plus 1 per employee on largest shift Nursing and convalescent homes 1 per 4 beds, plus 1 per employee, plus 1 per vehicle used in operation Senior high schools 3 per room used for offices, plus 7 per classroom Business, Professional, and Personal Services: Automobile repairs and service 3 per service bay, plus 1 per wrecker or service vehicle, plus 1 per employee on largest shift Banks and financial institutions 1 per 200 sq. ft. gross floor area, plus stacking for 4 vehicles at each drive-thru window or automated teller machine Barbershops and beauty shops 3 per operator, plus 1 per other employees Carwashes: 1. Full-service Stacking for 30 vehicles or 10 per approach lane, whichever is greater, plus 3 spaces per bay for manual drying, plus 1 per employee on largest shift 2. Self-service 3 stacking spaces per approach lane plus 2 drying spaces per stall Delivery services 1 per employee on largest shift, plus 1 per vehicle used in operation Equipment rental and leasing 1 per 200 sq. ft. gross floor area Funeral homes or crematoria 1 per 4 seats in main chapel, plus 1 per employee on largest shift, plus 1 per vehicle used in operation Hotels and motels 1 per rental unit plus 1 space per employee, plus requirements for any other associated use, such as, a restaurant or lounge Kennels or pet grooming 1 per 300 sq. ft. of sales, grooming, or customer waiting area plus 1 per employee on largest shift Laboratories 1 per employee on largest shift, plus 1 per 250 sq. ft. of office space Laundromats, coin-operated 1 per 4 washing machines and dryers Laundry and dry cleaning plants or substations 1 per employee on largest shift plus 1 per vehicle used in operation plus stacking for 4 vehicles per pickup door or window Medical, dental, or related offices 3 per examining room, plus 1 per employee including doctors Motion picture productions 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area Office uses not otherwise classified 1 per 250 sq. ft. gross floor area Recreational vehicle parks or campsites Refer to development standards for recreational vehicle parks Repair of bulky items (appliances, furniture, boats, etc.) 1 per employee on largest shift plus 1 per vehicle used in operation Theaters (indoor) 1 per 4 seats Truck washes 3 stacking spaces per stall Veterinary services (other) 4 per doctor plus 1 per employee Vocational, business, or secretarial schools 1 per 100 feet of classroom space, plus 1 per 250 sq. ft. of office space Services and repairs (not otherwise classified) 1 per 250 sq. ft. gross floor area, plus 1 per vehicle used in operation Drive-thru (not otherwise classified) Stacking for 4 vehicles at each bay, window, lane, ordering station, or machine in addition to use requirement Retail Trade: Bars, dancehalls 1 per 3 persons in designed capacity of building, plus 1 per employee on largest shift, on the same zone lot Brewery, micro-brewery, distillery and micro-distillery 1 per every 3 seats plus 1 for every 2 employees on the largest shift, except when located in the B1H Zoning District. Convenience stores 1 per 200 sq. ft. gross floor area plus 4 stacking spaces per side of each pump island Department stores, food stores 1 per 200 sq. ft. gross floor area Fuel oil sales 1 per employee on largest shift plus 1 per vehicle used in operation Furniture, floor covering sales 1 per 500 sq. ft. gross floor area Motor vehicle, motorcycle, or recreational vehicle sales or rental; manufactured homes sales 5 spaces, plus 1 per 10,000 sq. ft. of display area, plus 1 per employee on largest shift Restaurants with drive-thru service 1 per 4 seats plus 1 per employees on largest shift plus 11 total stacking spaces with minimum 5 spaces at or before ordering station Restaurants without drive-thru service 1 per every 3 seats plus 1 for every 2 employees on largest shift Retail sales (not otherwise classified) 1 per 200 sq. ft. gross floor area Retail sales of bulky items (appliances, building materials, etc.) 1 per 200 sq. ft. gross floor area Service stations, gasoline 3 per service bay, plus 1 per wrecker or service vehicle, plus 1 per employee on largest shift, plus 4 stacking spaces per side of each pump island Shopping centers 1 per 200 sq. ft. of nonstorage retail area Wholesale Trade: Market showrooms (furniture, apparel, etc.) 1 per 2,000 sq. ft. gross floor area Wholesale uses 1 per employee on largest shift, plus 1 per 200 sq. ft. of retail sales or customer service area, plus 1 per vehicle used in operation Transportation, Warehousing, and Utilities: Airport, bus and train terminals 1 per 4 seats for waiting passengers, plus 1 per employee on largest shift Communication towers, demolition debris landfills, heliports, utility lines or substations No required parking Self-storage warehouses 1 space per 4 storage units Transportation, warehousing, and utility uses (not otherwise classified) 1 per employee on largest shift plus 1 per vehicle used in operation Manufacturing and Industrial Uses 1 per employee on largest shift, plus 1 per 200 sq. ft. of retail sales or customer service area, plus 1 per vehicle used in operation  
(Code 1993, § 27-196; Ord. No. 98-8, 5-11-1998; Ord. No 14-7, § 6, 10-6-2014; Ord. No. 17-5, § 6, 12-11-2017) 
Sec. 40-450. - Unlisted uses. 
(a)  Where a particular use or class of use is not listed under section 40-449, the Department of Planning and Development shall determine the minimum number of spaces to be required in each individual case. In reaching such determination, the Department of Planning and Development shall be guided by the requirements for similar uses, the number and type of vehicles and/or persons likely to be attracted to the proposed use and studies of the parking requirements in other jurisdictions. 
(b)  Appeal from such decisions shall be made to the Board of Adjustment. 
(Code 1993, § 27-196) 
Secs. 40-451-40-468. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 

Sec. 40-469. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of site plan review is to: 
(a)  Provide site-specific information on a particular site's capacity to support a proposed development. 
(b)  Ensure compliance with the standards and requirements of the city as they relate to individual cases. 
(c)  Provide a coordinated and timely review procedure by which to ensure comprehensive and equitable enforcement of the minimum standards of the city. 
(d)  Promote and preserve the health, safety, and general welfare of the people. 
(Code 1993, § 27-197) 
Sec. 40-470. - Applicability. 
(a)  Plot plan required. No building permit for a single-family or two-family dwelling and accessory buildings on a single lot shall be issued until a plot plan, in accordance with the standards of the Department of Planning and Development, has been approved. 
(b)  Site plan required. No other building permit shall be issued on a lot until a site plan, in accordance with the standards of section 40-471, has been approved for the development. No new or amended site plan shall be required if an adequate site plan is already on file, no increase in or rearrangement of parking is proposed or required, and no increase in impervious surface is proposed or required. 
(Code 1993, § 27-198) 
Sec. 40-471. - Procedures. 
(a)  Required review. No person shall construct or engage in the construction of any building or building additions or alterations to any development until such construction, addition, or alteration has been approved and a building permit issued, subject to the following process: 
(1)  A site plan, following the requirements of subsection (b) of this section, is submitted to the Department of Planning and Development. 
(2)  A Technical Review Committee (TRC), made up of department heads or their designees from the Department of Planning and Development, the Electric Department, the Public Works Department, the Police Department, and the Fire and Rescue Department, reviews the plan. Other city departments may also be represented on the TRC, including the Parks and Recreation Department. Other governmental agencies, including the North Carolina Department of Transportation, the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources, Division of Coastal Management, and the United States Army Corps of Engineers, may be represented on the TRC from time to time. The Director of Planning and Development, or his designee, shall coordinate and preside over the TRC. The TRC may take any of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the plan as submitted. 
b.  Require that the plan be resubmitted for evaluation where revision of the plan is necessary to meet with applicable city ordinances, policies, and standards. 
c.  Disapprove the plan if it cannot be approved with reasonable conditions of compliance. The reasons for such disapproval shall be set forth by the TRC. Disapproval by the TRC may be appealed to the City Manager and ultimately to the City Council, unless otherwise required to be first submitted to the Planning Board for their recommendation. 
(3)  The plan is submitted to the Planning Board for approval. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, the following development plans may be approved by the TRC without going before the City Council or Planning Board: 
a.  Final Planned Unit Development (PUD) plans. 
b.  Development plans for development in all business districts, all industrial districts, all residential districts, and all office and institutional districts, except the following: 
1.  Recreation vehicle parks or campsites. 
2.  Mobile home parks. 
3.  Shopping centers. 
4.  Industrial parks. 
5.  Group housing developments. 
(4)  If required, the Planning Board shall forward a copy of the plan with its recommendations to the City Council for their review and approval. 
(5)  If the plan is approved by the TRC, or by the City Council, if required, the Building Inspector shall issue a permit for the construction, additions, or alterations as shown on the approved plan. 
(6)  The Department of Planning and Development shall make an examination of the construction at any reasonable time to determine whether the work is being done in accordance with the approved plan and the specifications and requirements of this article. The owner and/or developer of the development shall make available any records, test data, or other information essential to such determination. 
(7)  Where any land in the development is to be dedicated for public use, the city subdivision regulations shall be followed. 
(b)  Site plan requirements. Site plans submitted for approval must be drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet by a registered engineer, land surveyor, or architect and shall show the following information on one (1) or more sheets: 
(1)  A title, date, north arrow, engineer's scale, graphic scale, and the names and addresses of the developer and the person or firm preparing the plan; 
(2)  Name of the development; 
(3)  A vicinity sketch with a scale no less than one (1) inch equals one thousand (1,000) feet showing the site and its relationship to the surrounding area and the nearest intersection of two (2) public streets; 
(4)  Location, arrangement, and dimensions of automobile parking spaces and truck loading/unloading spaces and docks, including width of aisles and bays, proposed angle of parking, number of spaces, handicapped spaces, circulation patterns, and required buffers; 
(5)  The plan conforms with applicable development standards, including United States mail delivery and pickup stations; 
(6)  Show existing and finished contours at intervals of two (2) feet, in parking or paved areas the finished grade elevation may be shown instead of contours; 
(7)  Proposed streetlighting for private drives and parking areas; 
(8)  Location of recreational facilities and open space; 
(9)  Names and locations of all proposed public or private drives, dedicated streets, and vehicular entrances and exists showing width, rights-of-way, street names, sight distance triangles at intersections, curb and gutter alignments, and location and dimensions of sidewalks, alleys, and pedestrian ways where required (curb, gutter, and storm drainage shall be installed per city specifications) with all width dimensions and improvements shown; 
(10)  Provide site data regarding total acres, gross floor area of each building and/or additions (existing and proposed), proposed use of buildings, and parking tables showing both the required number of parking spaces for each use and the total number of parking spaces provided in the development plan; 
(11)  Indicate type of screening to be provided; 
(12)  If planting, landscaping, and/or buffering is required, show locations, sizes, common names, and number of existing and proposed plants and trees and provide a schedule for planting; 
(13)  Show locations and dimensions of property lines, zoning setback lines (front, side, rear), public utility easements, and all buildings (existing and proposed); 
(14)  Location of adjoining properties and buildings, with names and addresses of owners of record, and current zoning classifications; 
(15)  Location of water taps, sewer taps, septic tank locations, septic tank drain fields, and fire hydrants, showing size of lines and meters; 
(16)  Location and dimensions of proposed and existing water lines, sanitary sewer lines, and storm sewer lines; 
(17)  Location of electrical service connections, meters, and poles; 
(18)  Location and dimensions of bridges, culverts, railroads, and watercourses, including ditches; 
(19)  Drainage plans including locations and dimensions of pipes, yard drains, catchbasins, and curb inlets; 
(20)  Location and dimension of gas lines; 
(21)  Locations and dimensions of any required refuse collection container spaces; 
(22)  Locations, dimensions, and materials of walls and fences; 
(23)  Where public water or public sewer is not available, a written statement from the Beaufort County Health Department shall be submitted indicating that the development has adequate land area and suitable topography to accommodate the proposed methods of water supply and sewage disposal. 
(c)  Additional mobile home requirements. Site plans for mobile home parks must meet the additional requirements of article VIII of this chapter, pertaining to mobile home parks, as well as the requirements of subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Group housing projects. Site plans for group housing projects must meet the additional requirements of article XI of this chapter, pertaining to multifamily development, as well as the requirements of subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)  Planned Unit Developments. Site plans for Planned Unit Developments (PUD) must meet the additional requirements of article XII of this chapter, pertaining to Planned Unit Development, as well as the requirements of subsection (b) of this section. 
(f)  Additional approvals, permits. The following additional approvals and/or permits shall be required, where applicable: 
(1)  Construction permit approval for all water, sewer, drainage, and street facilities shall be obtained from the city. These facilities may also require approval by the North Carolina Department of Transportation. 
(2)  Sewer line permit approval for new sewer line construction shall be obtained from the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources. 
(3)  Water line permit approval for new water line construction shall be obtained from the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources, Division of Health Services. 
(4)  Driveway permit approval for construction of driveways shall be obtained from the Director of Public Works. If a state-maintained street is involved, the North Carolina Department of Transportation approval is also required. 
(5)  Encroachment agreement shall be obtained from the North Carolina Department of Transportation for all encroachments into the rights-of-way of a state maintained road. 
(6)  Pretreatment sewer facilities shall require permit approval by the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources. 
(7)  Erosion control permit approval shall be obtained from the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources, Division of Land Quality, for all land disturbing activities consisting of one (1) acre or more. 
(8)  Permit approval for construction in coastal areas, pursuant to the Coastal Area Management Act (CAMA) must be obtained from the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources, Division of Coastal Management. 
(9)  Permit approval for construction in wetlands areas must be obtained from the United States Army Corps of Engineers. 
All developments shall comply with all applicable county, state, and federal permits. Where one (1) of the preceding permits is required, or other general occupancy permits is necessary prior to the issuance of a building permit, the site plan approval shall be held pending receipt of such permit. 
(Code 1993, § 27-199) 
Sec. 40-472. - Issuance of permits; enforcement. 
(a)  No permits for any use or improvements shall be issued and no construction activities shall be allowed for any development subject to this chapter until a site plan has been approved as provided herein. 
(b)  The Department of Planning and Development shall issue a building permit for development upon determining that the application for such permit complies with the approved site plan. 
(Code 1993, § 27-200) 
Sec. 40-473. - Appeals. 
    Appeals from any regulation of this article shall be made to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with article XIX of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 27-201) 
Sec. 40-474. - Compliance with subdivision standards. 
    All development regulated in accordance with this article shall be subject to the requirements, conditions, and restrictions of chapter 34, pertaining to subdivisions, if applicable. 
(Code 1993, § 27-202) 
Secs. 40-475-40-501. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 

Sec. 40-502. - Establishment, membership, appointment, and term. 
(a)  There shall be and hereby is created a Board of Adjustment, hereinafter called the Board, consisting of five (5) members and two (2) alternates. Two (2) members of the Board and one (1) alternate shall be appointed by the Board of County Commissioners. Three (3) members and one (1) alternate shall be appointed by City Council in accordance with section 2-531(a). Appointments shall be for three-year terms. 
(b)  The Council may, in its discretion, appoint alternate members to serve on the Board in the absence or temporary disqualification of any regular member or to fill a vacancy pending appointment of a member. Alternate members shall be appointed for the same term, at the same time, and in the same manner as regular members. Each alternate member, while attending any regular or special meeting of the Board and serving on behalf of any regular member, shall have and may exercise all the powers and duties of a regular member. 
(Code 1993, § 27-203; Ord. No. 06-02, § 7, 2-13-2006) 
Cross reference- Removal of members, § 2-531. 
State Law reference- Appointment of board members, G.S. 160A-388(a). 
Sec. 40-503. - Vacancies and compensation. 
    Vacancies occurring for other than expiration of term shall be filled as they occur for the remainder of the unexpired term and such vacancy shall be filled by the body making the original appointment. Members shall serve without pay but may be reimbursed for any expenses incurred while representing the Board. 
(Code 1993, § 27-204) 
Sec. 40-504. - Attendance. 
    Absences are subject to the provisions of section 2-531(b). 
(Code 1993, § 27-205) 
Sec. 40-505. - Rights, privileges, and duties of extraterritorial and alternate members. 
    The two (2) regular members and one (1) alternate member of the Board appointed by the Board of County Commissioners as representatives of the extraterritorial area outside of and contiguous to the city limits of the city, as defined in section 40-4, shall be residents of such area and residents of county. All members of the Board, whether appointed by the City Council or by the Board of County Commissioners, shall have equal rights, privileges, and duties with all other members of the Board in all matters, regardless of whether the matters at issue arise within the city or within the extraterritorial area. Each alternate member, while attending any regular or special meeting of the Board and serving in the absence of any regular member, shall have and may exercise all of the rights, privileges, and duties of a regular member for whom he is substituting. 
(Code 1993, § 27-206) 
Sec. 40-506. - Organization. 
(a)  The Board shall adopt rules governing its organization and for all proceedings before it in accordance with section 2-532. 
(b)  At the first meeting after the membership of the Board has been changed through the expiration of one (1) or more terms, the Board shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman from within its membership. The chairman, or the vice-chairman, in the absence of the chairman, shall preside at all meetings of the Board. The chairman of the Board or the vice-chairman is authorized in his official capacity to administer oaths to witnesses in any matter coming before the Board. 
(c)  The Board shall appoint a secretary and such other officers as may be authorized by the City Council. Said secretary may be an employee of the city upon approval of the City Manager of the city. 
(d)  The Director of Planning and Development, or his designee, shall serve as staff advisor to the Board. 
(Code 1993, § 27-207) 
Sec. 40-507. - Minutes, written orders. 
(a)  The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings in a book maintained for the purpose of showing the vote of each member upon each question, and, if absent or failing to vote, an indication of such fact. Final disposition of all cases shall be by written order with the findings of fact stated, and the reasons thereof, all of which shall be a matter of public record. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specified, any order or decision of the Board shall expire and become void if a building permit or certificate for such use is not obtained within two (2) years from the date of said order or decision. 
(Code 1993, § 27-208) 
Sec. 40-508. - Quorum. 
    No final action shall be taken unless a quorum be present. The quorum shall consist of four-fifths (4/5) of the membership of the Board. To secure a quorum, an alternate member may be used in the absence of a regular member. 
(Code 1993, § 27-209) 
Sec. 40-509. - Conduct of meetings. 
(a)  All evidence and testimony shall be presented publicly, and the Board may consider all relevant facts within the personal knowledge of any member of the Board, but such facts should be stated publicly in the hearing. 
(b)  All meetings of the Board shall be held at a regular time and place, and at such other times and places as the Board may determine. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. Due notice shall be given to all parties in interest and public hearings shall be advertised when required under the provisions of this chapter. The staff advisor to the Board shall begin each request by offering staff comments regarding the request and answering any questions regarding the request or the procedure. After staff comments, persons speaking on behalf of the request and persons speaking against the request shall have the opportunity to speak and answer the questions of the Board and the staff. 
(Code 1993, § 27-210) 
Sec. 40-510. - Appeals to the Board. 
(a)  An appeal to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, or Board of the city from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Department of Planning and Development which is based in whole or in part upon the provisions of this article; or from any other decision for which the Board is authorized by law to hear appeals. 
(b)  Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the Board by filing with the Department of Planning and Development and with the Board a notice of appeal and specifying the grounds thereof. The Department of Planning and Development shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(c)  The Board shall refuse to consider an appeal or application previously denied, if it finds that there has been no substantial changes in conditions or circumstances bearing on the appeal or application. 
(Code 1993, § 27-211) 
Sec. 40-511. - Stay of proceedings. 
    An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Director of Planning and Development certifies to the Board after the notice of the appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause immediate peril to life or property or that because the violation charged is transitory in nature a stay would seriously interfere with enforcement of this chapter. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Board or by a court of record on application, on notice to the Department of Planning and Development from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(Code 1993, § 27-212) 
Sec. 40-512. - Powers and duties of Board. 
    The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)  Administrative review. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Department of Planning and Development in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)  Special use permits. To grant in particular cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards permits for special uses as authorized by the table of uses. The Board shall not grant a special use permit unless and until: 
(1)  A written application for a special use permit is submitted indicating the section of this chapter under which the special use permit is sought. 
(2)  The application referred to and a recommendation is received from the Planning Board when required. 
(3)  A public hearing is held, with notice given pursuant to section 40-515. A person may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(4)  The Board finds that the circumstances of the particular application and the use for which the special use permit is sought will meet the criteria for special uses set out in article V of this chapter, pertaining to standards and criteria for special uses, especially with respect to the effect of the request on the public health, safety and welfare, and the value of property. 
(5)  The Board may place any restrictions and requirements it deems necessary on any special use permit granted. 
If at any time after a special use permit has been issued for any special use, the Board finds that the conditions imposed and agreements made have not been or are not being fulfilled by the holder of a special use permit, the permit shall immediately be terminated and the operation of such a use discontinued. If a special use permit is terminated for any reason, it may be reinstated only after the steps listed above in subsections (b)(1) through (b)(5) of this section have been met. 
(c)  Variances. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance from the terms of this chapter shall not be granted by the Board unless and until: 
(1)  A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating: 
a.  If the property owner complies with the provisions of this chapter, he can secure no reasonable return from or make no reasonable use of his property; 
b.  The hardship is not the result of the applicant's own actions; and 
c.  The variance, if granted, will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter and will preserve its spirit. 
(2)  A public hearing is held, with notice given pursuant to section 40-515. A person may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(3)  The Board makes a finding that the requirements of subsection (c)(1) of this section have been met by the applicant for a variance. 
(4)  The Board shall further make findings that the variance to be granted is the minimum variance and that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(5)  In granting any variance, the Board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter. Violations of such conditions and safeguards when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, punishable according to the provisions of article XXI of this chapter. 
(6)  Under no circumstances shall the Board grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this chapter in the district involved or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this chapter in such district. 
(7)  When practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships would result from carrying out the strict letter of a zoning chapter, the Board of Adjustment shall have the power to vary or modify any of the regulations or provisions of the chapter so the spirit of the chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. No change in permitted uses may be authorized by variance. Appropriate conditions, which must be reasonably related to the condition or circumstance that gives rise to the need for a variance, may be imposed on any approval issued by the Board. These regulations may provide that a Board of Adjustment may determine and vary their application in harmony with their general purpose and intent and in accordance with general or specific rules therein contained, provided no change in permitted uses may be authorized by variance. 
(d)  Special and conditional uses permits. The regulations may also provide that the Board of Adjustment may issue special use permits or conditional use permits in the classes of cases or situations and in accordance with the principles, conditions, safeguards, and procedures specified therein and may impose reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards upon these permits. 
(e)  Special use and conditional use procedures. When deciding special use permits or conditional use permits, the City Council or Planning Board shall follow quasi-judicial procedures. 
(Code 1993, § 27-213; Ord. No. 06-02, §§ 9-11, 2-13-2006) 
State Law reference- Special use and conditional use permits, G.S. 160A-381(c). 
Sec. 40-513. - Decisions. 
    In exercising the powers listed in section 40-512, the Board of Adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the rest of this chapter, reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify the order, requirement, division, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. 
(Code 1993, § 27-214) 
Sec. 40-514. - Voting. 
(a)  Conflicts. A member of the Board or any other body exercising the functions of a Board of Adjustment shall not participate in or vote on any quasi-judicial matter in a manner that would violate affected persons' constitutional rights to an impartial decision maker. Impermissible conflicts include, but are not limited to, a member having a fixed opinion prior to hearing the matter that is not susceptible to change, undisclosed ex parte communications, a close familial, business, or other associational relationship with an affected person, or a financial interest in the outcome of the matter. If an objection is raised to a member's participation and that member does not recuse himself, the remaining members shall by majority vote rule on the objection. 
(b)  Vacant and disqualified Board members. For the purposes of this subsection, vacant positions on the Board and members who are disqualified from voting on a quasi-judicial matter shall not be considered members of the Board for calculation of the requisite supermajority, if there are no qualified alternates available to take the place of such members. 
(c)  Special use and conditional use voting. No vote greater than a majority vote shall be required for the City Council or Planning Board to issue such permits. For the purposes of this section, vacant positions on the Board and members who are disqualified from voting on a quasi-judicial matter shall not be considered members of the Board for calculation of the requisite majority. 
(Ord. No. 06-02, § 8, 2-13-2006) 
State Law reference- Special use and conditional use permits, G.S. 160A-381(c); voting requirements, G.S. 160A-388(e). 
Sec. 40-515. - Notice of hearing before the Board of Adjustment. 
    Before conducting a public hearing to consider an appeal or the issuance or granting of a special use permit or a variance, notice of the public hearing shall be given at least five (5) days before the hearing in a newspaper having general circulation in the area. The said notice shall be published not less that five (5) days or more than eighteen (18) days before such public hearing. 
(Code 1993, § 27-216) 
Sec. 40-516. - Appeals from decision of Board. 
    Any person jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Board, or any citizen or any officer, department, or Board of the city, within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision rendered by the Board of Adjustment in the Department of Planning and Development, or after a written copy thereof is delivered to every aggrieved party who has filed a written request for such copy with the Secretary or the Chairman of the Board at the time of its hearing of the case, whichever is later, may present to Superior Court a petition for a writ of certiorari, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of illegality, whereupon such decision of the Board shall be subject to review as provided by law. 
(Code 1993, § 27-217) 
Secs. 40-517-40-540. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 40-541. - Who may petition. 
    A petition for an amendment to either this chapter of the city or the Official Zoning Map of the city may be initiated by the City Council, the Planning Board, any department of the city, or the owner or authorized agent of the owner of any property within the zoning jurisdiction of the city that desires an amendment to either this chapter or Official Zoning Map which would affect property in which he has a vested property right recognized under existing law. 
(Code 1993, § 27-218) 
Sec. 40-542. - Fee. 
    A fee shall be paid to the city for each proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification, or repeal to this chapter or the Official Zoning Map. Such fee shall be established from time to time by ordinance and shall be used to partially defray the public expense in keeping records relating to the petition, advertising a public hearing on the proposal, and performing other services in processing the petition. 
(Code 1993, § 27-219) 
Sec. 40-543. - Procedure. 
(a)  Submittal of petition. All petitions for a change to the Official Zoning Map shall be on forms provided by the Department of Planning and Development and shall include a legal description and acreage of the property sought to be rezoned, the names or addresses of all property owners within one hundred (100) feet of the property, and such other and further information as may be required by the city to process the petition. Such petition must be received by the Department of Planning and Development no later than the 15th day of the month prior to the month the applicant wishes to have the request heard by the Planning Board. All petitions for a change to the text of this chapter shall be submitted on forms provided by the Department of Planning and Development, and shall include any further information that may be required to process the petition. 
(1)  Subsequent to initial adoption of this chapter, all proposed amendments to this chapter or zoning map shall be submitted to the Planning Board for review and comment. If no written report is received from the Planning Board within 30 days of referral of the amendment to that Board, the City Council may proceed in its consideration of the amendment without the Planning Board report. The City Council is not bound by the recommendations, if any, of the Planning Board. 
(2)  Members of the Planning Board providing advice to the City Council shall not vote on recommendations regarding any zoning map or text amendment where the outcome of the matter being considered is reasonably likely to have a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact on the member. 
(b)  Submittal to Planning Board for recommendation. 
(1)  Every proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification, or repeal to this chapter or the Official Zoning Map shall be referred to the Planning Board for its recommendation and report. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing and hear evidence from parties in interest and citizens regarding the petition. The Planning Board may delay its recommendation for no more than two (2) months, if it desires additional time to study the matter and tables or continues a petition for further study. If after two (2) months after initial consideration of the petition, no recommendation has been made by the Planning Board, then the petition shall be presumed to have been approved by the Planning Board. 
(2)  The Planning Board shall advise and comment on whether the proposed amendment is consistent with any comprehensive plan that has been adopted and any other officially adopted plan that is applicable. The Planning Board shall provide a written recommendation to the City Council that addresses plan consistency and other matters as deemed appropriate by the Planning Board, but a comment by the Planning Board that a proposed amendment is inconsistent with the comprehensive plan shall not preclude consideration or approval of the proposed amendment by the City Council. 
(c)  Public hearing. No part of this chapter or of the Official Zoning Map shall be amended, supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed until a public hearing has been held by the City Council, at which time parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Such public hearing shall automatically be set and held at a regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council during the month in which the petition to rezone or otherwise amend this chapter is to be received and considered by the Planning Board. After hearing the evidence, the City Council may vote upon the request immediately following such public hearing or may delay action by continuing the public hearing as it deems necessary. In the event the Planning Board desires additional time to study the matter and tables or continues a petition for further study, the City Council shall delay its public hearing until after a recommendation and report on the petition have been received from the Planning Board, subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. The applicant, or his agent, must appear at the public hearing in order to have the request considered. 
(d)  Public notice. Whenever there is a request for an amendment to the Official Zoning Map, the owner of that parcel of land and the owners of all parcels of land adjoining and contiguous to that parcel of land as shown on the county tax records shall be mailed a notice of the request, pursuant to G.S. 160A-384, except as provided otherwise in the North Carolina General Statutes. 
(1)  Notice shall be by first class mail to the last addresses listed on the county tax abstracts for such owners. 
(2)  The person mailing such notices for zoning map amendments shall certify to the City Council that proper notice has been given. Such certification shall be deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud. 
(3)  Notice in the case of comprehensive rezoning of all property within the city shall be mailed where required by G.S. 160A-384. 
(4)  Notice of such proposed action shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in accordance with G.S. 160A-364. 
(5)  The first class mail notice required under this section shall not be required if the zoning map amendment directly affects more than fifty (50) properties, owned by a total of at least fifty (50) different property owners, and the city elects to use the expanded published notice provided for in this subsection. In this instance, a city may elect to either make the mailed notice provided for in this section or may as an alternative elect to publish notice of the hearing as required by G.S. 160A-364, but provided each advertisement shall not be less than one-half (1/2) of a newspaper page in size. The advertisement shall only be effective for property owners who reside in the area of general circulation of the newspaper which publishes the notice. Property owners who reside outside of the newspaper circulation area, according to the address listed on the most recent property tax listing for the affected property, shall be notified according to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(6)  Notice for text or zoning map amendments. 
a.  Whenever there is a request for an action involving a text amendment to this chapter or an appeal of an interpretation of this chapter, a notice of such proposed action shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in accordance with G.S. 160A-364. 
b.  When a zoning map amendment is proposed, the city shall prominently post a notice of the public hearing on the site proposed for rezoning or on an adjacent public street or highway right-of-way. When multiple parcels are included within a proposed zoning map amendment, a posting on each individual parcel is not required, but the city [county] shall post sufficient notices to provide reasonable notice to interested persons. 
(e)  Protest petitions. 
(1)  Zoning ordinances may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed. In case, however, of a qualified protest against a zoning map amendment, that amendment shall not become effective, except by favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the City Council. 
(2)  For the purposes of this subsection, vacant positions on the Council and members who are excused from voting shall not be considered members of the Council for calculation of the requisite supermajority. 
(3)  To qualify as a protest under this section, the petition must be signed by the owners of either twenty (20) percent or more of the area included in the proposed change, or five (5) percent of a one hundred-foot-wide buffer extending along the entire boundary of each discrete or separate area proposed to be rezoned. A street right-of-way shall not be considered in computing the one hundred-foot buffer area as long as that street right-of-way is one hundred (100) feet wide or less. When less than an entire parcel of land is subject to the proposed zoning map amendment, the one hundred-foot buffer shall be measured from the property line of that parcel. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the city may rely on the county tax listing to determine the owners of potentially qualifying areas. 
(4)  The foregoing provisions concerning protests shall not be applicable to any amendment which initially zones property added to the territorial coverage of the ordinance as a result of annexation or otherwise, or to an amendment to an adopted special use district, conditional use district, or conditional district; if the amendment does not change the types of uses that are permitted within the district or increase the approved density for residential development, or increase the total approved size of nonresidential development, or reduce the size of any buffers or screening approved for the special use district, conditional use district, or conditional district. 
(5)  No protest against any change in or amendment to a zoning ordinance or zoning map shall be valid or effective for the purposes of G.S. 160A-385, unless it is in the form of a written petition actually bearing the signatures of the requisite number of property owners and stating that the signers do protest the proposed change or amendment, and unless it shall have been received by the City Clerk in sufficient time to allow the city at least two (2) normal work days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, before the date established for a public hearing on the proposed change or amendment to determine the sufficiency and accuracy of the petition. The City Council may, by ordinance, require that all protest petitions be on a form prescribed and furnished by the city, and such form may prescribe any reasonable information deemed necessary to permit the city to determine the sufficiency and accuracy of the petition. A person who has signed a protest petition may withdraw his name from the petition at any time prior to the vote on the proposed zoning amendment. Only those protest petitions that meet the qualifying standards set forth in G.S. 160A-385 at the time of the vote on the zoning amendment shall trigger the supermajority voting requirement. 
(f)  Governing Board conflict of interest. A City Councilmember shall not vote on any zoning map or text amendment where the outcome of the matter being considered is reasonably likely to have a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact on the member. 
(g)  Conditional zoning. Such districts may include, but shall not be limited to, general use districts, in which a variety of uses are permissible in accordance with general standards; overlay districts, in which additional requirements are imposed on certain properties within one (1) or more underlying general or special use districts; and special use districts or conditional use districts, in which uses are permitted only upon the issuance of a special use permit or a conditional use permit and conditional zoning districts, in which site plans and individualized development conditions are imposed. 
(h)  Conditions in CUD, SUD, conditional zones. Property may be placed in a special use district, conditional use district, or conditional district only in response to a petition by the owners of all the property to be included. Specific conditions applicable to these districts may be proposed by the petitioner or the city or its agencies, but only those conditions mutually approved by the city and the petitioner may be incorporated into the zoning regulations or permit requirements. Conditions and site-specific standards imposed in a conditional district shall be limited to those that address the conformance of the development and use of the site to city ordinances and an officially adopted comprehensive or other plan and those that address the impacts reasonably expected to be generated by the development or use of the site. 
(i)  Statement for small-scale rezonings. A statement analyzing the reasonableness of the proposed rezoning shall be prepared for each petition for a rezoning to a special or conditional use district, or a conditional district, or other small-scale rezoning. 
(j)  City Council statement. Prior to adopting or rejecting any zoning amendment, the City Council shall adopt a statement describing whether its action is consistent with an adopted comprehensive plan and explaining why the Council considers the action taken to be reasonable and in the public interest. 
(Code 1993, § 27-220; Ord. No. 97-2, 3-10-1997; Ord. No. 06-02, §§ 1-6, 2-13-2006) 
State Law reference- Voting, G.S. 160A-75; division into districts, G.S. 160A-382(a); petition required for certain property placement, G.S. 160A-382(b); notice of public hearing for map amendment, G.S. 160A-384(c); Qualified protests to changes, G.S. 160A-385(a) 
Sec. 40-544. - Withdrawal of zoning map or text amendment petition from Planning Board consideration. 
(a)  A petition for zoning map or text amendment may be withdrawn not less than ten (10) working days prior to the Planning Board meeting date. A petition that is withdrawn twice within any twelve-month period shall not be considered by the Planning Board until the expiration of twelve (12) months from the date of the last withdrawal. 
(b)  All requests for withdrawal must be filed in writing with the Department of Planning and Development. 
(c)  Reconsideration of withdrawn petitions shall be in accordance with original submission requirements. 
(Code 1993, § 27-221) 
Sec. 40-545. - Withdrawal of zoning map or text amendment petition from consideration following Planning Board recommendation. 
(a)  A petition for a zoning map or text amendment may be withdrawn from the City Council public hearing provided that such request is made at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the public hearing date. If the public hearing is continued to a later date, the date of the original scheduled hearing shall control. 
(b)  All requests for withdrawal must be filed in writing with the City Manager. 
(c)  Petitions withdrawn in accordance with this section shall not be reconsidered by the Planning Board until the expiration of six (6) months following the date of withdrawal. 
(d)  Reconsideration of withdrawn petitions shall be in accordance with original submission requirements. 
(e)  Original requests referred back to the Planning Board for reconsideration shall not require a filing fee provided all other submission requirements are met. 
(Code 1993, § 27-222) 
Sec. 40-546. - Effect of denial of zoning map or text amendment petition on subsequent similar petition. 
    When the City Council has denied any petition for zoning map or text amendment, a petition for the same amendment affecting the same property, or any portion thereof, shall not be accepted by the Planning Board, unless substantial changes are made to the petition, until the expiration of six (6) months from the date of such previous denial. 
(Code 1993, § 27-223) 
Sec. 40-547. - Recordation of amendments. 
    All ordinances amending this chapter shall be recorded in the office of the Beaufort County Register of Deeds before such ordinance shall become effective. 
(Code 1993, § 27-224) 
Sec. 40-548. - Appeal to decision of City Council. 
    Appeals from the decisions of City Council shall be made in accordance with applicable law. 
(Code 1993, § 27-225) 
Secs. 40-549-40-574. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES 

Sec. 40-575. - Interpretation of chapter provisions. 
    It is the intent of this chapter that all questions of interpretation shall be the responsibility of the Director of Planning and Development. 
(Code 1993, § 27-226) 
Sec. 40-576. - Duties of City Council. 
(a)  It is further the intent of this chapter that the duties of the City Council in connection with this chapter shall be to: 
(1)  Consider and act upon proposed amendments to this chapter; and 
(2)  Establish a schedule of fees for this chapter. 
(b)  The duties of the City Council shall not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that arise. 
(Code 1993, § 27-227) 
Sec. 40-577. - Permits required. 
(a)  No land, building, or structure shall be used, no building, sign, or structure shall be erected, and no existing building, sign, or structure shall be moved, expanded, enlarged, or altered until the Department of Planning and Development has approved such use or construction in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Unless stated otherwise in this chapter, each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a survey map drawn to scale, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact sizes and locations on the lot of the buildings and accessory buildings then existing, and the lines within which the proposed building shall be erected or altered, the existing or intended use of each building or part of a building, the number of families or housekeeping units the building is designed to accommodate, and such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 27-228) 
Sec. 40-578. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    A certificate of occupancy issued by the Department of Planning and Development is required in advance of occupancy or use of a building hereafter erected, altered, or moved, and for a change of use of any building or land. It shall be unlawful to occupy any building or structure without a certificate of compliance. A certificate of compliance shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or structure conforms to the applicable provisions of these regulations. 
(Code 1993, § 27-229) 
Sec. 40-579. - Enforcement and appeals. 
(a)  The Director of Planning and Development, or his designee, shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the Director of Planning and Development to provide for the enforcement of this chapter using the procedures established in section 40-580. If a decision of the Department of Planning and Development is questioned, the aggrieved person may appeal such decision to the Board of Adjustment, and ultimately to a court of competent jurisdiction, in accordance with the procedures of section 40-580. 
(b)  The Director of Planning and Development, or his designee, shall also be authorized to enforce the conditions established by the City Council, Planning Board, Board of Adjustment, Historic Preservation Commission, or Technical Review Committee, as required and appropriate. 
(Code 1993, § 27-230) 
Sec. 40-580. - Enforcement procedure. 
(a)  Notice of violation. When the Director of Planning and Development, or his designee, finds a violation of this chapter, it shall be his duty to give the owner or occupant of the property in violation written notice (by certified or registered mail to his last known address, by personal service of the notice, or by posting the notice conspicuously on the property) of the following: 
(1)  That the land, building, structure, sign, or use is in violation of this chapter of the city; 
(2)  The nature of the violation, and citation of the section of this chapter violated; 
(3)  The measures necessary to remedy the violation; and 
(4)  The time period in which the violation must be corrected. 
If applicable, a stop work order may be issued at this time. 
(b)  Appeal. Any owner or occupant who has received a notice of violation may appeal in writing the decision of the Department of Planning and Development to the Board of Adjustment (unless this chapter has specified that another Board shall hear the appeal of the violation) within fifteen (15) days following the date of the notice of violation. The Board of Adjustment, or other designated Board, shall hear the appeal within sixty (60) days, and it may affirm, modify, or revoke the notice of violation. In the absence of an appeal, the decision of the Department of Planning and Development shall be final. 
(c)  Notice of decision. The decision of the Board of Adjustment may be delivered to the aggrieved party either by personal service or by registered mail or certified mail return receipt requested. 
(d)  Failure to comply with notice. If the owner or occupant of a property fails to comply with a notice of violation from which no appeal has been taken, or a final decision of the Board of Adjustment following an appeal, the owner or occupant shall be subject to such remedies and penalties as may be provided for by state law or by section 40-58, pertaining to remedies. 
(Code 1993, § 27-231) 
Sec. 40-581. - Remedies. 
    Any or all of the following procedures may be used to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(a)  Injunction. Any violation of this chapter or of any condition, order, requirement, or remedy adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected, abated, mandated, or enjoined by other appropriate proceeding pursuant to state law. 
(b)  Civil penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the assessment of a civil penalty. 
(c)  Denial of permit or certificate. The Department of Planning and Development shall withhold or deny any permit, certificate, or other authorization on any land, building, structure, sign, or use in which there is an uncorrected violation of a provision of this chapter, or of a condition or qualification of a permit, certificate, or other authorization previously granted. 
(d)  Conditional permit or temporary certificate. The Department of Planning and Development may condition the authorization of any permit or certificate upon the correction of the deficiency, payment of civil penalties within a specified time, or the posting of a compliance security approved by the appropriate governmental authority. 
(e)  Stop work orders. Whenever a building, structure, sign, or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired in violation of this chapter, the Department of Planning and Development may order the work to be immediately stopped. The stop work order shall be in writing and directed to the owner, occupant, or person doing the work. The stop work order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reasons for the stoppage, and the conditions under which the work may be resumed. Such action shall be in accordance with G.S. 160A-421 or the state building code. 
(f)  Revocation of permits or certificates. The Department of Planning and Development may revoke and require the return of a permit or certificate by notifying the permit holder in writing, stating the reason for the revocation. Permits or certificates shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the approved application, plans, or specifications; refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit or certificate. Any permit or certificate mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may also be revoked. 
(g)  Criminal penalties. Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor or infraction as provided by G.S. 14-4. 
(Code 1993, § 27-232) 
Sec. 40-582. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  Responsible parties. The owner or occupant of any land, building, structure, sign, use of land, or part thereof; any architect, builder, contractor, agent; or any other person who participates or maintains any condition that is in violation of this chapter may be held responsible for the violation and subject to the civil penalties and remedies provided herein. 
(b)  Notice. No civil penalty shall be assessed until the person alleged to be in violation has been notified in accordance with section 40-580(a). If after receiving a notice of violation under section 40-580(a), the owner or other violator fails to take corrective action, a civil penalty may be imposed under this section in the form of a citation. The citation shall be served in the same manner as a notice of violation. The citation shall state the nature of the violation, shall state the civil penalty to be imposed upon the violator, and shall direct the violator to pay the civil penalty within fifteen (15) days of the date of the citation. 
(c)  Continuing violation. For each day the violation is not corrected, the violator will be guilty of an additional and separate offense and subject to additional civil penalty. 
(d)  Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to assessment of a civil penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per violation, per day. The penalty would begin after the expiration of the notice of violation, or after an appeal from a notice of violation is denied. 
(e)  Demand for payment. The Department of Planning and Development shall make written demand for payment upon the owner or the person in violation and shall set forth in detail a description of the violation for which the civil penalty has been imposed. 
(f)  Nonpayment. If payment is not received or equitable settlement reached within thirty (30) days after demand for payment is made, the matter shall be referred to the City Attorney to institute a civil action for recovery of the civil penalty. Moreover, if the civil penalty is not paid within the time prescribed, the Director of Planning and Development may have a criminal summons or warrant issued against the violator. Upon conviction, the violator shall be subject to any criminal penalty the court may impose pursuant to G.S. 14-4. 
(Code 1993, § 27-233) 
Sec. 40-583. - Other powers and actions. 
(a)  State and common law remedies. In addition to other enforcement provisions contained in this article, the City Council may exercise any and all enforcement powers granted to it by state or common law. 
(b)  Previous enforcement. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the continuation of previous enforcement actions. 
(Code 1993, § 27-234) 
Sec. 40-584. - Violations. 
    All such remedies provided herein shall be cumulative. To the extent that state law may limit the availability of a particular remedy set forth herein for a certain violation or a part thereof, such remedy shall remain available for other violations or other parts of the same violation. 
(Code 1993, § 27-235) 
Sec. 40-585. - Validity. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter and each section, subsection, clause, and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid. 
(Code 1993, § 27-236) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1972 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1972 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 1972 Code, not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. 
1972 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-6 1-1-1-6 2-1 2-1 2-2-2-17 2-21-2-36 2-17 2-532 2-18-2-20 2-37-2-39 2-22-2-24 2-67 2-25-2-27 2-68 2-28-2-30 2-95-2-97 2-31, 2-32 2-123, 2-124 2-32.1 2-125 2-33, 2-34 2-149, 2-150 2-35, 2-36 2-169, 2-170 2-37, 2-38 2-194, 2-195 2-39-2-42 2-214-2-217 2-44-2-46 2-219-2-221 2-47 2-251 2-48.1 2-253 2-52, 2-53 2-285, 2-286 2-53-2-56 2-287-2-290 3 1-8 3-1 4-4 3-2 4-3 3-5 4-8 3-6 4-1, 4-2 3-7 4-2 3-8 4-7 3-9 4-6 3-10 4-5 4-1 6-1 4-2 6-3 5-1-5-4 8-1-8-4 5-5-5-10 8-5 5-11-5-27 8-6-8-22 6-1-6-3 6-61-6-63 6-5 6-64 7A-2-7A-5 14-28-14-31 7A-6 14-27 7A-20 6-6 7A-21 14-1 7A-22, 7A-23 14-24 9-1 6-109 9-4-9-6 6-110-6-112 9-7-9-11 6-114-6-118 9-12 6-113 9-13, 9-14 6-119, 6-120 10-1-10-12 16-22-16-33 10A-1 16-81 10A-2 16-80 10A-3-10A-9 16-109-16-115 10A-10-10A-13 16-82-16-85 11-1, 11-2 18-1, 18-2 11-4 18-3 11-7-11-10 18-4-18-7 11-14 18-8 11-19 18-12 11-25-11-29 18-51-18-55 11-31 18-56 11-36-11-39 18-76-18-79 11-41-11-43 18-80-18-82 11-49, 11-50 18-101, 18-102 11-51-11-53 18-121-18-123 11-53.2-11-53.4 18-124-18-126 11-54, 11-55 18-128, 18-129 11-55-11-57 18-130-18-132 11-59 18-133 11-61-11-66 18-134-18-139 11-80, 11-81 18-180, 18-181 11-85-11-87 18-222-18-224 13-3 22-94 13-4 22-96 13-5 20-13 13-7-13-9 20-2-20-4 13-11, 13-12 20-5, 20-6 13-13-13-15 20-8-20-10 13-17 16-3 13-20 20-11 14-1 22-1 14-2, 14-3 22-5, 22-6 14-4 22-3 14-5 22-2 14-6 22-33, 22-34 14-7, 14-8 22-34, 22-35 14-10 22-4 14-11 22-38 14-19-14-24 22-59-22-64 14-26, 14-27 22-66, 22-67 14-29 22-68 14-30 22-7 15-1-15-4 16-55-16-58 17-2, 17-3 6-36 17-26 6-35 18-3, 18-4 26-1, 26-2 20-1-20-11 32-1-32-11 20-15-20-23 32-12-32-20 20-24-20-28 32-50-32-54 20-29-20-34 32-82-32-87 20-35 32-89 21-1 34-1 21-2, 21-3 34-4, 34-5 21-4 34-3 21-5 34-6 21-11 34-28 21-14 34-228 21-19 34-147 21-21 34-5 21-22 34-91 21-23 34-105 21-24 34-107 21-25 34-92 34-96 21-28 34-49 21-29 34-71, 34-72 23-1-23-4 6-87-6-90 24-1 36-19 24-2-24-8 36-54-36-60 24-9-24-13 36-20-36-24 24-15-24-23 36-79-36-87 25-1-25-7 10-1-10-7 25-8, 25-9 10-43, 10-44 25-10 10-47 25-11 10-45 25-12-25-14 10-48-10-50 25-15 10-46 25-16-25-19 10-8-10-11 25A-1 38-70 25A-1.1 38-2 25A-1.2 38-1 25A-1.3 38-3 25A-2, 25A-3 38-4, 38-5 25A-5-25A-8 38-7-38-10 25A-9-25A-14 38-39-38-44 25A-15 38-62 25A-15.1 38-63 25A-16 38-69 25A-18 38-71 25A-19-25A-26 38-101-38-108 25A-27, 25A-28 38-132, 38-133 25A-29 38-165 25A-30, 25A-31 38-184, 38-185 25A-39, 25A-40 38-267, 38-268 25A-40.1, 25A-40.2 38-269, 38-270 25A-41 38-271 25A-42-25A-42.4 38-272 25A-46 38-293 25A-46.1-25A-46.4 38-293-38-296 25A-46.5, 25A-46.6 38-297, 38-298 25A-47-25A-49 38-299-38-301 25A-53-25A-57 38-321-38-325 25A-61, 25A-62 38-354, 38-355 25A-62.1-25A-62.4 38-355-38-358 25A-62.5-25A-62.7 38-359-38-361 25A-63 38-362 25A-63.1-25A-63.3 38-363-38-365 25A-64.1-25A-64.3 38-366-38-368 25A-71 38-369, 38-370 26-1, 26-2 22-92, 22-93 26-3 22-95 26-4 22-97  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1993 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1993 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 1993 Code, not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1993 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-10 1-1-1-10 2-1 2-1 2-21-2-36 2-21-2-36 2-36 2-532 2-37-2-39 2-37-2-39 2-56, 2-57 2-67, 2-68 2-76-2-78 2-95-2-97 2-96-2-98 2-123-2-125 2-116, 2-117 2-149, 2-150 2-136, 2-137 2-169, 2-170 2-156, 2-157 2-194, 2-195 2-176-2-183 2-214-2-221 2-201-2-203 2-251-2-253 2-221-2-226 2-285-2-290 2-311-2-314 2-455-2-458 2-351-2-354 2-481-2-484 2-375 2-531 3-1-3-8 4-1-4-8 3-26-3-28 4-35-4-37 3-31 4-40 3-33-3-37 4-42-4-46 3-38, 3-39 4-52, 4-53 4-1 6-1 6-35 4-2-4-4 6-2-6-4 4-6 6-6 4-8 6-8 4-27 6-36 4-46-4-49 6-61-6-64 4-66-4-69 6-87-6-90 4-86-4-97 6-109-6-120 5-1-5-22 8-1-8-22 6-1-6-12 10-1-10-12 6-31-6-38 10-43-10-50 6.5-26-6.5-30 12-19-12-23 7-1, 7-2 14-1, 14-2 7-3 14-30 7-27-7-32 14-24-14-29 7-34 14-31 7-70-7-76 14-53-14-59 7-78-7-83 14-61-14-66 8-1-8-3 16-1-16-3 8-21-8-32 16-22-16-33 8-51-8-57 36-19-36-25 8-76-8-82 36-54-36-60 8-101-8-109 36-79-36-87 8-126-8-129 16-55-16-58 8-146-8-151 16-80-16-85 8-171-8-177 16-109-16-115 8-190-8-204 16-139-16-153 9-1-9-12 18-1-18-12 9-31, 9-32 18-32, 18-33 9-51-9-56 18-51-18-56 9-76-9-82 18-76-18-82 9-101, 9-102 18-101, 18-102 9-121-9-141 18-121-18-141 9-141.1 18-142 9-142, 9-143 18-143, 18-144 9-144, 9-145 18-146, 18-147 9-156, 9-157 18-180, 18-181 9-176-9-178 18-222-18-224 9-196-9-210 18-242-18-256 10-1-10-16 20-1-20-16 10-31-10-35 20-36-20-40 10-36 20-69 10-52, 10-53 20-70, 20-71 10-75-10-83 20-101-20-109 11-1-11-7 22-1-22-7 11-26-11-28 22-33-22-35 11-29, 11-30 22-37, 22-38 11-51-11-60 22-59-22-68 11-62 22-69 11-81-11-86 22-92-22-97 11-87-11-89 18-148-18-150 12-1, 12-2 24-21, 24-22 13-1-13-3 26-1-26-3 13-5 26-4 14-1 2-551 16-1-16-20 32-1-32-20 16-36-16-40 32-50-32-54 16-56-16-63 32-82-32-89 17-1 34-2 34-156 17-2-17-4 34-3-34-5 17-5 34-1 17-6-17-11 34-6-34-11 17-26, 17-27 34-28, 34-29 17-28-17-35 34-43-34-50 17-36-17-41 34-71-34-76 17-42, 17-43 34-30, 34-31 17-60-17-80 34-90-34-110 17-81 34-110 17-82-17-86 34-112-34-116 17-115-17-124 34-146-34-155 17-126-17-130 34-157-34-161 17-141-17-152 34-191-34-202 17-161, 17-162 34-228, 34-229 17-171, 17-172 34-254, 34-255 17-181 34-274 17-191 34-297 17-200-17-202 34-328-34-330 18-1 38-2 38-65 18-2 38-1 18-3-18-5 38-3-38-5 18-7-18-10 38-7-38-10 18-31-18-36 38-39-38-44 18-51, 18-52 38-62, 38-63 18-54-18-56 38-69-38-71 18-71-18-79 38-101-38-109 18-80, 18-81 38-132, 38-133 18-110 38-165 18-131, 18-132 38-184, 38-185 18-151-18-153 38-209-38-211 18-156-18-159 38-214-38-217 18-161 38-243 18-171-18-176 38-267-38-272 18-191-18-199 38-293-38-301 18-211-18-215 38-321-38-325 18-231-18-246 38-354-38-369 18-248 38-370 27-1 40-1 40-24 40-84 27-2-27-11 40-2-40-11 27-13 40-25 27-14-27-21 40-34-40-41 27-22-27-34 40-71-40-83 27-36-27-41 40-85-40-90 27-42 40-92 27-42.1 40-91 27-43 40-93 27-44-27-49 40-115-40-120 27-50-27-59 40-139-40-148 27-61 40-149 27-62-27-70 40-167-40-175 27-71-27-76 40-204-40-209 27-77-27-87 40-227-40-237 27-102 40-260 27-103 40-259 27-104-27-107 40-261-40-264 27-108-27-115 40-287-40-294 27-115.5 40-295 27-116-27-122 40-296-40-302 27-123-27-134 40-313-40-324 27-147 40-354 27-148 40-353 27-149-27-158 40-355-40-364 27-162 40-386 27-163 40-404 27-164 40-403 27-165-27-179 40-405-40-419 27-181-27-183 40-420-40-422 27-184-27-194 40-438-40-448 27-196 40-449, 40-450 27-197-27-202 40-469-40-474 27-203-27-214 40-502-40-513 27-216, 27-217 40-515, 40-516 27-218-27-225 40-541-40-548 27-226-27-236 40-575-40-585  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1993 Code which are included herein. Ordinances adopted since adoption of the 1993 Code, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 86-23 11-10-1986 1 10-45 87-3  1-12-1987 1 2-29 87-6  4-13-1987 1 18-123 87-13  6- 8-1987 1 18-102 87-18 11- 9-1987 1 18-125 88-4  4-11-1988 1(11-53.5) 18-127 88-5  4-11-1988 1, 2 18-9, 18-10 88-6  4-11-1988 1 18-11 88-7  4-11-1988 1 2-218 88-8  5- 9-1988 1 18-123 88-12  8- 8-1988 1 18-101 88-14 10-10-1988 1 18-102 88-15 11-14-1988 1 10-47 2 10-45 88-17 11-14-1988 1 16-1, 16-2 88-18 12-12-1988 1 18-102 88-19 12-12-1988 1 10-47 89-1  3-13-1989 1, 2 10-47 89-5  6-12-1989 1(24-14) 36-25 89-11  8-14-1989 1 2-455-2-458 89-12  9-11-1989 1 18-77 89-13  9-11-1989 18-123 89-17 10- 9-1989 1 20-36-20-40 89-18 10- 9-1989 18-77 89-19 11-13-1989 1 18-77 89-22 11-13-1989 1(11-20) 18-32 89-23 11-13-1989 1 10-47 2 10-50 89-24 11-13-1989 1 18-125 89-25 11-13-1989 1(13-1) 20-1 89-27 12-11-1989 1 18-77 90-2  1- 8-1990 1 18-77 90-4  3-12-1990 1(13-22) 20-12 90-6  3-12-1990 1 8-6 2 8-12 90-7  3-12-1990 1 10-43, 10-44 10-47 90-10  7- 9-1990 1 22-5 90-12  7- 9-1990 1 2-252 2-286 2-456 90-13  8-13-1990 1 20-6 1(13-12.1) 20-7 90-14  9-10-1990 1 18-77 90-15  9-10-1990 1 18-76 91-5  6-10-1991 1 18-140 91-7  7- 8-1991 1 22-33, 22-34 91-8  7- 8-1991 1 38-185 91-11  8- 5-1991 1 20-39 91-14  9- 9-1991 1(2-74) 2-481, 2-482 1(2-75), 1(2-76) 2-483, 2-484 91-15 10-14-1991 1 18-76 91-16 10-14-1991 1 20-69 2(A)-(D) 20-70 2(E) 20-71 92-6  5-11-1992 1 18-77 92-7  5-11-1992 1 20-14 92-8  6- 8-1992 1 18-132 92-10  7-13-1992 1, 2 2-285 92-12  8-31-1992 1 32-10 92-13 10-12-1992 1 18-123 92-16 11- 9-1992 2-6 12-19-12-23 93-2  3- 8-1993 1 10-43, 10-44 10-47 2 10-45 3 10-49 93-5  4-12-1993 1 4-37 4-40 4-43 4-45, 4-46 1(3-43) 4-52 93-11  8- 9-1993 1 18-77 93-12  9-13-1993 1 16-139-16-148 16-150-16-153 93-14 11- 8-1993 1 18-125 94-4  4-11-1994 1 16-23 94-7  6-13-1994 1 18-123 94-8  6-13-1994 1 18-77 94-12  6-30-1994 1 8-6 38-185 94-15  7-11-1994 1 16-140 94-16  8- 8-1994 1 16-2 94-19  9- 1-1994 1 18-141 94-18  9-12-1994 1 16-147 94-23 10-10-1994 1 16-1 95-1  1- 9-1995 1 38-1-38-5 38-7-38-10 38-39-38-44 38-62, 38-63 38-65 38-69-38-71 38-101-38-109 38-132, 38-133 38-165 38-184, 38-185 38-270-38-272 38-293-38-301 38-321-38-325 38-354-38-370 95-53  1- 9-1995 1 38-65 95-5  2-13-1995 1 10-47 95-8  4-10-1995 1 18-130 95-11  5- 8-1995 1 18-141 95-6  6-19-1995 2 38-209-38-211 38-214-38-217 38-267-38-269 95-12  6-19-1995 1 38-185 95-13  7-10-1995 2 20-101-20-109 95-16  9-11-1995 1 10-47 95-17  9-11-1995 1 38-215 95-18 10- 9-1995 1 18-143 95-19 10- 9-1995 1, 2 18-77, 18-78 95-20 11-13-1995 1 6-6 95-23 11-13-1995 1 20-16 96-1  2-12-1996 18-32 21 18-33 96-2  2-12-1996 34-1 34-3-34-6 34-10, 34-11 34-28-34-31 34-43-34-50 34-71-34-76 34-90-34-110 34-112-34-116 34-146-34-161 34-191-34-202 34-228, 34-229 34-254, 34-255 34-274 34-297 34-328-34-330 96-2(b)  3-11-1996 2-36 2-532 96-2(a)  3-13-1996 2-33 96-5  5-13-1996 18-77, 18-78 96-6  5-13-1996 18-144 96-7  5-13-1996 18-143 96-8  5-13-1996 1(9-144) 18-145 96-12  7- 8-1996 18-128 96-14  8-26-1996 18-77 96-15  9- 9-1996 18-136 96-17 11-11-1996 18-102 96-18 11-11-1996 14-66 97-1  3-10-1997 2-482 97-2  3-10-1997 40-543 97-4  5-19-1997 18-123 97-5  5-19-1997 18-123 97-6  5-19-1997 6-8 97-7  5-19-1997 34-91 97-8  6-23-1997 38-185 97-9  6-23-1997 8-5, 8-6 97-10  6-23-1997 4-35-4-37 4-40 4-42-4-46 4-52 97-11  7-14-1997 40-302 97-12  7-14-1997 22-33-22-35 22-37, 22-38 97-13  7-14-1997 32-10 97-14  9- 8-1997 18-1 97-15  9- 8-1997 18-80 97-16  9- 8-1997 40-93 97-17 10-13-1997 2-97 98-1  1-12-1998 20-16 98-2  1-12-1998 38-365 98-3  2- 9-1998 40-93 40-149 98-4  3- 8-1998 18-129 98-5  3- 9-1998 40-93 98-6  4-13-1998 18-129 98-7  5-11-1998 40-93 98-8  5-11-1998 40-449 98-9  6- 8-1998 40-93 98-10  6-22-1998 2-23 2-67 98-14  7-13-1998 40-25 40-93 98-15  9-14-1998 18-123 98-16  9-14-1998 4-37 4-42 98-17  9-14-1998 40-93 98-18 11- 9-1998 4-36 98-19 11- 9-1998 24-22 98-20 11- 9-1998 40-93 98-21 11- 9-1998 40-148 98-22 12-14-1998 40-146 99-1  1-11-1999 40-93 40-149 99-2  6-14-1999 40-149 99-3  6-14-1999 40-93 99-5  6-14-1999 40-93 99-6  6-14-1999 40-169 99-9  7-12-1999 40-93 99-10  8- 9-1999 18-141 99-11  9-13-1999 14-66 99-12  9-13-1999 32-88, 32-89 99-13 10-11-1999 40-149 99-17 12-13-1999 18-137 99-18 12-13-1999 40-416 00-1  2-14-2000 1-6 18-12 18-143, 18-144 18-146, 18-147 00-2  2-14-2000 2-33 00-3  2-14-2000 40-93 40-149 00-4  4-10-2000 40-302 00-5  6-19-2000 36-23 00-7  6-26-2000 8-6 00-9  6-26-2000 14-59 00-10  7-11-2000 18-123 00-11  8-14-2000 40-415 00-12  9-11-2000 40-41 00-13  9-11-2000 40-146 00-14  9-11-2000 40-149 00-15  9-11-2000 18-101 00-17 10- 9-2000 40-316 00-16 10-14-2000 16-25 00-19 11-13-2000 40-302 00-20 11-13-2000 1 20-39 4 20-39 00-21 12-11-2000 2-67 01-01  1- 8-2001 40-410 01-2  2-12-2001 18-123 01-3  3-12-2001 14-59 01-4  5-14-2001 40-149 01-5  6-11-2001 10-3 01-7  7- 9-2001 14-59 14-61 01-8  8-13-2001 1 18-77 01-9  8-13-2001 1 18-123  9-10-2001 24-22 01-10  9-10-2001 2-531 01-11  9-10-2001 22-97 01-12 10- 8-2001 40-93 40-119, 40-120 01-13 10- 8-2001 1 18-132 01-14 10- 8-2001 40-93 40-149 01-15 10- 8-2001 18-256 26-4 01-17 11-19-2001 18-102 02-01  1-14-2002 40-93 02-2  1-14-2002 14-53 14-56 14-58, 14-59 14-62 14-65, 14-66 02-3  2-11-2002 40-386 02-4  5-13-2002 2-36 2-532 02-6  6-24-2002 18-141, 18-142 02-7  6-24-2002 18-10 02-8  6-24-2002 22-97 02-9  6-24-2002 18-123 02-11  6-24-2002 18-102 02-13  8-12-2002 18-129 02-14  8-12-2002 18-148-18-150 22-95 22-97 02-15  9- 9-2002 22-97 02-16  9- 9-2002 18-77, 18-78 02-17  9- 9-2002 18-77 02-18 10- 7-2002 40-93 02-19 10- 7-2002 22-95 02-21 11-11-2002 40-403 40-411 40-413-40-415 40-417 02-22 11-11-2002 40-386 02-23 11-11-2002 40-149 02-24 11-11-2002 40-93 03-03  2-10-2003 40-93 40-119, 40-120 03-04  2-10-2003 40-386 03-05  3-10-2003 18-123 03-06  3-10-2003 18-123 03-07  3-10-2003 18-132 03-08  3-10-2003 40-421 03-9  4-14-2003 40-259-40-264 03-10  4-14-2003 1, 2 2-219 03-11  6- 9-2003 1 18-102 03-14  9- 8-2003 1 18-129 03-15 10- 6-2003 1 10-47 2 38-215 03-17 10-20-2003 1, 2 20-1 04-1  1-12-2004 1 40-91 2 40-93 3, 4 40-119, 40-120 5 40-140 04-02  2- 9-2004 1, 2 2-215 04-3  2- 9-2004 1 20-39 04-5  3-15-2004 1 16-55 04-6  5-10-2004 1 38-209 04-10  6-28-2004 1 38-185 04-11  6-28-2004 1, 2 10-43, 10-44 3 10-47 4 38-215 04-14  8- 9-2004 1 18-77 04-16  8- 9-2004 1(18-51)- 
1(18-60) 38-62-38-71 04-17  9-13-2004 20-3 04-18  9-13-2004 2-285 04-19  9-13-2004 1 40-93 04-20  9-13-2004 1 40-93 04-21  9-13-2004 1 40-93 04-22 10-18-2004 1 14-61 04-23 10-18-2004 1, 2 18-123 05-1  2-14-2005 1 18-77 05-3  2-14-2005 1(3-26)-1(3-44) 4-35-4-53 05-5  2-14-2005 1 40-148 05-06  3-14-2005 1 18-101 05-04  3-15-2005 1 2-531 1(2-375)- 
1(2-387) 2-501-2-513 05-08  4-11-2005 1, 2 18-77, 18-78 05-09  6-20-2005 1 38-101 05-11  6-20-2005 1 8-6 05-12  6-27-2005 1 18-53 2 18-77 05-13  8- 8-2005 1(a)-1(e) 36-111-36-115 05-15  9-12-2005 1 18-77 05-16  9-12-2005 1 18-77 05-17  9-12-2005 1 24-22 05-18 11-14-2005 2 2-571 05-19 12-12-2005 1, 2 18-123 05-20 12-12-2005 1 38-6 2, 3 38-66 06-01  1- 9-2006 1(4-5) 6-5 06-02  2-13-2006 1-6 40-543 7 40-502 8 40-514 9-11 40-512 12 40-6 14 40-149 15, 16 40-12, 40-13 06-03  2-13-2006 1 34-1 2, 3 34-28 4 34-254 06-06  3-13-2006 1 40-299 06-06-A  3-13-2006 1 38-209 2, 3 38-243, 38-244 06-07  4-10-2006 19-1 30-2 19-2 30-1 19-3-19-22 30-3-30-22 06-08  4-10-2006 1, 2 10-47 06-09  4-10-2006 1, 2 38-215 06-10  4-10-2006 1 22-97 06-11  6-12-2006 1 28-1-28-10 06-12  6-19-2006 1 18-53 06-13  6-19-2006 1, 2 8-6 06-15  6-19-2006 1-3 18-13 4 32-24 06-16  6-19-2006 1(16-21)- 
1(16-23) 32-21-32-23 06-17  6-19-2006 1 14-60 06-18  6-19-2006 1 6-7 06-19  6-19-2006 1 22-95 06-20  8-14-2006 1(19-31) 30-23 2 30-18 06-21  8-14-2006 1 18-124 06-22  9-19-2006 1 40-93 06-23 11-14-2006 1(27-162.1) 40-387 06-24 12-11-2006 1, 2 40-418 06-25 12-11-2006 2 40-93 07-01  1- 8-2007 1 40-25 2 40-93 4 40-119, 40-120 07-2  2-12-2007 1, 2 18-101, 18-102 07-03  3-12-2007 1 40-262 07-04  3-12-2007 1 22-5 07-05  6-25-2007 1 28-10 07-06  6-25-2007 1 38-212, 38-213 07-07 10- 8-2007 1 22-5 07-08 10- 8-2007 1 40-93 2 40-120 07-9 11-13-2007 1(2-331)- 
1(2-336) 2-391-2-396 07-10 12-10-2007 1 18-77 07-11 12-10-2007 1 18-77 07-12 12-10-2007 1 18-102 08-1  1-14-2008 1 22-70 08-2  2-12-2008 1 18-123 08-03  3-17-2008 1 18-77 08-04  4-14-2008 1 40-415 08-5  6- 9-2008 1 18-132 08-6  6- 9-2008 1 40-415 08-7 10-20-2008 1(27-161) 40-385 09-1  2- 9-2009 1 22-92 09-3  8-10-2009 1 18-132 09-4 10-12-2009 1       Added 16-4 10-1  2- 8-2010 1-7       Added Adopt. Ord., pg. xi 10-2  2- 8-2010 1 2-33 10-3  2- 8-2010 1 2-29 10-4  5-10-2010 1 18-129(b) 2       Added 18-129.1 10-5  6-14-2010 1 22-97(e) 10-6  7-26-2010 1, 2 8-18 10-7  8- 9-2010 1 40-93 10-8  9-13-2010 1, 2 18-123 10-9 11- 8-2010 2       Added 38-400-38-411 10-10 12-13-2010 1 40-93 2       Added 40-119(rr) 3       Added 40-120(rr) 11-1  2-14-2011 1 40-93 2       Added 40-119(ss) 3       Added 40-120(ss) 11-2  2-14-2011 1       Added 18-83 11-3  2-14-2011 1       Rpld 6-109-6-120       Added 6-109-6-139 11-4  3-14-2011 2       Added 40-407(a)(5) 11-5  3-14-2011 1 40-93 2       Added 40-119(tt) 3       Added 40-120(tt) 11-6  5- 2-2011 1       Rpld 38-1-38-411       Added 38-1-38-81       Added 39-1-39-163 11-7  6-13-2011 2       Added 38-130-38-141 11-8  6-13-2011 1       Added 18-128(b)(5) 11-9  7-18-2011 1       Added 18-128(b)(6) 11-10  8- 8-2011 1       Added 20-17 11-11  8- 8-2011 1 18-78 2 18-77 11-12 11-14-2011 1 40-25 2 40-93 3       Added 40-119(uu) 4       Added 40-120(uu) 11-13 11-14-2011 1 18-77 12-1  2-13-2012 1 22-97(title) 2       Rpld 22-97(j)       Added 22-97(j) 12-2  2-13-2012 1       Rpld 22-97(i)       Added 22-97(i) 12-3  4- 9-2012 1 2-251 2 2-252 3 2-531 4 2-253 ref. 12-4  8-13-2012 1       Rpld 6-109-6-139       Added 6-109-6-138 12-5 10- 8-2012 1 6-3 6-88(a) 6-89(l) 6-90 18-242 18-243 18-245(b) 18-246(d), (e)(1) 18-247(b) 18-253 20-39(a)(3) 40-261(b) 40-262(a) 40-263(b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3)a. 13-1  5-13-2013 1 10-45 13-2  7- 1-2013 1       Rpld 2-571 2       Added 2-571-2-590 13-3 10- 7-2013 1       Rpld 32-50 2       Added 32-50 13-4 10- 7-2013 1       Rpld 8-1-8-22       Added 8-1-8-23 13-5 10- 7-2013 1       Rpld 22-97(d) 2       Added 22-97(d) 13-6 10-28-2013 1       Rpld 39-1-39-163       Added 39-1-39-163 13-7 12- 9-2013 1       Added 2-620-2-623 14-1  4-14-2014 1 18-78 2 18-77 14-2  4-14-2014 1 18-102(c) 14-3  5-12-2014 1 40-415 14-4  6- 9-2014 1 40-261 14-5  9- 8-2014 1 18-53 2 18-77 14-6  9- 8-2014 1       Rpld 8-10 2       Added 8-10 14-7 10- 6-2014 1 40-25 2, 3 40-93 4, 5 40-119, 40-120 6 40-449 14-8 11-24-2014 1 24-21, 24-22 15-1  3-23-2015 1, 2 2-571 2-586, 2-587 2-589 1, 3 2-586 4 40-227 5 40-233 15-2  4-13-2015 1 40-263(b)(1), (b)(2) 15-3  5-11-2015 1 10-50 15-4  5-11-2015 1 39-51 15-5  5-11-2015 1 38-50 15-6  7-13-2015 1 18-123 15-7  8-10-2015 1 22-5(m) 15-8  8-10-2015 1 18-53 2 18-77 15-9  9-28-2015 1, 2 18-123 3, 4 18-124 15-10 11- 9-2015 1, 2 22-65(c) 16-1  8- 8-2016 1 18-102(c) 17-1  3-13-2017 1 40-25 2 40-93 3, 4 40-119, 40-120 17-2  3-13-2017 1 2-455 2 2-457 17-3  6-26-2017 1 2-587 17-4  8-14-2017 1 16-1 17-5 12-11-2017 1 4-25 2, 3 40-93 4, 5 40-119, 40-120 6 40-449 18-1  2-12-2018 1 4-1 2 4-3 4-8 18-2  5-14-2018 1 18-123 18-148 18-3  5-14-2018 1 2-33 18-4  6-11-2018 1, 2 18-102(b) 3       Rnbd 18-102(c)-(f)       as 18-102(d)-(g) 4       Added 18-102(c) 1, 2 18-150 18-5  6-11-2018 1       Added 18-84 2 18-13 18-6  7- 9-2018 1 18-84 18-7  7- 9-2018 1, 2 38-132 3, 4 38-133 18-8  8-13-2018 1 18-77 18-12 12-10-2018 1, 2 18-141 18-13 12-10-2018 1       Added Art. IX, 
18-271-18-276 19-1  1-14-2019 1, 2       Rpld 18-142 19-2  1-14-2019 1, 2       Rpld 18-149  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the North Carolina General Statutes. 
G.S. Section  
this Code 1-593 1-2 1A-1 1-2 2-532 40-386 6-47 et seq. 1-6 ch. 7 40-262 ch. 7A 40-262 12-3 1-2 ch. 14 Ch. 20 14-4 1-6 6-138 16-85 18-83 18-84 22-70 22-97 38-137 40-581, 40-582 14-4(b) 18-12 14-127 et seq. 20-4 14-136 et seq. Ch. 14 14-154 et seq. Ch. 10 14-160 et seq. 20-4 14-202.10 16-80 14-202.10 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. IV 14-202.12 16-80 14-221 et seq. Ch. 26 14-225.1 20-8 14-286 14-27 14-30 14-288.12 20-13 14-309.11(a) 40-25 14-309.13 40-25 14-317 16-3 14-360 et seq. Ch. 4 14-366 et seq. Ch. 4 14-399 Ch. 28 14-401.3 Ch. 8 15-12 et seq. 18-11 15-27.2 Ch. 6 30-17 15A-401 et seq. Ch. 26 15A-501 et seq. Ch. 26 18B-100 et seq. 16-31 18B-300(c) 20-1 18B-401 Ch. 36, Art. II 18B-1001 16-1 18B-1002(a)(5) 20-1 ch. 19A Ch. 4 ch. 20 Ch. 18 20-4.01 1-2 18-1 20-4.01(27)(b) 36-19 20-5 et seq. 36-80 20-10 Ch. 36, Art. II 20-37 Ch. 36, Art. II 20-37.5(2), 20-37.5(3) 18-143 20-50 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. II 20-66 18-32 20-87 Ch. 36, Art. II 20-97 Ch. 18, Art. II 20-97(d) 36-24 20-101 Ch. 36, Art. II 20-114 18-3 20-118 18-80 20-130.1 18-82 20-141 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. IV, Div. 2 20-142.1 Ch. 18, Art. III 20-144, 20-145 Ch. 18, Art. IV, Div. 2 20-145 26-4 20-156 26-4 20-157 14-26 14-28 14-30 20-157(e) 18-137 20-158 Ch. 18, Art. III 20-158.1 Ch. 18, Art. III 18-78 20-161 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. V 20-162 14-30 18-137 20-165.1 18-76 20-169 Ch. 18 Ch. 18, Art. IV, Div. 2 18-51 18-76 20-171 18-2 20-171.1, 20-171.2 Ch. 18, Art. VI 20-172 Ch. 18, Art. III 20-175 18-122 20-219.11 18-250 20-280 Ch. 36, Art. II 25-3-506 10-47 38-48 39-49 ch. 44A, art. I 18-252 44A-1 et seq. 18-252 47-30 et seq. Ch. 34 ch. 47C 40-149 40-316, 40-317 40-319 47C-1-101 et seq. 40-149 58-79.1 et seq. Ch. 6 58-82-1 14-30 58-82-1 et seq. Ch. 14 58-84-30 Char. § 13.1 58-86-1 et seq. Ch. 14 ch. 62A 12-19 12-21 12-23 62A-1 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. II 62A-6-62A-8 12-22 63-34 40-236 ch. 65 Ch. 8 65-13 8-4 ch. 66 Ch. 16 66-250 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. III ch. 67 Ch. 4 Ch. 4, Art. II 67-4.1 4-37 4-51 67-4.1(c) 4-51 67-4.2 4-51 ch. 68 Ch. 4 ch. 75A Ch. 22 ch. 75B Ch. 16 80-45 Ch. 4 ch. 85B 16-140 ch. 87 Ch. 6 ch. 89B 40-149 90-21.20 Ch. 26 90-86 et seq. 20-12 90-270.34(b)(2) Ch. 16, Art. IV 90-636 Ch. 16, Art. IV ch. 93B Ch. 16 95-126 et seq. Ch. 16 104E-1 et seq. Ch. 28 ch. 105 16-22 16-29 16-33 ch. 105, art. 12 40-149 105-33 16-27 105-33 et seq. Ch. 16 16-32 105-53 16-147 105-103 16-23 105-105 16-25 105-109 16-23 105-113.77 16-31 105-349 et seq. 20-40 105-366 20-40 105-374, 105-375 20-40 ch. 106 Ch. 4 ch. 106, art. 34 Ch. 4 106-400 et seq. Ch. 4 106-419 et seq. 20-37 ch. 106A, art. 7, pt. 2 Char. § 4.1 111-11 40-25 113-127 et seq. Ch. 22 ch. 113A 34-45 113A-100 et seq. Ch. 34 34-6 113A-106 et seq. 34-6 121-12(a) 40-386 ch. 125 Ch. 2, Art. XVII 125-5 2-458 128-16 et seq. Ch. 26 ch. 130A Ch. 4 ch. 130A, art. 9 40-259 130A-19, 130A-20 Ch. 20, Art. II 130A-184 et seq. Ch. 4 130A-290 et seq. Ch. 28 130A-290(a)(6)-130A-290(a)(36) 40-259 ch. 133 Ch. 32 ch. 136 Ch. 32 136-18(10) Ch. 10 136-18(20) Ch. 8 136-18.3 Ch. 28 136-30 18-143 136-30 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. III 136-44.14 18-143 136-71.6 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. VI 136-90 32-3 136-91 Ch. 28 136-102.6 Ch. 34 136-141 et seq. 18-255 20-5 136-143 18-255 ch. 143, art. 21, pt. 6 40-260 ch. 143, art. 33C 40-386 143-128 et seq. Ch. 6 143-129 Ch. 2, Art. XXI 143-131 Ch. 2, Art. XXI 143-136 et seq. Ch. 6 6-1 143-143.8 et seq. Ch. 6 143-143.15 40-263 143-151.8 et seq. Ch. 6 143-213(18) 39-2 143-214.7(c) Ch. 30 143-215.1 39-2 39-62 143.215.1(d) 39-2 143-215.1(b), (g) 39-62 143-215.3(a)(14) 39-2 143.215.3C 39-103 143-215.6B 39-114 143-215.6B(f)-(i) 39-114 143-318.9 et seq. 2-31 2-216 143-355.2 Ch. 38, Art. III 143B-313.1 et seq. Ch. 22 143B-391, 143B-392 Ch. 2, Art. XI 153A-275 39-1 157-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. X 157-5 2-251 157-8 2-251 ch. 158, ch. 159 Ch. 2 159-13(a) Ch. 2 159-24, 159-25 Ch. 2, Art. VI 159-25 2-150 Char. § 4.6 ch. 160A Ch. 2 ch. 160A, pt. 3, art. 19 40-313 ch. 160A, art. 8 40-260 ch. 160A, art. 10 Char. § 5.1 6-135 ch. 160A, art. 19 et seq. 40-2 ch. 160A, art. 19, pt. 2 34-4 ch. 160A, art. 19, pt. 3 40-260 40-386 ch. 160A, art. 19, pt. 3C 40-386 ch. 160A, art. 19, pt. 5 40-260 ch. 160A, art. 19, pt. 6 6-110 160A-1 Char. § 1.2 160A-3 Ch. 34 34-5 160A-63 Char. § 2.7 160A-64 2-67 160A-66 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 160A-67 Ch. 2, Art. II 2-21 2-67 160A-68 2-28 160A-68 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 160A-69 2-34 160A-69, 160A-70 2-67, 2-68 160A-70 Char. § 2.4 160A-74, 160A-75 Char. § 2.6 160A-75 40-543 160A-76 Ch. 6 160A-77 1-1 160A-79 1-1 160A-146 Ch. 2, Art. II 2-21 160A-147 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV 160A-147-160A-152 2-1 160A-163 Ch. 14 160A-171 Ch. 2, Art. V 160A-172 2-125 160A-173 Ch. 2, Art. VIII 160A-174 Ch. 20 40-2 160A-174 et seq. Ch. 26 160A-175 1-6 4-52 14-53 16-153 18-83 18-84 22-70 30-18 40-421 160A-175(b) 22-97 160A-178 Ch. 16, Art. III Ch. 16, Art. V 160A-181 Ch. 16 16-2 20-2 160A-182 Ch. 4 160A-184 20-6 160A-186 Ch. 4 160A-188 4-8 160A-189, 160A-190 20-3 160A-191 Ch. 16 160A-193 4-2 Ch. 18, Art. VIII Ch. 20, Art. II 20-39 Ch. 28 160A-194 Ch. 6 Ch. 16 160A-206, 160A-207 Ch. 2 160A-209 Ch. 2 160A-211 Ch. 16 Ch. 16, Art. II 160A-212 Ch. 4 160A-216 et seq. 6-135 Ch. 32 32-86 160A-217 32-86 160A-265 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. XXI 160A-266(c) Char. § 10.2 160A-281 et seq. Ch. 26 160A-286 Ch. 26 160A-291 14-1 14-24 160A-291 et seq. Ch. 14 160A-292 14-2 14-24 160A-296 Ch. 32, Art. II 160A-296 et seq. Ch. 18 Ch. 32 160A-296(a)(2) 32-3 160A-298 18-224 160A-300.6 18-271 160A-301 Ch. 18, Art. V 160A-303 Ch. 18, Art. VIII 18-243 160A-303.1 Ch. 28 160A-303.2 Ch. 18, Art. VIII 18-243 160A-304 Ch. 36, Art. II Ch. 36, Art. II, Div. 3 36-20 36-82 160A-306 Ch. 32, Art. III Ch. 40 160A-307 Ch. 32, Art. III 160A-311 et seq. Ch. 10 10-1 Ch. 28 160A-312 10-1 39-1 160A-317(b) Ch. 28 160A-341 et seq. Ch. 8 160A-348 Ch. 8 8-1 160A-350 et seq. Ch. 22 160A-352 22-1 160A-353 22-3 160A-355 22-35 160A-356 22-38 160A-360 Char. § 8.1 Ch. 34 34-5 160A-360 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IX Ch. 40 160A-360(i) 34-11 160A-361 2-214, 2-215 160A-361 2-620 34-1 40-25 160A-361 et seq. Ch. 34 160A-362 2-215 160A-363 2-217 160A-364 40-12 40-543 160A-367 34-1 160A-371 et seq. Ch. 34 34-4 160A-373 34-28 160A-373(3) 34-9 160A-376 34-1 160A-376(a) 34-1 160A-381 et seq. Ch. 40 160A-381(c) 40-512 40-514 160A-382(a) 40-385 160A-382(a), 160A-382(b) 40-543 160A-384 40-543 160A-384(c) 40-543 160A-385 40-543 160A-385(a) 40-543 160A-385.1 40-12 160A-388(a) 40-319 40-502 160A-388(e) 40-514 160A-392 40-6 160A-400.14(a) 6-132 160A-411 et seq. Ch. 6 6-3 160A-412 6-3, 6-4 160A-414 6-3 6-7 14-53 160A-417 34-254 40-12 160A-421 40-581 160A-423 40-319 160A-432 Ch. 6 160A-435 et seq. Ch. 6 6-5 160A-436, 160A-437 6-5, 6-6 160A-441 6-110 160A-441 et seq. Ch. 6 160A-443(5a) Char. § 14.1 160A-443(6) 6-135 160A-443(7) 6-132 160A-444 6-110 160A-446(f) 6-132 160A-460 et seq. Ch. 40 160A-493 Ch. 4 160A-500 et seq. 2-253 160A-505 2-253 ch. 163 Ch. 2 163-292 Char. § 3.1 168-20-168-23 40-25 180A-283 40-120  
