
Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina Code of Ordinances


WRIGHTSVILLE BEACH, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



Contains 2017 S-24, current through
Ordinance 1767, passed 6-8-17 and
State Legislation through 2012 Legislative Service No. 5




Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet:  www.amlegal.com




ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE  1101 



   AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOARD OF ALDERMEN OF THE TOWN OF WRIGHTSVILLE
BEACH, NORTH CAROLINA, REVISING, CONSOLIDATING, ELABORATING AND ADDING TO THE
ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN OF WRIGHTSVILLE BEACH, NORTH CAROLINA



   The Board of Aldermen of the Town of Wrightsville Beach, North
Carolina, doth ORDAIN:



   1.   The Code of Ordinances prepared for the Town of Wrightsville
Beach, North Carolina, by American Legal Publishing Corporation, 133 West
Fourth St., Cincinnati, Ohio, bearing a copyright of 1989 is hereby adopted
as the official Code of Ordinances of the Town of Wrightsville Beach, North
Carolina.




   2.   (a)   All ordinances of a general and permanent nature of
the town enacted on or before June 30, 1988 and not included within the Code,
or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby
repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance, except as
provided in Section 3;





      (b)   To the extent that ordinances or portions of ordinances
included within this Code are the same in substance as ordinances in effect
prior to the adoption of this Code, it is intended that they be treated as
continuations and not as new enactments or amendments, in order that all
rights and liabilities that have been accrued are preserved and may be
enforced.





   3.   This Code of Ordinances contains all of the general and
permanent ordinances of the Town of Wrightsville Beach, but it does not
contain, and is not intended to affect, the following classes of ordinances
or actions having the effect of ordinances:





      (a)   Annexation ordinances;





      (b)   Budget ordinances or amendments thereto;





      (c)   Bond orders and ordinances;





      (d)   Ordinances granting a franchise;





      (e)   Ordinances or resolutions pertaining to the exercise of
the power of eminent domain;





      (f)   Ordinances or resolutions pertaining to the levy of
special assessments;





      (g)   Ordinances, resolutions, or orders naming, renaming or
closing a street;





      (h)   Ordinances establishing or amending the boundaries of
zoning districts;





      (i)   Ordinances establishing or amending a position
classification and pay plan for town employees; and





      (j)   Ordinances or resolutions of any type which are not
normally codified, including but not limited to, ordinances or resolutions of
limited interest or of a transitory nature;





   4.   No provision of this ordinance is intended, nor shall be
construed, to affect in any way any rights or interests (whether public or
private):





      (a)   Now vested or accrued, in whole or in part, the validity
of which might be sustained or preserved by reference to any provisions of an
ordinance repealed by the adoption of this code;





      (b)   Derived from, or which might be sustained or preserved
in reliance upon, action heretofore taken pursuant to or within the scope of
any ordinance repealed by the adoption of this code.





   5.   No action or proceeding of any nature (whether civil or
criminal, judicial or administrative or otherwise) pending on the effective
date of this ordinance by or against the Town of Wrightsville Beach or any of
its departments or agencies shall be abated or otherwise affected by the
adoption of this Code.





   6.   If any portion of this Code or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect
other provisions or applications of this Code which can be given effect
without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions
of the Code are declared to be severable.





   7.   Ordinances which are adopted after the cut-off date specified
in Section 2 shall be forwarded to the North Carolina League of
Municipalities or publisher for codification into this volume. The League or
publisher is hereby authorized to make all necessary editorial changes to
codify such ordinances appropriately.





   8.   A copy of this Code shall be kept on file in the office of the
Town Clerk and it shall be the express duty of the Clerk, or someone
authorized by the Clerk, to insert in their designated places all duly
adopted amendments to this code, and to extract from this Code all provisions
which may be from time to time duly repealed. A copy of this Code shall be
available for all persons desiring to examine it during reasonable times,
under the supervision of the Town Clerk.





   9.   It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by
additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to alter or
tamper with the Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the Ordinances
of the Town to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this Section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in
Section 14-4 of the General Statues of North Carolina.





   10.   This ordinance, and the Code of Ordinances which it adopts,
shall be in full force and effect from and after the 27th day of July 1989.





   This Ordinance adopted this 27th day of July, 1989.





                                       �
�  Carlton G. Hay        /s/





                                       �
�  Mayor





ATTEST:





Linda Askew        /s/





Town Clerk





   (SEAL)





APPROVED AS TO FORM:





John C. Wessel      /s/





Town Attorney




CHARTER



Section
   1.




Article I.  Incorporation, Corporate Powers and Boundaries




      1.1   Incorporation



      1.2   Powers



      1.3   Corporate limits




Article II.  Governing Body




      2.1   Mayor and Board of Aldermen



      2.2   Board of Aldermen; composition; terms of office



      2.3   Mayor; term of office; duties



      2.4   Mayor Pro Tempore



      2.5   Meetings



      2.6   Voting requirements; quorum



      2.7   Compensation; qualifications for office; vacancies



      2.8   Board of adjustment




Article III.  Elections




      3.1   Regular municipal elections



      3.2   Election of Board members



      3.3   Election of Mayor



      3.4   Special elections and referendums




Article IV.  Organization and Administration




      4.1   Form of government



      4.2   Town Manager



      4.3   Town Clerk



      4.4   Tax Collector



      4.5   Town Attorney



      4.6   Other administrative officers and employees




Article V.  Special Assessment Provisions




      5.1   Assessment for street improvement; petition unnecessary



      5.2   Assessments for sidewalk improvement; petition
unnecessary



      5.3   Procedure; effect of assessments




Article VI.  Adoption of Ordinances by Initiative and Referendum




      6.1   Initiative ordinances generally; petitions



      6.2   Form of ballots; passage of referendum; repeal or
amendment



      6.3   Number of ordinances on ballot; limitation on number of
special elections



      6.4   Publication of notice of election



      6.5   Sufficiency of petition




Article VII.  Additional Provisions




      7.1   Development over water and anchorage of vessels



      7.2   Ocean activities



      7.3   Fishing from bridges



      7.4   Vehicles on beaches



      7.5   Removal of trees



      7.6   Building permits



   2.



   3.



   4.



   5.



   6.



   7.



   8.



   9.



   10.



   11.




GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF NORTH CAROLINA





   1989 SESSION





   RATIFIED BILL










   CHAPTER 611





   HOUSE BILL 869




AN ACT TO REVISE AND CONSOLIDATE THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF WRIGHTSVILLE
BEACH.



The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:



   Section 1.  The Charter of the Town of Wrightsville Beach is revised
and consolidated to read:



   The Charter of the Town of Wrightsville Beach.



Article I.
Incorporation, Corporate Powers and Boundaries.



Section 1.1.  Incorporation.



The Town of Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina, in New Hanover County and the
inhabitants thereof shall  continue to be a municipal body politic and
corporate, under the name of the "Town of Wrightsville Beach", hereinafter at
times referred to as the "Town."



Sec. 1.2.  Powers.



The Town shall have and may exercise all of the powers, duties, rights,
privileges and immunities conferred upon the Town of Wrightsville Beach
specifically by this Charter or upon municipal corporations by general law.
The term "general law" is employed herein as defined in G.S. 160A-1.



Sec. 1.3. Corporate limits.



The corporate limits shall be those existing at the time of ratification of
this Charter, as set forth on the official map of the Town and as they may be
altered from time to time in accordance with law. An official map of the
Town, showing the current boundaries, shall be maintained permanently in the
office of the Town Clerk and shall be available for public inspection.
Immediately upon alteration of the corporate limits made pursuant to law, the
appropriate changes to the official map shall be made and copies shall be
filed in the office of the Secretary of State, the New Hanover County
Register of Deeds and the appropriate board of elections.



Article II.
Governing Body.



Sec. 2.1. Mayor and Board of Aldermen.



The Mayor and Town Board of Aldermen, hereinafter referred to as the "Board,"
shall be the governing body of the Town.



Sec. 2.2.  Board of Aldermen; composition; terms of office.



The Board shall be composed of four members elected by all the qualified
voters of the Town for staggered terms of four years or until their
successors are elected and qualified.



Sec. 2.3.  Mayor; term of office; duties. 



The Mayor shall be elected by all the qualified voters of the Town for a term
of two years or until his or her successor is elected and qualified; shall be
the official head of the Town government and preside at meetings of the
Board; shall have the right to vote on all matters before the Board; and
shall exercise the powers and duties conferred by law or as directed by the
Board.



Sec. 2.4.  Mayor Pro Tempore. 



The Board shall elect one of its members as Mayor Pro Tempore to perform the
duties of the Mayor during his or her absence or disability, in accordance
with general law. The Mayor Pro Tempore shall serve in such capacity at the
pleasure of the other members of the Board.



Sec. 2.5.  Meetings. 



In accordance with general law, the Board shall establish a suitable time and
place for its regular meetings. Special and emergency meetings may be held as
provided by general law.



Sec. 2.6.  Voting requirements; quorum. 



Official actions of the Board and all votes shall be taken in accordance with
applicable provisions of general law, particularly G.S. 160A-75. The quorum
provisions of G.S. 160A-74 shall apply.



Sec. 2.7.  Compensation; qualifications for office; vacancies.



The compensation and qualifications of the Mayor and Board members shall be
in accordance with general law. Vacancies that occur in any elective office
of the Town shall be filled by appointment as provided in G.S. 160A-63.



Sec. 2.8.  Board of adjustment. 



Notwithstanding the provisions of G.S. 160A-388, the Town Board shall serve
as the Board of Adjustment and shall have and may exercise the same powers
and duties as are granted by law to appointed boards of adjustment.



Article III.
Elections.



Sec. 3.1.  Regular municipal elections.



  Regular municipal elections shall be held in each odd-numbered year in
accordance with the uniform municipal election laws of North Carolina.
Elections are conducted on a nonpartisan basis and the results determined
using the nonpartisan plurality method as provided in G.S. 163-292.



Sec. 3.2.  Election of Board members.



  The Board members serving on the date of ratification of this Charter
shall serve until the expiration of their term or until their successors are
elected and qualified. In the regular municipal election in 1989, and every
four years thereafter, there shall be elected two Board members to serve as
provided in Article II of this Charter. In the regular municipal election in
1991, and every four years thereafter, there shall be elected two Board
members to serve as provided in Article II.



Sec. 3.3.  Election of Mayor.



A Mayor shall be elected in each regular municipal election.



Sec. 3.4.  Special elections and referendums.



Special elections and referendums may be held only as provided by this
Charter, general law or applicable local acts of the General Assembly.



Article IV.
Organization and Administration.



Sec. 4.1.  Form of government.



The Town shall operate under the council-manager form of government, in
accordance with Part 2 of Article 7 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes.



Sec. 4.2.  Town Manager.



The Board shall appoint a Town Manager who shall be responsible for the
administration of all departments of the Town government. The Town Manager
shall have all the powers and duties conferred by general law, except as
expressly limited by the provisions of this Charter.



Sec. 4.3.  Town Clerk.



The Town Manager shall appoint a Town Clerk to keep a journal of the
proceedings of the Board; to maintain official records and documents; to give
notice of meetings; and to perform such other duties required by law or as
the Town Manager may direct.



Sec. 4.4.  Town Collector.



The Board shall appoint a Tax Collector pursuant to G.S. 105-349 to collect
all taxes owed to the Town, subject to general law, this Charter and Town
ordinances.



Sec. 4.5.  Town Attorney.



The Board shall appoint a Town Attorney licensed to practice law in North
Carolina. It shall be the duty of the Town Attorney to represent the Town,
advise Town officials and perform other duties required by law or as the
Board may direct.



Sec. 4.6.  Other administrative officers and employees.



The Board may provide for appointment of other officers and employees by the
Town Manager, and may organize the Town government as deemed appropriate,
subject to the requirements of general law.



Article V.
Special Assessment Provisions.



Sec. 5.1  Assessment for street improvements; petition unnecessary.



   (a)   In addition to any authority granted by general law, the Board
is hereby authorized to order street improvements and to assess the costs
thereof against abutting property in accordance with the provisions of this
Article.



   (b)   The Board may order street improvements and assess the total
costs thereof against abutting property, exclusive of the costs incurred at
street intersections, according to one or more of the assessment bases set
forth in Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes without the
necessity of a petition, upon the following findings of fact:



      (1)   That the street improvement project does not exceed
1,200 linear feet; and



      (2)   That such street or part thereof is unsafe for vehicular
traffic or creates a safety or health hazard and it is in the public interest
to make such improvements; or



      (3)   That it is in the public interest to connect two streets
or portions of a street already improved; or



      (4)   That it is in the public interest to widen a street, or
part thereof, which is already improved; provided that assessments for
widening any street or portion of a street without a petition shall be
limited to the cost of widening and otherwise improving such street in
accordance with street classification and improvement standards established
by the Town, as applied to the particular street or part thereof.



   (c) For the purposes of this Article, the term "street improvement"
includes grading, regrading, surfacing, resurfacing, widening, paving,
repaving, acquisition of right-of-way and construction or reconstruction of
curbs, gutters and street drainage facilities.



Sec. 5.2.  Assessments for sidewalk improvement; petition unnecessary.



In addition to any authority granted by general law, the Board is hereby
authorized, without the necessity of petition, to order sidewalk improvements
or repairs according to standards and specifications of the Town, and to
assess the total costs thereof against abutting property, according to one or
more of the assessment bases set forth in Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the
General Statutes; provided that regardless of the assessment basis or bases
employed, the Board may order the costs of sidewalk improvements made only on
one side of a street to be assessed against property abutting both sides of
such street.



Sec. 5.3.  Procedure; effect of amusements.



In ordering street and sidewalk improvements without a petition and assessing
the costs thereof under authority of this Article, the Board shall comply
with the procedures required by Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the General
Statutes, except those provisions relating to petitions of property owners
and sufficiency thereof. The effect of the act of levying assessments under
authority of this Article shall be the same as if assessments were levied
under authority of Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes.



Article VI.
Adoption of Ordinances by Initiative and Referendum.



Sec. 6.1.  Initiative ordinances generally; petitions.



Any proposed ordinance, which the Board may lawfully adopt, may be submitted
to the Board by petition signed by the voters of the Town. If the petition
accompanying the proposed ordinance is signed by voters of the Town equal in
number to at least thirty-five percent (35%) of the voters voting in the last
preceding regular election and contains a request that such ordinance be
submitted to a vote of the people if not passed by the Board, the Board shall
either: (i) adopt the ordinance without alteration within 20 days after the
Town Clerk and the New Hanover County Board of Elections have certified the
sufficiency of the accompanying petition; or (ii) within 20 days after the
Town Clerk and the New Hanover County Board of Elections have certified the
sufficiency of the petition, the Board of Aldermen shall call a special
election to be held within six months, unless a general election is fixed
within six months thereafter. At such special or general election the
ordinance shall be submitted without alteration to the voters of the Town.



Sec. 6.2.  Form of ballots; passage of referendum; repeal or amendment.



The ballots used when voting upon such ordinances shall contain these words:
"For the ordinance" (stating the nature of the proposed ordinance) and
"Against the ordinance" (stating the nature of the proposed ordinance). If a
majority of the qualified voters voting on the proposed ordinance shall vote
in favor thereof, such ordinance shall thereupon become a valid and binding
ordinance of the Town. Any ordinance proposed by petition or which shall be
adopted by the vote of the people may be repealed or amended by the Board;
provided, however, that such ordinance may not be repealed or amended earlier
than two years following the effective date of such ordinance.



Sec. 6.3  Number of ordinances on ballot; limitation on number of special
elections.



Any number of proposed ordinances may be voted upon at the same election in
accordance with the provisions of this section, but there shall not be more
than one special election in any period of six months for such purpose.



Sec. 6.4.  Publication of notice of election. 



Whenever any ordinance is required by this section to be submitted to voters
of the Town at any election, the Town Clerk shall cause such ordinance to be
published once in a newspaper published daily in New Hanover County. Such
publication shall not be more than 20 nor less than five days before the date
fixed for the special or general election.



Sec. 6.5.  Sufficiency of petition.



The petition provided for herein shall be signed by none but legal voters of
the Town. Each petition shall contain, in addition to the names of the
petitioners, the street and house number at which each petitioner resides,
and his or her age and length of residence in the Town. It shall also be
accompanied by the affidavit of one or more legal voters of the Town, stating
that the signers thereof were, at the time of the signing, legal voters of
the Town, and stating the number of signers at the time the affidavit was
made.



Article VII.
Additional Provisions.



Sec. 7.1  Development over water and anchorage of vessels.



The Town Board may regulate by ordinance development over and anchorage of
vessels on estuarine waters and over lands covered by navigable waters and
owned by the State pursuant to G.S. 146-12, that are within the zoning
jurisdiction of the Town. In addition to the authority granted in G.S.
160A-381 concerning general zoning power, the Town may also regular the
location and use of floating homes.



Sec. 7.2.  Ocean activities.



The Town Board may adopt ordinances to regulate and control swimming, surfing
and littering in the Atlantic Ocean and other waterways adjacent to the Town
and lying within its boundaries or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction
established pursuant to G.S. 160A-360; provided, however, nothing contained
herein shall be construed to permit the Town to prohibit altogether swimming
and surfing or to make these activities unlawful.



Sec. 7.3.  Fishing from bridges.



In addition to the authority granted municipalities in G.S. 160A-302.1, the
Town Board is authorized to enact ordinances prohibiting or regulating
fishing from any bridge for any purpose relating to public safety.



Sec. 7.4.  Vehicles on beaches.



Notwithstanding the provisions of G.S. 160A-308, the Town Board is authorized
to enact ordinances to regulate, restrict and prohibit the use of dune or
beach buggies, jeeps, motorcycles, cars, trucks, or any other form of
power-driven vehicle specified by the Board on the foreshore, beach strand
and barrier dune system by commercial fishermen for commercial activities.



Sec. 7.5.  Removal of trees.



The Town is authorized to enact ordinances to regulate the removal of trees
from public and private property within its jurisdiction in order to
preserve, protect and enhance one of the most valuable natural resources of
the community and to protect and enhance the public health, safety and
welfare of its citizens. Such ordinances by their terms may be made
applicable to areas over which the Town is authorized to exercise
extraterritorial jurisdiction pursuant to G.S. 160A-360 subject to approval
of any other local government units having jurisdiction over the
extraterritorial areas to be regulated. The boundaries of any
extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be designated utilizing the standards and
procedures set forth in G.S. 160A-360 and may include areas under county or
city/county jurisdiction with approval of the relevant governing body.
Provided, however, that no ordinance enacted pursuant to this section shall
apply to any agricultural land, forest land, or horticultural land as defined
in G.S. 105-277.2.



Sec. 7.6.  Building permits.



Notwithstanding the provisions of G.S. 160A-417 and Article 9 or 9C of
Chapter 143 of the General Statutes, the Town Board may require permits (as
provided by G.S. 160A-417 and Article 9 or 9C of Chapter 143 of the General
Statutes) for any construction, installation, repair, replacement or
alteration costing five thousand dollars ($5,000) or less in any single
family residence.



   Sec. 2.  The purpose of this act is to revise the Charter of the Town
of Wrightsville Beach and to consolidate certain acts concerning the
property, affairs or government of the Town. It is intended to continue
without interruption those provisions of prior acts which are expressly
consolidated into this act, so that all rights and liabilities which have
accrued are preserved and may be enforced.



   Sec. 3.  This act does not repeal or affect any acts concerning the 
property, affairs or government of public schools, or acts validating
official actions, proceedings, contracts or obligations of any kind.



   Sec. 4.  All local acts in conflict with this act are repealed. The
following acts having served the purposes for which they were enacted or
having been consolidated into this act, are expressly repealed:



Chapter 234, Private Laws of 1935



Chapter 575, Session Laws of 1949



Chapter 1113, Session Laws of 1957



Chapter 894, Session Laws of 1963



Chapter 1220, Session Laws of 1963



Chapter 519, Session Laws of 1965



   Sec. 5.  The Mayor and Aldermen serving on the date of ratification of
this act shall serve until the expiration of their term. Thereafter, those
offices shall be filled as provide in Articles II and III of the Charter
contained in Section 1 of this act.



   Sec. 6.  This act does not affect any rights or interest which arose
under any provisions repealed by this act.



   Sec. 7.  All existing ordinances, resolutions and other provisions of
the Town of Wrightsville Beach not inconsistent with the provisions of this
act shall continue in effect until repealed or amended.



   Sec. 8.  No action or proceeding pending on the effective date of this
act by or against the Town or any of its departments or agencies shall be
abated or otherwise affected by this act.



   Sec. 9.  If any provision or application of this act is held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this act
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and
to this end the provisions of this act are declared to be severable.



   Sec. 10.  Whenever a reference is made in this act to the particular
provision of the General Statutes, and such provision is later amended,
superseded or recodified, the reference shall be deemed amended to referred
to the amended General Statute, or to the General Statute which most clearly
corresponds to the statutory provision which is superseded or recodified.



   Sec. 11.  This act is effective upon ratification.



   In the General Assembly read three times and ratified this the 11th day
of July, 1989.



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Chapter



   10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of construction



   10.07   Revivor; effect of repeal



   10.08   Conflicting provisions



   10.09   Severability



   10.10   Reference to other sections



   10.11   Reference to offices



   10.12   Errors and omissions



   10.13   Official time



   10.14   Reasonable time



   10.15   Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances



   10.16   Ordinances repealed



   10.17   Ordinances unaffected



   10.18   Ordinances saved



   10.19   Amendments to code; amendatory language



   10.20   Damaging ordinances prohibited



   10.21   Effective date of ordinances



   10.22   Ordinances confined to one subject



   10.23   Official copy of ordinance



   10.24   Ordinances adding to code



 



   10.98   Remedies



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections
shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the Town of Wrightsville
Beach, North Carolina" and may be so cited.  Such code may also be cited as
"Wrightsville Beach, Town Code," or "the code."



('72 Code, § l-l)



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)  Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation
of the General Statutes of North Carolina.



   (B)  Where a section of this code is followed by a reference to the
General Statutes of North Carolina, the reference indicates that the section
is analogous or similar to the cited sections in the General Statutes of
North Carolina. Footnotes, cross-references, and other comments are by way of
explanation only and should not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



   (C)  All provisions of this code are limited in application to the
territorial boundaries of the town although the provisions may not be so
limited specifically.  Nothing herein contained is intended to conflict with
or supercede applicable state or federal laws.



   (D)  Code, title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any
part of the law as contained in the code.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I not incompatible with future legislation
shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this
code unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   The captions of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of the sections nor as any part of the section, nor,
unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of the
sections, including the captions are amended or re-enacted.



('72 Code, § l-4)



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code, unless otherwise specifically provided,
the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings.



   "BOARD OF ALDERMEN."  The governing body of the Town of Wrightsville
Beach, North Carolina.



   "BOND."  When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be
sufficient.



   "COMPUTATION OF TIME."  The time within which an act is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if
the last day is Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded.



   "COUNTY."  The County of New Hanover, in the State of North Carolina,
except as otherwise provided.



   "IN THE TOWN."  Any territory, jurisdiction of which for the exercise
of its regulatory power has been conferred on the town by public or private
law.



   "MAYOR."  Mayor of Wrightsville Beach.



   "MONTH."  A calendar month.



   "OATH."  Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words swear
and sworn shall be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed.



   "OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD."  Whenever certain hours are named in this
code, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in
current use in this town.



   "OWNER."  Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of
the whole or a part of such building or land.



   "PERSON."  A corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual.



   "PERSONAL PROPERTY."  Every species of property except real property,
as herein defined.



   "PRECEDING, FOLLOWING."  Next before and next after, respectively.



   "PROPERTY."  Includes real and personal property.



   "REAL PROPERTY."  Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.



   "SIDEWALK."  Any portion of a street, between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



   "SIGNATURE" or "SUBSCRIPTION."  Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



   "STATE."  The State of North Carolina, except as otherwise provided.



   "STREET."  Includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue,
boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge, and the approaches thereto
within the town and shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way between
abutting property lines.



   "TENANT" or "OCCUPANT."  Applied to a building or land shall include
any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.



   "TOWN."  Town of Wrightsville Beach, except as otherwise provided.



   "WRITING" or "WRITTEN."  Includes printing and any other mode of
representing words and letters.



('72 Code, § l-2)



§ 10.06  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this town shall be by the
following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.



   (A)  "AND" or "OR."  Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written "and/or," if the sense requires it.



   (B)  Acts by assistants.  When a statute requires an act to be done
which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.



   (C)  Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the past or present tense shall
include the future, if applicable.



   (D)  General term.  A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



   (E)  Joint authority.  Words importing joint authority to three or
more persons shall be construed as authority to a majority of these persons,
unless otherwise declared in the law giving the authority.



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning rules of construction, see G.S. § 12-3. 



   For provisions concerning computation of time, see G.S. § l-593



§ 10.07  REVIVOR; EFFECT OF REPEAL.



   Whenever an ordinance is repealed, which repealed a former ordinance,
the original ordinance shall not thereby be revived, unless it shall be so
expressly provided.



§ 10.08  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of the
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail.  If the conflicting
provisions bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as
to be consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the subject matter taken
as a whole.



§ 10.09  SEVERABILITY.



   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Board of Aldermen that
the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this code are
severable.  If any phrases, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this
code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid
judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining
phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this code, since the
same would have been enacted by the Board of Aldermen without the
incorporation in this code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase,
clause, sentence, paragraph, or section.



('72 Code, § l-5)



§ 10.10  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.11  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the town exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.12  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted that will conform wth the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.13  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal law,
shall be the official time within the town of the transaction of all county
business.



Statutory reference:



   Computation of time, see G.S.  § l-593



§ 10.14  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)  In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)  In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this
code, by order of any court, or by any applicable statute, the day of the
act, event, or default from which the designated period of time begins to run
shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed is to be
included unless it is a Saturday; a Sunday; a legal holiday as defined by
state statute; or a day the office in which the act is to be done is closed
during regular business hours.  In any event, the period runs until the end
of the next day that is not a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday, or a day
on which the office is closed. When the period of time allowed is less than
seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, legal holidays, and days on
which the office is closed shall be excluded from the computations.




Statutory reference:




   Computation of time, see G.S. § l-593



§ 10.15  PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATIONS OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.



   The provisions appearing in this code, so fas as they are the same as
those of the ordinances included herein, shall be considered as continuations
thereof and not as new enactments.



('72 Code, § l-3)



§ 10.16  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 10.17  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.18  ORDINANCES SAVED.



   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
legislative body or a certain town officer or employee to make additional
ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the
ordinance, all ordinances and regulations  of a similar nature serving that
purpose effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto,
shall remain in effect and are saved.



§ 10.19  AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.



   (A)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend,
repeal, or in any way affect this code, may be numbered in accordance with
the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein.



In the case of repealed chapters, sections, and subsections, or any part
thereof, by subsequent ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from
this code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby.  The subsequent
ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall
be prima facie evidence of subsequent ordinances until a time that this code
and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a new code by
the Board of Aldermen.



   (B)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this code may be made by
amending these provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
code in the following language:  "That section             of the Code
of Ordinances, Town of Wrightsville Beach, is hereby amended to read as
follows:                                             
    ."  The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.



   (C)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the code is
to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of
Ordinances, Town of Wrightsville Beach, is hereby amended by adding a section
to be numbered, which section reads as follows:                    
  ."  The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.



§ 10.20  DAMAGING ORDINANCES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall tear or deface any of the town ordinances.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 10.21  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances shall be effective after the ratification thereof except
ordinances specifying some other effective date or ordinance required by
state law to be effective only after having met specific date requirements.



('72 Code, § l-7)



§ 10.22  ORDINANCES CONFINED TO ONE SUBJECT.



   All ordinances shall be confined to one subject.  Appropriation
ordinances dealing with several items shall be deemed to consist of only one
subject.



('72 Code, § l-8)



§ 10.23  OFFICIAL COPY OF ORDINANCE.



   A true copy of an ordinance which has been duly enacted by the Board of
Aldermen, signed by the Mayor, and attested to by the Town Clerk shall be
known as an official copy of any ordinance for the town.  All ordinances or
a true copy thereof shall be inserted in this code in the proper chapter.



('72 Code, § l-9)



§ 10.24  ORDINANCES ADDING TO CODE.



   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the code a new title,
chapter, or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the title, chapter, or section.



§ 10.98  REMEDIES.



   Any ordinance contained herein may be enforced by other remedies, as
authorized in G.S. 160A-175, including the imposition of civil fines, the
ordering of appropriate equitable relief, including injunctions, or a
combination of remedies.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided in the code, a violation of any
provision of the code is a misdemeanor or infraction as provided by G.S. §
14-4 punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding $50 or by
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days. An ordinance may provide by express
statement that the maximum fine, term of imprisonment, or infraction penalty
to be imposed for violation is some amount of money or number of days less
than the maximum imposed by G.S. § 14-4.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided in the code, a violation of any
provision of the code shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the
amount of $50 to be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of
debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within ten days after having
been cited for violation of the ordinance.



   (C)   The provisions of the code may be enforced by an appropriate
equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (D)   Each day's continuing violation of any provisions of the code
shall be a separate and distinct offense.



   (E)   The provisions of the code may be enforced by any one, all, or
a combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed by G.S. § 160A-175
and this section.



(Ord. 1360, passed 4-13-00)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



Chapter



   30.   BOARD OF ALDERMEN



   31.   TOWN OFFICIALS



   32.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS



   33.   FINANCE



CHAPTER 30:  BOARD OF ALDERMAN



Section




   30.01   Governing body





   30.02   Powers and duties generally





   30.03   Ordinance book





   30.04   Form of government





   30.05   Committees





   30.06   Regular meetings





   30.07   Special meetings





   30.08   Presiding officer





   30.09   Quorum





   30.10   Minutes to be kept





   30.11   Rules of procedure




Cross-reference:



   Election of Board, see Charter Sec. 3.2



   Term, see Charter Sec. 2.2



   Vacancies, see Charter Sec. 2.7



§ 30.01  GOVERNING BODY.



   The governing body of the town shall consist of a Mayor and Board of
Aldermen of four members.  The governing body shall be charged with the
general government and administration of the affairs of the town.



Cross-reference:



   Board as governing body of town;  members, see Charter Sec. 3



Statutory reference:



   Board to organize town government, see G.S. § 160A-146



§ 30.02  POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.



   The powers and duties of the governing body shall be set out in the
General Statutes of North Carolina, the town Charter, and the ordinances of
the town.



Cross-reference:



   Powers and duties, see Charter Sec. 7



Statutory reference:



   General power, see G.S. § 160A-67



§ 30.03  ORDINANCE BOOK.



   The Clerk shall file a true copy of each ordinance, until it is
codified in this code, in an ordinance book or a file separate and apart from
the Board of Aldermen's minute book.  The ordinance book or file shall be
appropriately indexed and maintained for public inspection in the office of
the Clerk.



Statutory reference:



   For similar requirements, see G.S. § 160A-78



§ 30.04  FORM OF GOVERNMENT.



   The town shall operate under the Council-Manager form of government in
accordance with G.S. Ch. 160A, Article 7, Part 2, and any Charter provisions
not in conflict therewith.



§ 30.05  COMMITTEES.



   The Mayor and Board of Aldermen may create such committees of the Board
for special purposes as they deem best.



('72 Code, § 2-10)



§ 30.06  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   The regular meetings of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen of the town
shall be held at least once monthly at a time and place as shall be fixed by
the Board of Aldermen.  The Board of Aldermen may, in its discretion, change
the meeting schedule after first giving proper notice.



('72 Code, §2-4) (Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-90; Ord. 1224, passed 1-20-94; Am.
Ord. 1520, passed 9-14-06)



Statutory reference:



   Regular meetings, see G.S. § 160A-71



§ 30.07  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   Special meetings of the Board of Aldermen may be held according to the
procedures set out in the applicable general statutes.



Statutory reference:



   Special meetings, see G.S. § 160A-71



§ 30.08  PRESIDING OFFICER.



   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Aldermen.  In
his absence, the Mayor Pro Tempore shall preside.



('72 Code, § 2-9)



Cross-reference:



   Mayor as presiding officer, see Charter Sec. 4



§ 30.09  QUORUM.



   A majority of the members of the Board of Aldermen shall constitute a
quorum.  No official business of the town shall be transacted by the Board
unless a quorum is present.



('72 Code, § 2-6)



Statutory reference:



   Quorum, see G.S. § 160A-74



§ 30.10  MINUTES TO BE KEPT.



   The Town Clerk or Assistant Town Clerk shall be present at all the
meetings of the Board of Aldermen and shall keep in a book provided for that
purpose a record of all the proceedings of the Board.



('72 Code, § 2-7)  (Ord., passed 6-27-74)



Statutory reference:



   Minutes to be kept, see G.S. § 160A-72



§ 30.11  RULES OF PROCEDURE.



   The Board of Aldermen may adopt rules of procedure not inconsistent
with the Town Charter, general law, or generally accepted principles of
parliamentary procedure.



Statutory reference:



   Rules of procedure, G.S § 160A-71



CHAPTER 31:  TOWN OFFICIALS



Section




General Provisions





   31.01   Officers and employees





   31.02   Official bonds; premiums to be paid by town





   31.03   Consolidation of offices





   31.04   Employees serve at pleasure of Board





   31.05   Conflicts of interest prohibited





   31.06   Criminal history checks





Officials





   31.20   Building Inspector





   31.21   Finance Director





   31.22   Director of Public Works




GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.01  OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



   Such officers and employees as are deemed necessary shall be appointed
by the Board of Aldermen.  All officers and employees shall serve at the
pleasure of the Board and receive such compensation as from time to time is
prescribed by the Board.



('72 Code, § 2-2)



§ 31.02  OFFICIAL BONDS; PREMIUMS TO BE PAID BY TOWN.



   The Town Clerk and other officers or employees required by the Board of
Aldermen shall, before entering upon their duties, post bond in amounts
specified by the Board.  All bond premiums shall be paid from town funds;
however, when two offices are combined, such as Clerk and Treasurer, only one
bond shall be required.



('72 Code, § 2-3)



Statutory reference:



   Fidelity bonds, see G.S. § 159-29



§ 31.03  CONSOLIDATION OF OFFICES.



   Except as otherwise provided by law, the Board may in its discretion
consolidate any two or more offices and assign the duties of both offices to
one or more persons.



§ 31.04  EMPLOYEES SERVE AT PLEASURE OF BOARD.



   All employees elected or appointed by the Board of Aldermen shall hold
their office at the pleasure of the Board and may be removed at any time by
the Board.



§ 31.05  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST PROHIBITED.



   No member of the Board of Aldermen shall be pecuniarily interested,
directly or indirectly, in any contract made or entered into by the Board,
nor in any matter where the rights or liabilities of the town are, or may be,
involved, except as allowed by state law.



Statutory reference:



   Conflict of interest, see G.S. § 14-234



§ 31.06  CRIMINAL HISTORY CHECKS.



   In order to protect the citizens of the town and their properties, the
procedures herein are established to provide for fingerprinting and criminal
history checks on all final applicants for regular full and part-time
positions in the town government. Subject to division (C) of this section,
employment with the town may be denied for those persons convicted of any
crime against a person, or crimes against property where intent is an
element, or any drug or gambling related offense.



   (A)   The Town Manager, or designee, shall conduct an investigation
of any final candidate for a permanent full-time or permanent part-time
position with the town government and it shall be a precondition of
employment that an applicant for such a position shall upon request, provide
fingerprints and all other necessary personal identification including a
birth certificate, social security number and drivers license, if available,
so that the Town Manager, or designee, may cause a thorough search to be made
of local and state criminal records to determine if the applicant has a
history of criminal convictions or the crimes enumerated above by use of the
Police Information Network (PIN).



   (B)   The Police Department shall provide the findings from the use
of the PIN to the Town Manager or designee, provided that all necessary
agreements with the State Bureau of Investigations Division of Criminal
Information have been executed.



(Ord. 1469, passed 9-30-04)



OFFICIALS



§ 31.20  BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   For provisions concerning the Building Inspector, see §§ 151.110 and
155.125.



(Am. Ord., 1108, passed 1-11-90)



§ 31.21  FINANCE DIRECTOR.



   The position of Finance Director for the town is hereby established
pursuant to G.S. § 159-24.



§ 31.22  DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.



   The Director of Public Works shall be knowledgeable of general public
works operations including all work of the various divisions within the
Department of Public Works.  He shall, under the general direction of the
Town Manager, be responsible for planning and directing the activities of the
Department of Public Works, operations to include the four major divisions
within the Department (Water and Sewer, Streets and Sanitation, Equipment and
Building Maintenance, and Land Use and Building).  He shall prepare and
assist in preparing long and short term public works improvements for
approval by the Town Manager and Board of Aldermen.  He shall assist in the
development of and coordinate budget requests so as to develop an overall
public works program for the town.  For the purposes of administration, the
Town Manager shall place under the direct supervision of the Director of
Public Works such divisions as he deems to be necessary for efficient public
works operations.



CHAPTER 32:  DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS



Section



Fire Department



   32.01   Establishment of the Fire Department



   32.02   Fire Department members



   32.03   Duties and responsibilities of the Fire Chief



   32.04   Chain of command



   32.05   Fire Department members subject to personnel ordinances of
the town



   32.06   Relationship of Fire Department and volunteer members



Planning Board



   32.10   Creation



   32.11   Composition; filling vacancies



   32.12   Organization; meetings; records



   32.13   Powers and duties



Police Department



   32.20   Organization



   32.21   Duties of Chief



   32.22   Duties of police



   32.23   Town Manager to supervise



   32.24   Uniforms



   32.25   Requirements of employment



   32.26   Issuance of civil penalties



   32.27   Reserve Police Division



Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee



   32.35   Creation; appointment of members



   32.36   Length of appointment



   32.37   Powers and duties



   32.38   Meetings



   32.39   Attendance



   32.40   Compensation



   32.41   Officers



   32.42   Officers' duties



   32.43   Sub-committees



   32.44   By-laws



Historic Landmark Commission



   32.46   Historic Landmark Commission



   32.47   Appointment and tenure of members



   32.48   Composition



   32.49   Attendance at meetings



   32.50   Rules of procedure



   32.51   Meetings open to the public



   32.52   Authority and power



   32.53   Design review process for Certificate of Appropriateness



Marketing Advisory Committee



   32.55   Creation and purpose



   32.56   Composition and appointment of members



   32.57   Organization; meetings; records



   32.58   Responsibility, powers, and duties



   32.59   Compensation



FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 32.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   The Fire Department is hereby established to consist of a Chief and a
sufficient number of fire fighters, volunteer and paid, to maintain and
operate the department.  The department and all members, both volunteer and
paid, shall operate under the general direction of the Chief. The Fire Chief
is appointed by and works under the general direction of the Town Manager.
The Board of Aldermen is responsible for providing funding for the operation
of the Fire Department and payment of all expenses associated therewith and
for establishing policy, procedures and all other matters related to the Fire
Department, which matters shall be implemented through the Town Manager and
subsequently the Fire Chief.



(Ord. 1240, passed 8-25-94)



§ 32.02  FIRE DEPARTMENT MEMBERS.



   (A)   The Fire Department shall consist of both volunteer and paid
members.



   (B)   The Fire Chief shall be responsible for establishing ranks
within the Fire Department. The Chief shall do so in accordance with existing
town ordinances, policies and other applicable federal or state laws and
regulations.  All members of the Fire Department, both paid and volunteer,
shall be eligible to hold rank.



(Ord. 1240, passed 8-25-94)



§ 32.03  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FIRE CHIEF.



   The duties and responsibilities of the Fire Chief shall include, but
not necessarily be limited to, the following:



   (A)   Acting as the Chief Executive Officer for the Department and
being held accountable to the Town Manager and Board of Aldermen for the
supervision and oversight of the department.



   (B)   Being held responsible to the Town Manager and Board of
Aldermen for the promulgation of orders, regulations, and policies made or
given by or through the Town Manager relating to the Fire Chief's duties and
those of his department.



   (C)   Conferring with and being advised by the Town Manager on all
important matters not otherwise provided for in the regulations, policies and
ordinances.



   (D)   Performing all duties as required by the North Carolina
General Statutes, the Town Charter, the code of ordinances, and the policies
developed for the Fire Department by the town.



   (E)   Controlling and being responsible for all actions of the Fire
Department and its employees, both full-time and volunteer.



   (F)   Establishing and maintaining policies  for recruitment and
selection of volunteer members of the Fire Department, such policies to be
consistent with existing recruitment policies of the town.



   (G)   Inspecting, on a regular basis, the equipment of the Fire
Department.



   (H)   Supervising the fighting and extinguishing of all fires.



   (I)   Exercising authority at all fire scenes to ensure that fires
are expediently extinguished and that persons inhibiting the fire fighting
function do not interfere.



   (J)   Causing all fire hydrants to be inspected at least once every
six months and report to the Town Manager the results of the inspections.



   (K)   Ensuring that complete and accurate records regarding all
departmental activity are maintained.



   (L)   Assuming the duties of the Fire Prevention Officer.



   (M)   Investigating, or causing the investigation of, all fires
occurring within the town in an effort to ascertain the cause of each fire.



   (N)   Developing and maintaining an appropriate recruitment and
training program for the department.



   (O)   Coordinating the fire inspection program for the town.



   (P)   Serving as emergency preparedness coordinator.



   (Q)   Performing other duties as required. (Ord. 1240, passed
8-25-94)



§ 32.04  CHAIN OF COMMAND.



   (A)   The Fire Chief shall be responsible, subject to the approval
of the Town Manager, for establishing a chain of command for the Fire
Department.



   (B)   All members of the Fire Department, both paid and volunteer,
shall be obligated to comply and act in accordance with the chain of command
for the Fire Department so established by the Fire Chief.



(Ord. 1240, passed 8-25-94)



§ 32.05  FIRE DEPARTMENT MEMBERS SUBJECT TO PERSONNEL ORDINANCES OF THE
TOWN.



   (A)   All paid members of the Fire Department shall be subject to
certain sections of the personnel policies of the town.



   (B)   Volunteer members of the Fire Department shall be subject to
certain sections of the personnel policies, such sections to include the
following:



      (1)   Recruitment policies as set forth in the personnel
policies to include, but not necessarily limited to Equal Opportunity
Employment Policy, Equal Opportunity Employment Responsibility, Recruitment,
Implementation, Recruitment Sources, Job Advertisements, Applications for
Employment, Application File, Selection, Qualifications and  Standards, and
any amendments to or substitutions for these sections.



      (2)   In keeping with the council-manager form of government,
all appointments to the Fire Department, both paid and volunteer, shall be
subject to the final approval of the Town Manager.  Appointments to vacant
positions shall be based upon the recommendations made by the Fire Chief.



      (3)   Promotions policies and any amendments to or
substitutions for this section.



      (4)   The grievance procedures and procedures for disciplinary
action to include but not be limited to oral reprimand, written reprimand,
suspension, demotion, and dismissal as set forth in Chapter 34 of the town
code.



      (5)   The provisions of the personnel policies regarding
personnel records to include Personnel Records Maintenance, Personnel
Records, Basic Information Maintenance, Access to Personnel Records, Former
Employees, Remedies of Employees Objecting to Material in File, Penalty for
Permitting Access to Confidential File by Unauthorized Person, Disposal of
Records Regulated, and Violations, or any amendments to or substitutions for
these sections.



      (6)   Restriction on the use of confidential information or
any amendments to or substitutions for this section.



   (C)   In addition to the provisions of the personnel policies to
which volunteer and paid members of the Fire Department are subject, all
volunteer and paid members of the Fire Department shall be subject to rules
and regulations adopted for the operation of the Fire Department by the Fire
Chief acting under the supervision of the Town Manager.



(Ord. 1240, passed 8-25-94; Am. Ord. 1489, passed 1-12-06)



§ 32.06  RELATIONSHIP OF FIRE DEPARTMENT AND VOLUNTEER MEMBERS.



   (A)   The Board of Aldermen recognizes that historically the
volunteer members of the Fire Department have organized into a group for the
purpose of enhancing their capability as fire fighters and improving fire
suppression services provided to the town. The Board of Aldermen recognizes
the right of the volunteer members to organize into such a volunteer group
known as the "Wrightsville Beach Volunteer Firefighters Association," (herein
"WBVFA") provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall be construed
to authorize any activities which are in violation of the restrictions of
G.S. Ch. 95, Art. 12.



   (B)   (1)   The responsibility for: (a) establishing recruitment
policies for volunteer members; (b) selecting volunteer members consistent
with existing town policies; (c) establishing and maintaining training and
performance standards for volunteer members; (d) terminating participation by
volunteer members in the Fire Department; and (e) managing and supervising
the activities of volunteer members while participating as members of the
Fire Department is given to the Town Manager acting through the Fire Chief.



      (2)   Prior to implementing changes to (a) recruitment and
selection policies of volunteer members or (b) training and performance
standards for volunteer members, the town will use its best efforts to
consult with officers of the WBVFA regarding such matters; provided, however,
that nothing contained herein shall obligate the town to consult with WBVFA,
and the town shall be and remain responsible for all such actions as they
relate to volunteer members of the Fire Department. In the event WBVFA is
dissatisfied with such changes in recruitment and selection policies of
volunteer members or training and performance standards for volunteer
members, it may request a meeting regarding such changes with the Fire
Chief.  If after meeting with the Fire Chief, WBVFA continues to be
dissatisfied with such changes, it may request a meeting regarding those
matters with the Town Manager. Any such request shall be in writing, shall
specifically state the concerns of WBVFA and shall be signed by the President
of WBVFA. The request shall be presented to the Fire Chief. Upon receipt of a
request in proper form, the Fire Chief will forward such request to the Town
Manager who will set a date and a time for a meeting to consider the concerns
of WBVFA. Such meeting will be attended by town personnel as deemed
appropriate by the Town Manager. Officers of WBVFA may attend but the meeting
will not be open to the general membership of WBVFA. The Town Manager shall
give a written response to the concerns of WBVFA following such meeting and
the Manager's decision in such matter shall be final.



   (C)   WBVFA may use the fire station as a meeting place subject to
rules and regulations and scheduling as approved by the Fire Chief.



   (D)   Because of the relationship between the Fire Department and
WBVFA, there is the possibility that the general public may confuse the two
organizations.  The volunteer members of the Fire Department have
historically solicited funds from members of the community.  The town does
not intend to restrict the ability of WBVFA to solicit funds on its own, but
all such solicitations must clearly state that they are being made on behalf
of WBVFA and no town funds may be used in conjunction with such solicitation
efforts.



   (E)   (1)   All equipment used by volunteer and paid members of
the Fire Department shall be owned by the town. The town acknowledges that it
has been the policy of the volunteer members of the Fire Department to
purchase equipment for use by members of the Fire Department. The town
acknowledges the debt that it owes to the volunteer Fire Department members
for their efforts in obtaining equipment for the Fire Department. However, 
in order to eliminate any question regarding ownership of property used by
members of the Fire Department, it is hereby declared that all such property
is property of the town.



      (2)   All equipment purchased by WBVFA for use by the Fire
Department shall be formally offered to the town and accepted by the Board of
Aldermen. The Town Manager is hereby authorized to act as agent for the Board
of Aldermen and to accept equipment purchased by WBVFA for use by the Fire
Department and having a value of $500 or less.



   (F)   In the event WBVFA chooses to use some of its funds raised
through solicitation or otherwise for the purpose of providing training for
members of the Fire Department, both paid and volunteer, such funds shall
only be utilized in a manner as approved by the Fire Chief.  In no event
shall there be a co-mingling of town funds with funds of WBVFA.



   (G)   The Town Manager is ultimately responsible for the operation
of the Fire Department in a manner consistent with direction given by the
Board of Aldermen. All members of the Fire Department, both paid and
volunteer, shall be subject to rules and regulations regarding operation of
the Fire Department as promulgated by the Town Manager and the Fire Chief.



(Ord. 1240, passed 8-25-94)



PLANNING BOARD



§ 32.10  CREATION.



   Pursuant to state law, G.S. § 160A-361, a Planning Board for the town
is hereby created.



('72 Code, § 2-12)  (Ord., passed 3-20-69)



§ 32.11  COMPOSITION; FILLING VACANCIES.



   The Planning Board shall consist of seven members, all of whom shall be
citizens of the town and appointed by the Board of Aldermen.  All members
shall be appointed for two-year terms or until a successor is appointed. 
Members' terms shall run from February 1 through January 31.  No member of
the Planning Board shall serve more than three consecutive terms.  Vacancies
occurring for reasons other than expiration of terms shall be filled as they
occur by the Board of Aldermen for the period of the unexpired term.



('72 Code, § 2-13)  (Ord., passed 3-20-69; Am. Ord., passed 6-27-74; Am.
Ord. 1170, passed 3-12-92; Am. Ord. 1329, passed 3-11-99; Am. Ord. 1654,
passed 4-14-11)



§ 32.12  ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS; RECORDS.



   (A)   There shall be a Chairman and Vice Chairman elected annually
by the Board members at the regular meeting in February.  The Board shall
adopt Rules of Procedure which shall  be  effective  following approval by
the Board of Aldermen.  The Board shall keep minutes of meetings, records of
the members' attendance and resolutions, discussions, findings and
recommendations, all of which minutes and such records shall be furnished to
the Board of Aldermen.  The records shall be considered public records. 
The Board shall hold at least one meeting each month and all meetings shall
be open to the public and subject to the provisions of G.S. Chapter 143,
Article 33C regarding open meetings.



   (B)   The Board of Aldermen shall have the authority to remove any
member who misses three consecutive regular meetings or more than four total
meetings during his or her membership on the Planning Board.  It shall be
the responsibility of the Chairman of the Planning Board to advise the Board
of Aldermen of any member who misses three consecutive regular meetings or
more than a total of four meetings.  In the event the Board of Aldermen
removes a member because of his or her failure to comply with the attendance
requirements set forth herein, the Board of Aldermen shall notify the
Chairman of the Planning Board, in writing, that the member has been
removed.  Each member shall notify the Chairman or the Planning staff at
least 48 hours before a regular meeting when an absence is anticipated.



('72 Code, § 2-14)  (Ord., passed 3-20-69; Am. Ord., passed 6-27-74; Am.
Ord. 1170, passed 3-12-92; Am. Ord. 1252, passed 5-25-95)



Statutory reference:



   Meetings open to public, see G.S. § 143-318.10



§ 32.13  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Planning Board shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)  Studies.  To make careful studies of present conditions and the
probable future development of the town and its environs.  Such studies may
include but are not limited to land use surveys; population studies; economic
base studies; schools, parks, and recreation studies; traffic studies; and
urban renewal studies.



   (B)  Comprehensive plan.  To formulate and maintain a comprehensive
plan of the town and its environs for the purpose of achieving a coordinated,
adjusted, and harmonious development of the municipality which would promote,
in accordance with present and future needs, the safety, morals, order,
convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of its citizens; efficiency and
economy in the process of development; convenience of traffic; safety from
fire and other dangers; adequate light and air; healthful and convenient
distribution of population; provision of adequate open spaces; good civic
design and arrangement; wise and efficient expenditures of public funds;
adequate provision for public utilities; and other matters pertaining to
public requirements.  The comprehensive plan shall consist of a number of
parts which may include but not be limited to the following:  a land use
plan, a major thoroughfare plan, a utilities plan, a plan for economic
development, a recreation plan, a school plan, and a community facilities
plan.



   (C)   Zoning ordinances.  To suggest revisions from time to time to
the existing zoning ordinances and to make other recommendations as the
Planning Board deems appropriate from time to time to the Board of Aldermen
regarding zoning ordinances.



   (D)  Subdivision regulations.  To suggest revisions from time to time
to the existing subdivision regulations and to make other recommendations as
the Planning Board deems appropriate from time to time to the Board of
Aldermen regarding subdivision ordinances.



   (E)  Powers of review.  To review and make recommendations to the
Board of Aldermen upon the extent, location, and design of all public
structures and facilities; on the acquisition and disposal of public
properties; on the opening, abandonment, widening, extension, narrowing, or
other change to streets and other public ways; and on the construction,
extension, expansion, or abandonment of utilities, whether publicly or
privately owned.  However, in the absence of a recommendation from the
Planning Board after the expiration of 30 days from the date on which the
question has been submitted in writing to the Board, the Board of Aldermen
may if it deems wise, take final action.



   (F)  Annual report.  To submit, in April of each year, to the Board
of Aldermen, a report of its activities, for the preceding year.



   (G)   Prior approval by the Board of Aldermen.  In exercising the
powers and duties set forth herein, the Planning Board is authorized to
appoint committees made up in whole or in part of citizens of the town who
are not members of the Planning Board.  Provided, however, that the creation
of the committees and the appointments thereto shall be subject to the prior
approval of the Board of Aldermen.



   (H)    Staff support.  The Town Manager shall be responsible for
appointing staff personnel to support the activities of the Planning Board. 
The Town Manager shall designate those staff members so appointed in writing
and shall provide a copy of the designation to the Planning Board Chairman. 
The Planning Board shall not utilize the services of any staff personnel
other than those so designated without the prior approval of the Town Manager.



('72 Code, § 2-16)  (Ord., passed 3-20-69; Am. Ord. 1170, passed 3-12-92)



Statutory reference:



   Planning Board duties, see G.S. § 160A-361



POLICE DEPARTMENT



§ 32.20  ORGANIZATION.



   The Police Department of the town shall consist of a Chief and as many
police officers as the Board of Aldermen shall from time to time determine
and elect, and as many police officers as the Mayor and Board of Aldermen may
deem necessary to appoint for special purposes.



('72 Code, § 16-l)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to establish, see G.S. § 160A-281



§ 32.21  DUTIES OF CHIEF.



   The Chief of Police shall have control over the Police Department under
the general supervision of  the Town Manager.  The  Chief  shall  keep 
the Town  Manager informed  of the Department's activities and make such
reports as the Town Manager may from time to time require.  He shall perform
other duties as may be required of him by the Board of Aldermen and Town
Manager.



('72 Code, § 16-2)



§ 32.22  DUTIES OF POLICE.



   The Police Department shall carry out all orders of the Board of
Aldermen and Town Manager, shall enforce all laws of the state, all
provisions of this code and other ordinances of the town, and shall at all
times preserve the peace and protect the property and the safety of the
citizens of the town.



('72 Code, § 16-3)



Statutory reference:



   Powers and duties, see G.S. § 160A-285



§ 32.23  TOWN MANAGER TO SUPERVISE.



   The Town Manager shall have general supervision over the Police
Department.



('72 Code, § 16-4)



§ 32.24  UNIFORMS.



   All police officers shall wear uniforms provided by the town and shall
keep such uniforms in a neat and clean condition.  They shall surrender all
uniforms and equipment upon leaving the police service of the town.



('72 Code, § 16-5)



§ 32.25  REQUIREMENTS OF EMPLOYMENT.



   Each person appointed as a police officer shall meet all requirements
established by the North Carolina General Statutes and appropriate state
regulatory agencies.



Statutory reference:



   Oath of office, see G.S. § 160A-284



   State law requirements, see G.S. § 17C-10



§ 32.26  ISSUANCE OF CIVIL PENALTIES.



   Police officers employed by the town shall have the authority to issue
civil penalty citations for all town ordinances made specifically punishable
by civil penalty.  In addition, the Ocean Rescue Director, the Lifeguard
Captain, and any Park Ranger shall have the authority to issue civil penalty
citations for all town ordinances made specifically punishable by civil
penalty.



(Ord., passed 8-10-78; Am. Ord. 1138, passed 3-14-91; Am. Ord. 1475, passed
4-14-05)



§ 32.27  RESERVE POLICE DIVISION.



   (A)   There is established within the Police Department, as a
division thereof, a Reserve Police Division. This Division shall be a
volunteer organization composed of as many members as may from time to time
be determined by the Police Chief and approved by the Town Manager.



   (B)   The Division shall be under the direct control of the Chief of
Police or his or her designee, acting under the general supervision of the
Town Manager. Members of the Division when on active duty shall be subject to
the same chain of command within the Police Department as are regular
officers. Provided further, that members of the Division while on active duty
shall obey the instructions of regular officers in carrying out their duties.
All appointments and removals of members of this Division shall be made at
the discretion of the Chief of Police.



   (C)   The Reserve Police Division shall have no commanding officer,
or any officers other than the Chief of Police or his or her designee and all
members shall bear the rank of Police Officer I. The Chief of Police shall
provide for adequate training and establish policies and procedures
regulating the conduct and performance of members of the Division, and of
candidates for membership.



   (D)   The duties of the Division, subject at all times to the
direction, supervision and control of the Chief of Police or his or her
designee, shall be to assist the regular members of the Police Department in
the enforcement of law and the maintenance of peace and order when called to
active duty by the Chief of Police or his or her designee. The Chief shall,
by order, establish rules and regulations to govern the Division, to fix the
specific duties of its members, and to provide for the maintenance of
discipline. Members of the Division shall obey the instructions of regular
police officers in carrying out their duties. The Chief may prescribe other
duties than those mentioned herein to be performed by the Division, with
approval of the Town Manager.



   (E)  An identification card and other insignia or evidence of identity
as the Chief may prescribe shall be issued to each member of the Division,
who must carry the card and other identification at all times while on duty,
and who must surrender them upon the termination of membership.



   (F)   No member of the Division shall, while on duty, carry or use
any firearm other than a type approved or issued at the direction of the
Chief of Police.



   (G)   No member or members of the Division shall enforce, nor
attempt to enforce, any law, except within the normal jurisdiction of the
town. Reserve Officers will at all times conduct themselves in the same
manner and under the same limitations as regular police officers as described
by North Carolina General Statutes, town ordinances and Police Department
Standard Operating Procedures.



   (H)  While undergoing official training and while performing duties on
behalf of the town pursuant to orders or instructions of the Chief of Police,
members of the Division shall be entitled to benefits under the North
Carolina Workmen's Compensation Act pursuant to G.S. § 160A-282(a).



(Ord. passed 12-7-78; Am. Ord. 1271, passed 5-9-96; Am. Ord. 1416, passed
6-13-02)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to establish, see G.S. § 160A-282



   Oath of office, see G.S. § 160A-284



PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE



§ 32.35  CREATION; APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.



   There is created the Town Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee
composed of seven citizens of the town.  Each member of the Committee shall
be appointed by the Board of Aldermen.



(Ord., passed 7-25-74; Am. Ord. 1298, passed 1-22-98; Am. Ord. 1472, passed
2-24-05; Am. Ord. 1492, passed 1-26-06; Am. Ord. 1646, passed 2-10-11; Am.
Ord. 1668, passed 1-12-12)



Statutory reference:



   Recreation defined, see G.S. § 160A-352



   State policy, see G.S. § 160A-351



§ 32.36  LENGTH OF APPOINTMENT.



   Each member shall be appointed to serve for a two-year term. Members’
terms shall run from February 1 through January 31, or until a successor is
appointed. Members may be appointed for no more than three consecutive terms.
Any person who has previously served as a member of the Board for three
consecutive terms cannot serve a subsequent term until at least one year has
expired since the end of his or her last term.



(Ord., passed 7-25-74; Am. Ord., passed



3-13-75; Am. Ord. 1179, passed 5-14-92; Am. Ord. 1592, passed 2-26-09)



§ 32.37  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee shall serve as an
advisory body for the Department of Planning and Parks. The Committee shall
recommend policies to the Planning and Parks Director or his or her designee
within its powers and responsibilities as stated in this subchapter. The
Committee shall serve as a liaison between the Planning and Parks Department
and the citizens of the community in parks and recreation matters. The
Committee shall consult with and make recommendations to the Planning and
Parks Department Director or his or her designee in matters affecting parks
and recreation policies, programs, and the acquisition and disposal of lands
and properties related to the total community parks and recreation program,
and to its long-range, projected program for parks and recreation. The
Planning and Parks Director or his or her designee will submit Committee
recommendations to the Town Manager and/or Board of Aldermen for appropriate
action.



   (B)   The Committee shall make recommendations relating to the
acceptance by the town of any grants, gifts, or bequests of any personal or
real property offered or made available for parks and recreational purposes
and which are judged to be of present or possible future use for or to parks
and recreation. Any gift, bequest of money or other property, grant, or
devise of real property or personal property so acquired, shall be held by
the town, used, and finally disposed of in accordance with the terms under
which the grant, gift, or devise is made and accepted.



   (C)   Upon investigating and interpreting the needs of the
community, the Committee shall make recommendations in regard to the
construction and equipping of parks, playgrounds, and recreation centers
necessary or useful to parks and recreation function and programming.



   (D)   The Town Manager shall be responsible for appointing staff
personnel to support the activities of the Parks and Recreation Advisory
Committee. The Town Manager shall designate those staff members so appointed
in writing and shall provide a copy of the designation to the Director of
Planning and Parks. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee shall not
utilize the services of any staff personnel other than those so designated
without the prior approval of the Town Manager.



(Ord., passed 7-25-74; Am. Ord. 1179, passed 5-14-92; Am. Ord. 1592, passed
2-26-09)



Statutory reference:



   General powers, see G.S. § 160A-353



§ 32.38  MEETINGS.



   The Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee meetings shall be held on a
monthly basis as approved by the Board of Aldermen. The Chairman or in his or
her absence, the Vice-Chairman, may request a special meeting of the
Committee at any time. Special meetings may also be requested at any time by
at least five Committee members. Upon approval by the Board of Aldermen,
notice of regular and special meetings shall be given in accordance with G.S.
§ 143-318.9 et seq. A quorum of the Committee shall be in attendance before
action of an official nature can be taken. A majority of the actual
membership of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee, excluding vacant
seats, shall constitute a quorum in accordance with G.S. § 160A-74. A member
who has withdrawn from a meeting without being excused by a majority vote of
the remaining members present shall be counted as present for purposes of
determining whether a quorum is present.



(Ord., passed 7-25-74; Am. Ord. 1592, passed 2-26-09; Am. Ord. 1594, passed
4-9-09; Am. Ord. 1646, passed 2-10-11)



§ 32.39  ATTENDANCE.



   The Board of Aldermen shall have the authority to remove any member who
misses three consecutive regular meetings or more than four total meetings
during any two-year term of membership on the Parks and Recreation Advisory
Committee.  It shall be the responsibility of the Chairman of the Parks and
Recreation Advisory Committee to advise the Board of Aldermen of any member
who misses three consecutive regular meetings or more than a total of four
meetings.  In the event the Board of Aldermen removes a member because of
his or her failure to comply with the attendance requirements set forth
herein, the Board of Aldermen shall notify the Chairman of the Parks and
Recreation Advisory Committee in writing that the member has been removed. 
Vacancies occurring for reasons other than expiration of terms shall be
filled by the Board of Aldermen for the period of the unexpired term.



(Ord., passed 7-25-74; Am. Ord. 1179, passed 5-14-92; Am. Ord. 1592, passed
2-26-09)



§ 32.40  COMPENSATION.



   Committee members shall serve without monetary compensation.  Subject
to the prior approval of the Town Manager and in compliance with existing
policies of the town, members may be reimbursed for travel and subsistence to
professional recreation meetings, conferences and workshops.



(Ord., passed 7-25-74; Am. Ord. 1179, passed 5-14-92; Am. Ord. 1592, passed
2-26-09)



§ 32.41  OFFICERS.



   There shall be a Chairman and Vice- Chairman of the Parks and
Recreation Advisory Committee. An annual election of the Chairman and
Vice-Chairman shall be held by the Committee members and shall occur at the
regular monthly meeting in February.  Officers shall serve for one year from
election, with eligibility for re-election.  In the event an officer's
appointment to the Committee is terminated, a replacement to this office
shall be elected by the Committee, from its membership, at the meeting
following the termination.  The Planning and Parks Director or his or her
designee shall serve as Secretary of the Committee.



(Ord., passed 7-25-74; Am. Ord. 1592, passed 2-26-09)



§ 32.42  OFFICERS' DUTIES.



   (A)  The Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee Chairman shall
preside at all meetings and sign all documents relative to action taken by
the Committee.



   (B)  When the Chairman is absent, the Vice-Chairman shall perform the
duties of the Chairman.  When both the Chairman and Vice-Chairman are
absent, a temporary Chairman shall be selected by those members who are
present.



   (C)   The Secretary shall keep minutes of meetings, records of the
members' attendance and records of discussions, findings and recommendations,
all of which minutes and such records shall be furnished to the Board of
Aldermen.  The records shall be considered public records.



(Ord., passed 7-25-74; Am. Ord. 1179, passed 5-14-92; Am. Ord. 1592, passed
2-26-09)



§ 32.43  SUB-COMMITTEES.



   (A)   Subject to the prior approval of the Board of Aldermen, in
exercising the powers and duties set forth herein, the Parks and Recreation
Advisory Committee may appoint sub-committees composed only of appointed
members of the Committee.



   (B)   Under certain circumstances the need may arise to create a
sub-committee made up in whole or in part of citizens of the town who are not
members of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee.  Formation of such a
sub-committee shall be of a temporary nature to address a specific purpose
and shall not be authorized without approval of the Board of Aldermen. The
actual appointment of sub-committee members who are not already members of
the Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee shall be made by the Board of
Aldermen. The Recreation Advisory Committee may provide recommendations to
the Board of Aldermen pertaining to the selection of non-committee members
for appointment to a special sub-committee.



(Ord., passed 7-25-74; Am. Ord. 1179, passed 5-14-92; Am. Ord. 1592, passed
2-26-09; Am. Ord. 1646, passed 2-10-11)



§ 32.44  BY-LAWS.



   The Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee is authorized to adopt
procedures for conducting its meetings and other matters which shall be
incorporated into a set of by-Laws.  Provided, however, that the by-Laws
shall not be effective until approved by the Board of Aldermen.



(Ord., passed 7-25-74; Am. Ord., passed 3-13-75;Am. Ord. 1179, passed 5-14-92)



HISTORIC LANDMARK COMMISSION



§ 32.46  HISTORIC LANDMARK COMMISSION.



   A Historic Landmark Commission is hereby established in accordance with
the provisions of G.S. § 160A-400.7.



(Ord. 1198, passed 9-10-92; Am. Ord. 1222, passed 12-2-93)



§ 32.47  APPOINTMENT AND TENURE OF MEMBERS.



   The Historic Landmark Commission shall be composed of five members
appointed by the Board of Aldermen.  The term of office shall be two
years.  Members shall be appointed for terms of two years as vacancies
occur.  An appointment to fill an unexpired term shall be only for the
remaining portion of that term.  Membership on the Historic Landmark
Commission will be limited to three consecutive terms. Members shall continue
to serve until their successors are appointed.



(Ord. 1198, passed 9-10-92; Am. Ord. 1222, passed 12-2-93)



§ 32.48  COMPOSITION.



   All members of the Historic Landmark Commission shall be residents of
the town.  A majority of the members of the Historic Landmark Commission
shall have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history,
architecture, archeology or related fields.  All members shall serve without
compensation.



(Ord. 1198, passed 9-10-92; Am. Ord. 1222, passed 12-2-93)



§ 32.49  ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.



   Should a member fail to attend three consecutive regular meetings of
the Commission, and should there be no adequate excuse for the absences, the
Chairman, with the concurrence of a majority of the entire Commission, shall
recommend to the Board of Aldermen that a vacancy be declared and that the
vacant position be filled by the Board of Aldermen.  Absence due to illness,
death or other emergency situations shall not affect the member's status
excepting that of an extreme duration resulting in prolonged absence, whereby
the procedure for replacement of the member as specified in § 32.47 shall be
followed.



(Ord. 1198, passed 9-10-92)



§ 32.50  RULES OF PROCEDURE.



   The Historic Landmark Commission shall adopt rules of procedure subject
to approval of such rules by the Board of Aldermen for the conduct of its
business.  The Commission shall keep a record of its members' attendance and
of its resolutions, findings and recommendations and the records shall be of
public record.



(Ord. 1198, passed 9-10-92; Am. Ord. 1222, passed 12-2-93)



§ 32.51  MEETINGS OPEN TO THE PUBLIC.



   All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public and governed
by the provisions of G.S. Ch. 143, Art. 33C.



(Ord. 1198, passed 9-10-92)



§ 32.52  AUTHORITY AND POWER.



   The Historic Landmark Commission is authorized to discharge and conduct
its duties and responsibilities in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and as specified in G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Part 3C.  Provided, that
pending establishment by the Board of Aldermen of a historic district either
as a separate use district classification under the town's zoning ordinance
or as districts which overlay other zoning districts or designation of one or
more historic landmarks in accordance with G.S. § 160A-400.5, the Commission
shall limit its activities to the following:



   (A)   Conduct an investigation of and prepare a report describing
the boundaries of any proposed historic districts within the town and
describing the significance of the buildings, structures, features, sites or
surroundings included in the proposed district, such investigation and report
to be in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 160A-400.4;



   (B)   Upon conclusion of the investigation and report, the
Commission shall forward the report to the Department of Cultural Resources
acting through the State Historic Preservation Officer or his or her designee
for analysis and recommendations in accordance with the provisions of G.S. §
160A-400.4;



   (C)   Following action on the report by the Department of Cultural
Resources as specified above, the Commission shall forward the report to the
Town's Planning Board for its review and recommendation.  The Planning Board
shall make its recommendations upon conclusion of a review of the report to
the Board of Aldermen;



   (D)   Upon receipt of the recommendations of the Planning Board, the
Board of Aldermen shall take such action as it deems appropriate.  Before
taking any action on the recommendations, the Board of Aldermen shall hold a
public hearing for the purpose of soliciting input from the public concerning
the recommendations;



   (E)   The Commission is authorized to undertake other activities as
specified in G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Part 3C, which are required to be
carried out prior to the establishment by the Board of Aldermen of a historic
district either as a separate use district classification under the town
zoning ordinance or as districts which overlay other zoning districts or
designation of one or more historic landmarks in accordance with G.S. §
160A-400.5.



   (F)   From and after the designation of a landmark, no exterior
portion of any building or other structure (including masonry walls, fences,
light fixtures, steps and pavement, or other appurtenant features) nor
above-ground utility structures nor any type of outdoor advertising sign
shall be erected, altered, restored, moved, or demolished on such landmark
until after an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness as to
exterior features has been submitted to and approved by the Historic Landmark
Commission.  A Certificate of Appropriateness under the provisions of this
section shall be required whether or not a building permit is required, but,
in all instances where such a permit is required, the Certificate of
Appropriateness shall be issued prior to the issuance of a building permit.



(Ord. 1198, passed 9-10-92; Am. Ord. 1213, passed 6-10-93; Am. Ord. 1222,
passed 12-2-93)



§ 32.53  DESIGN REVIEW PROCESS FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.



   Applications for Certificate of Appropriateness shall be subject to
review based upon the design principles and guidelines then in effect and as
have been adopted by the Historic Landmark Commission and approved by
resolution of the Board of Aldermen.



(Ord. 1213, passed 6-10-93; Am. Ord. 1222, passed 12-2-93)



MARKETING ADVISORY COMMITTEE



§ 32.55  CREATION AND PURPOSE.



   Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-146, the Marketing Advisory Committee of the
town was created for the purpose of providing advice to the Board of Aldermen
and the New Hanover County Tourism Development Authority relating to the
tourism industry in the town.



(Ord. 1504, passed 3-23-06; Am. Ord. 1643, passed 11-18-10)



§ 32.56  COMPOSITION AND APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.



   The Marketing Advisory Committee shall consist of nine voting members
and two non-voting members. All voting members shall be appointed by the
Board of Aldermen and shall be citizens of the town or representatives from
the town’s business community, including but not limited to small business,
real estate, and the resort/lodging industry within the town.  One
non-voting member shall be the town’s non-governmental representative to
the New Hanover County Tourism Development Authority (TDA); the other
non-voting member shall be a member of the Board of Aldermen. The non- voting
members shall be considered alternate members with full authority to vote on
all matters in those cases where such alternates are necessary to satisfy a
quorum for a meeting. All voting members, except as otherwise provided
herein, shall be appointed for two-year terms or until a successor is
appointed. Terms shall run from July 1 to June 30. The terms of those members
appointed to replace members whose terms expire January 2016 shall expire
June 30, 2018. The terms of current members expiring January 2017 shall
expire June 30, 2017. The initial terms of the two new members added by Ord.
1754 shall begin on February 1, 2016 and shall expire on June 30, 2017.
Thereafter, the terms of such members shall be for two years. The term of the
non-voting member who is the town’s non- governmental representative to the
TDA shall be as dictated by the membership rules applicable to TDA members.
The term of the non-voting member who is a member of the Board of Aldermen
shall be February 1 to January 31.  No member of the Marketing Advisory
Committee shall serve more than three consecutive terms.  Vacancies
occurring for reasons other than expiration of a term shall be filled as they
occur by the Board of Aldermen for the period of the unexpired term.



(Ord. 1504, passed 3-23-06; Am. Ord. 1617, passed 2-11-10; Am. Ord. 1643,
passed 11-18-10; Am. Ord. 1752, passed 11-12-15; Am. Ord. 1754, passed
12-10-15)



§ 32.57  ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS; RECORDS.



   (A)   There shall be a Chairman, Vice Chairman, and Secretary
elected annually by the Marketing Advisory Committee members at the regular
meeting in February. The Committee shall adopt rules of procedure for the
conduct of its business that shall be effective following approval by the
Board of Aldermen.  Subsequent changes to the rules of procedure shall also
be subject to approval by the Board of Aldermen.  The Committee shall keep
minutes of the meetings and records of the members' attendance, discussions,
and recommendations, all of which minutes and such records shall be furnished
to the Board of Aldermen.  The records shall be considered public records.



   (B)   The Marketing Advisory Committee Chairman shall preside at all
meetings and sign all documents relative to action taken by the Committee. 
When the Chairman is absent, the Vice-Chairman shall perform the duties of
the Chairman.  When both the Chairman and Vice-Chairman are absent, a
temporary Chairman shall be selected by those members who are present.



   (C)   The Marketing Advisory Committee shall hold at least one
meeting each month. The Committee's regular meeting schedule shall be
approved by the Board of Aldermen. The Chairman, or in his or her absence the
Vice-Chairman, may call a special meeting of the Marketing Advisory Committee
at any time.  Notice of special meetings and changes to the regular meeting
schedule shall be given in accordance with G.S. § 143-318.9 et seq. All
meetings shall be open to the public and subject to the provisions of G.S.
Ch. 143, Article 33C, regarding open meetings. A quorum of the Marketing
Advisory Committee shall be in attendance before action of an official nature
can be taken.



   (D)   Routine business shall include issues pertinent to the
successful marketing of the community in relation to tourism as well as a
review of applications being submitted from the Board of Aldermen for funding
projects, programs, or equipment supporting the community's efforts to
attract and support the tourism industry.



   (E)   The Board of Aldermen shall have the authority to remove any
member who misses three consecutive regular meetings or more than four total
meetings in a one-year period.  It shall be the responsibility of the
Chairman of the Committee to advise the Board of Aldermen of any member who
misses three consecutive regular meetings or more than a total of four
meetings in a one-year period.  Absences due to sickness, death, or other
emergencies of a like nature shall be regarded as approved absences and shall
not affect the member's status on the Committee.  However, in the event of a
long illness, or other such cause for prolonged absences, the Chairman of the
Marketing Advisory Committee shall advise the Board of Aldermen of the
situation, and the Board of Aldermen may remove the member.  In the event
the Board of Aldermen removes a member because of his or her failure to
comply with the attendance requirements set forth herein, the Board of
Aldermen shall notify the Chairman of the Committee, in writing, that the
member has been removed.  Each member shall notify the Chairman,
Vice-Chairman, or Secretary at least 48 hours before a regular meeting when
an absence is anticipated.



   (F)   Subject to prior approval by the Board of Aldermen, the
Marketing Advisory Committee may appoint sub-committees composed exclusively
of members of the Marketing Advisory Committee. The role and duration of each
sub-committee must be clearly defined and approved by the Board of Aldermen.
It is the responsibility of the Marketing Advisory Committee Chairman to
insure that all appointed members of the Marketing Advisory Committee be
fully informed of actions and decisions made by each sub-committee.



(Ord. 1504, passed 3-23-06; Am. Ord. 1643, passed 11-18-10)



§ 32.58  RESPONSIBILITY, POWERS, AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Marketing Advisory Committee shall work in concert with
the Board of Aldermen, the TDA, and the Cape Fear Coast Convention and
Visitors Bureau (CFCCVB) to develop programs and initiatives to promote the
tourism industry in the town.



   (B)   Upon approval by the Board of Aldermen, the Marketing Advisory
Committee shall provide annual marketing recommendations to the CFCCVB for
inclusion in the annual county-wide marketing plan.



   (C)   The Marketing Advisory Committee shall function in an advisory
capacity to the Board of Aldermen and shall meet from time to time with the
Board of Aldermen to discuss issues relative to marketing and tourism.



   (D)   The Marketing Advisory Committee shall be provided the
opportunity to review and comment on program funding requests that have been
prepared and approved by the Board of Aldermen prior to submission to the TDA
for consideration.



   (E)   The Marketing Advisory Committee shall work closely with local
non-governmental organizations and the private sector to promote tourism that
will benefit the community.



   (F)   Neither the Marketing Advisory Committee nor any subcommittee
of the Marketing Advisory Committee is empowered to obligate municipal funds,
enter into contracts on behalf of the town, or implement town policy without
the express approval of the Board of Aldermen.



(Ord. 1504, passed 3-23-06; Am. Ord. 1643, passed 11-18-10)



§ 32.59  COMPENSATION.



   Marketing Advisory Committee members shall serve without monetary
compensation.



(Ord. 1504, passed 3-23-06; Am. Ord. 1643, passed 11-18-10)



CHAPTER 33:  FINANCE



Section



   33.01   [Repealed.]



   33.02   Purchases by town employees



   33.03   Law enforcement officers special separation allowance trust
fund



   33.04   Disbursement of funds



   33.05   Counter-signatures on all drafts



   33.06   Capital Reserve Fund



   33.07   Bad checks presented to the town



   33.08   Cash management policy



§ 33.01  [REPEALED.]



§ 33.02  PURCHASES BY TOWN EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   Before any order shall be given for items to be paid by the
town or any purchase made by any town employees, a purchase order must first
be obtained from the Finance Officer if the amount of purchase exceeds $500.



   (B)   The Finance Officer may issue the purchase order only when
there are sufficient funds for the purchase and in accordance with the annual
budget as allocated by the Board of Aldermen in the annual budget ordinance.



   (C)   Any town employee purchasing goods exceeding $500 without a
purchase order from the Finance Officer will be held responsible for the cost
of same.



   (D)   The Finance Officer may change the amount necessary for a
purchase order as deemed necessary, provided that this action and amount are
reported to the Board of Aldermen at its next meeting.



('72 Code, § 7-2)  (Am. Ord. 1250, passed 5-18-95; Am. Ord. 1293, passed
9-11-97; Am. Ord. 1721, passed 1-23-14)



§ 33.03  LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS SPECIAL SEPARATION ALLOWANCE TRUST FUND.



   (A)  There is established on the books of the town a trust fund to be
known as the Law Enforcement Officers' Special Separation Allowance Trust
Fund. 



   (B)   The purpose of this trust fund is to receive monies
appropriated by the Board of Aldermen to fund the law enforcement officers'
special separation allowance benefit as required by G.S. § 143-166.42 and to
be a source of payment of special monthly separation allowances to former law
enforcement officers who have retired from employment with the town and who
meet the qualifying requirements of G.S. § 143-166.41 for receipt of
payments of the special separation allowance.



   (C)   The Board of Aldermen shall appropriate monies to the trust
fund as needed to assure that sufficient assets will exist and remain
available to pay future benefits when due.  The Town Manager shall obtain
actuarial evaluations of the status of the trust fund as necessary to assure
adequate appropriations to the trust fund to maintain its actuarial soundness.



   (D)   The Finance Officer shall be and hereby is directed to invest
the monies in the trust fund in deposits and securities eligible for
investment of local funds under state law, until such time as the monies are
needed for disbursement.



(Ord. 1132, passed 1-10-91)



Statutory reference:



   Investment of funds, see G.S. § 159-30



   Local Fiscal Assistance Act, see G.S. § 159, Article 3



   Selection of depository, see G.S. § 159-31



§ 33.04  DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.



   (A)  In accordance with the Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control
Act, no bill or claim against the town may be paid unless it has been
approved by the officer or employee responsible for the function or agency to
which the expense is charged.  No check or draft of the town shall be valid
unless it bears on its face the certificate of the Finance Officer as
follows:  "This disbursement has been approved as required by the Local
Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act."



   (B)   No contract, agreement, or purchase order shall be valid
unless it bears the Finance Officer's certificate as follows:  "This
instrument has been pre-audited in the manner required by the Local
Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act."



(Am. Ord. 1250, passed 5-18-95)



Statutory reference:



   Duties of Finance Officer, see  G.S. § 159-2



   Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act, see G.S. § 159,
Article 3



   Pre-audit of disbursements, see G.S. § 159-28



§ 33.05  COUNTER-SIGNATURES ON ALL DRAFTS.



   All checks and drafts issued by the town, regardless of amount, must be
signed by the Finance Officer, Town Manager, or Mayor.



(Am. Ord. 1250, passed 5-18-95)



Statutory reference:



   Dual signatures on checks, see G.S. § 159-25



§ 33.06  CAPITAL RESERVE FUND.



   (A)   Pursuant to the authority granted by G.S. § 160-425, there is
hereby created and established a Capital Reserve Fund to be maintained in
addition to all other funds now authorized by law.



   (B)   Moneys appropriated and paid into the Capital Reserve Fund
shall be expended only for those purposes as set out in G.S. § 160.432(1),
(2), (4), (5), (7), and (9).



      (1)   All of the foregoing purposes in division (B) above
declared to be necessary expenses and the cost thereof shall be deemed to
include land, easements, rights in land, water rights, contract rights,
franchises, and equipment used or useful in connection with the said purposes.



      (2)   All money deposited in accordance with the provisions of
this section shall be secured as provided by G.S. § 159-28 of the Local
Government Act.



   (C)   Moneys appropriated and paid into the Capital Reserve Fund may
be invested from time to time as prescribed by G.S. § 160-431 and 159-28.1.



(Ord., passed 7-27-72)



Statutory reference:



   The statutes cited in this section have been repealed and/or
replaced.  For current provisions regarding capital reserve funds, see G.S.
§§159-18 through 159.22



§ 33.07  BAD CHECKS PRESENTED TO THE TOWN.



   When the payor bank of any uncertified check tendered to the town in
payment of any obligation due to the town shall refuse payment upon such
check, and such check shall be returned to the town, a penalty of $25 shall
be imposed.  The penalty shall not be waived or diminished and shall be in
addition to other charges or penalties provided for by law.



(Ord. 1106, passed 11-2-89; Am. Ord. 1158, passed 10-10-91; Am. Ord. 1377,
passed 3-22-01)



§ 33.08  CASH MANAGEMENT POLICY.



   There shall be a Board of Aldermen approved cash management policy that
outlines the town's financial and investment practices.  The policy may be
amended from time to time by the Board of Aldermen.



(Ord. 1250, passed 5-18-95)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



Chapter



   50.   WATER AND SEWERS



CHAPTER 50  WATER AND SEWERS



Section



General Provisions



   50.001   Definitions



   50.002   Tampering with or obstructing water and sewer lines or
water meters prohibited



   50.003   Work on water and sewer system by authorized personnel only



   50.004   Violations; recovery of damages



Water Use Regulations



   50.016   Administrative authority



   50.017   Permit for connection required



   50.018   Tap and meter sizes required



   50.019   Private water supply



   50.020   Cutoff of public water supply in times of emergency



Sewer Use Regulations



   50.030   Intent of regulation of sewer use



   50.031   Applicability of sewer use provisions



   50.032   Use of public sewers required



   50.033   Discharge to natural outlets



   50.034   Prohibition of septic tanks, privies, and the like



   50.035   Requirement of sewer use



   50.036   Building sewers, connections, and fees



   50.037   Separate connections required



   50.038   Method of sewer connection



   50.039   Elevation of sewer connection



   50.040   Prohibited connections



   50.041   Public hazard



   50.042   Grease removal



   50.043   Sand and grit removal



   50.044   Preliminary treatment devices



   50.045   Industrial discharge permits



   50.046   Time limit for obtaining industrial discharge permit



   50.047   Industrial discharge permit application



   50.048   Pretreatment requirements



   50.049   Industrial discharge permit cancellation



   50.050   Industrial discharge permit fees



   50.051   Industrial user ownership changes



   50.052   Effect of approvals of pretreatment facilities; wastewater
characteristics



   50.053   Permit issuance does not convey property rights, exclusive
privileges



   50.054   Discharge of industrial or pretreated wastes to be approved



   50.055   Prohibited discharges



   50.056   Prohibited wastes and limitations



   50.057   B.O.D. limit



   50.058   Chemical oxygen demand



   50.059   Suspended solids



   50.060   Flow equalization



   50.061   Deleterious discharges



   50.062   Water quality changes



   50.063   Standards of waste discharge and delivery



   50.064   Septic tank and portable toilet wastes



   50.065   Quality determination; effluent sampling



   50.066   Quantity determination



   50.067   Powers and authority of Inspectors



   50.068   Sewer service connection fees; user charges



   50.069   Extra strength wastewater surcharges



   50.070   Discontinuance of wastewater treatment and disposal
service; when permissible



Water and Sewer Rates



   50.080   Schedule of connection charges; usage rates



   50.081   Reestablishment of water service which has been terminated
for nonpayment



   50.082   Disconnection, reconnection and meter reading fees



   50.083   Special rates



   50.084   Billing; payment of accounts



Discontinuation, Suspension of Service



   50.090   Procedure for discontinuation of service



   50.091   Suspension of service



   50.092   Discontinuation in protection of health and welfare



Extension of Service



   50.100   Application for approval of extension



   50.101   General extension requirements



   50.102   General approval requirements



   50.103   Specifications for extension; ownership



   50.104   Additional subdivision improvement may be required



   50.105   Approved subdivision or developed property



   50.106   Approved extension project; assessment of costs



   50.107   Proposed development or unapproved subdivision



   50.108   Financing of extension within town limits



   50.109   Surety bond; refund or reimbursement of funds



   50.110   Exceptions from following extension procedure authorized



   50.111   Extension outside town; application



   50.112   Financing of extension outside town limits



   50.113   Deposit of funds; contract for extension outside town limits



   50.114   Surety bond or private construction for extension outside
town limits



   50.115   Annexation



   50.116   Cutoff of public water supply at piers



Water Supply Shortage



   50.120   Issuance of water shortage proclamation



   50.121   Conditions deemed emergency



   50.122   Restrictions, limitations imposed



   50.123   Proclamation, restrictions, and the like shall be written



   50.124   End of emergency; lifting or modification of restrictions



   50.125   Water shortage response triggers



   50.126   Non-essential water usage and irrigation control



   50.127   Water shortage response



   50.128   Water shortage response enforcement



Stormwater Management



   50.130   Title



   50.131   Authority



   50.132   Findings



   50.133   Purpose



   50.134   Applicability and jurisdiction



   50.135   Interpretation



   50.136   Definitions



   50.137   Design manual



   50.138   Relationship to other laws, regulations, and private
agreements



   50.139   Severability



   50.140   Effective date and transitional provisions



   50.141   Review and decision-making entities



   50.142   Review procedures



   50.143   Application for approval



   50.144   Approvals



   50.145   Appeals



   50.146   General standards



   50.147   Impervious surface requirements



   50.148   Structural stormwater control requirements



   50.149   Standards for stormwater control measures



   50.150   Variances



   50.151   Additional standards for SA waters



   50.152   General standards for maintenance



   50.153   Operation and maintenance agreement



   50.154   Inspection program



   50.155   Notice to owners



   50.156   Records of installation and maintenance



   50.157   Nuisance



   50.158   Enforcement



   50.159   Remedies



   50.160   Procedures



   50.161   Illicit discharges and connections



   50.162   Stormwater fees



 



   50.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Building code, see Ch. 151



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.  Terms
in this chapter not otherwise defined shall have the meaning prescribed
within the regulations of EPA/DEM.



   "AVERAGE FLOW."  The total flow of wastewater in gallons during a
normal operating calendar day of 24 hours, as can be measured over a period
of time of not less than six months.



   "B.O.D.5" or "FIVE-DAY BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND."  The total quantity
of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20°C. expressed in milligrams
per liter (mg/l).  "B.O.D.5" shall be determined by standard methods
currently approved by EPA/DEM.



   "BUILDING SEWER."  The pipe from the building to the town-owned sewer
service line or sewer lateral.  The town sewer service lateral shall
constitute the publicly provided access point generally located at the
property line for residential service.  However, the lateral may be located
at some other access point as provided by the town.



   "BUILDING WATER."  The pipe from the building to the town-owned water
service line or water lateral.  The town water service lateral shall
constitute the publicly provided access point generally located at the
property line for residential service.  However, the lateral may be located
at some other access point as provided by the town.



   "C.O.D." or "CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND." The total quantity of oxygen
required for the chemical oxidation of decomposable matter under standard
laboratory conditions.  "C.O.D." shall be determined by the standard methods
currently approved by EPA/DEM.



   "COMBINED SEWER."  A sewer receiving both surface runoff and
wastewater flows.



   "COMMERCIAL NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES."  All commercial structures
requiring water and sewer service but having no habitational units.



   "COMPOSITE SAMPLE."  The makeup of individual samples, so taken as to
represent the nature of wastewater or industrial wastes.



   "CONNECTION" or "TAP."  The attachment of the building water or sewer
to the town's provided access point to the public sanitary sewer or public
water supply.



   "CONSTITUENTS."  The combination of particles, chemicals, or
measurable environmental or chemical conditions (such as temperature, pH, or
B.O.D.5) which exist in the subject wastes.



   "CONSUMER."  Shall have the same meaning as "DOMESTIC USER."



   "COOLING WATER."  Any physical connection or structural arrangement
between a public or a private potable water system and any nonpotable source
or system through which an unsafe quality of water could flow or siphon from
the nonpotable source to the potable system.



   "DEBRIS SCREENS" or "DEBRIS TRAPS." Any device or structure constructed
in accordance with pretreatment requirements operated by a user or customer
of the town's wastewater system for the purpose of removing particles and
undissolved materials from the wastewater to be contributed to the public
sanitary sewer.



   "DIRECTOR."  The Director of Public Works of the town or his duly
authorized deputy, agent, or representative.



   "DOMESTIC USER."  A person who uses the public water supply or who
discharges wastewater to the public sanitary sewer: containing a pollutant
strength within the defined range for standard strength wastewater;
containing no constituents at a quantity or concentration prohibited in this
chapter; and at a rate of average flow not to exceed 50,000 gallons per day.



   "DOMESTIC WASTEWATER."  The wastewater generated from normal human
living processes which have constituent strength within the range defined for
standard strength wastewater, and which contain no constituents of a quantity
or concentration exceeding the limits stated in this chapter.  Normal human
living processes include wastewater from bathrooms and toilets,
non-commercial kitchens, and non-industrial and non-commercial laundries.



   "EFFLUENT."  The sewage, water, or other liquid flowing out of any
basin, pretreatment device, or facility and subsequently entering a public
sewer, unless the context specifically refers to the flow from some other
facility.



   "EPA/DEM."  The United States Environmental Protection Agency and the
Division of Environmental Management, Department of Natural Resources and
Community Development, State of North Carolina.



   "FEE SCHEDULE."  The official privilege license tax; permit,
application, and other fee; deposit; and utilities service and rate charge
schedule for the town, as created by the fee schedule designated by the Board
of Aldermen which may be revised from time to time.



   "FLAMMABLE."  The nature of material, materials, or substances which
provide the capability to burn spontaneously or to burn upon exposure to
fire, sparks, or high temperature or to burn under conditions found in the
town wastewater collection system.  Combustible nature of materials and
related combustible conditions shall be determined by standard methods
currently approved by the Fire Prevention Code of the American Insurance
Association, l976 Edition, as revised.



   "GREASE INTERCEPTOR."  Any device constructed in conformity to the
plumbing code, operated by the customer of the wastewater system for removing
oil and grease before contributing liquid wastes to the wastewater system.



   "HOLDING TANK."  Any device or structure constructed in conformity
with the plumbing code, operated by a public sanitary sewer customer for the
purpose of moderating and controlling flows of wastewater to be discharged to
a public sewer.



   "INDUSTRIAL USER."  A person who discharges to the public sanitary
sewer wastewater which prior to pretreatment has characteristics, or, because
of available operations or processes requiring water use, may potentially
have characteristics, which conform to any of the following:  a pollutant
strength greater than standard strength wastewater; constituent quantity or
concentration exceeding allowable limits defined in this chapter; or an
average flow rate exceeding a quantity of 50,000 gallons per day.



   "INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER."  The wastewater generated from activities,
operations, or processes which require water and which add to the water
pollutant constituents at a strength exceeding standard wastewater strength
or at a quantity or concentration exceeding allowable limits defined in this
chapter.



   "INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER SURCHARGE." The additional charge for service
provided to any user of the town's wastewater system service area which has
effluent characteristics exceeding those of standard strength wastewater.



   "INFLOW."  Water other than wastewater that enters a sanitary sewer
system, including water entering through a building sewer, from sources such
as roof leaders, collar drains, yard drains, area drains, foundation drains,
drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections
between storm sewers and sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling towers, storm
waters, surface runoff, street wash waters, or drainage.



   "INFLUENT."  The wastewaters arriving at the public wastewater
treatment facility for treatment.



   "INTERFERENCE."  Inhibition or disruption of public sanitary sewers or
public wastewater treatment facilities which contributes to a violation of
any requirement of the NPDES permit.



   "METERED WATER."  The amounts of water used by the water and
wastewater system during the town's utility service billing periods, as
measured by water meters required and approved by the town.



   "MG/L" or "MILLIGRAM PER LITER." Ratio of weight to volume, and, for
purposes of this chapter, is interchangeable with "ppm"(parts per million).



   "NATURAL OUTLET."  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake,
or other body or surface or groundwater.



   "OWNER" or "USER."  Any property owner, or occupant or tenant who is a
customer of the public water or sanitary sewer services.



   "PPM" or "PARTS PER MILLION."  Ratio of weight to volume, and, for
purposes of this chapter, is interchangeable with "mg/l"(milligrams per
liter).



   "PERMIT."  The document allowing attachment to the water and sewer
system of the town.



   "pH."  The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions
in grams per liter of solution.  "pH" shall be determined by standard
methods currently approved by EPA/DEM.



   "PLUMBING CODE."  The North Carolina State Building Code, Volume II,
Plumbing, l980 Edition, as revised.



   "POTABLE WATER."  That supplied by the public water system of the town
as approved by all public water supply monitoring agencies.



   "PRETREATMENT."  Physical, biological, or chemical treatment applied
to wastewater, or the processes utilized for the purposes of pretreatment of
wastewater to reduce its B.O.D.5 requirements, suspended solids, oil and
grease, and other constituents, prior to discharge of wastewater to the
public sewer.



   "PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER."  A wastewater collection pipe or sewer
conduit which services all abutting private and public properties and is
owned, controlled, operated, and maintained by the town.  It shall include
all appurtenances connected and used in the wastewater collection system.



   "RECEIVING WATERS."  Those waters into which wastes are discharged.



   "RESIDENTIAL" or "COMMERCIAL RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES."  All
single-family and multi-family units, motels, hotels, or places used or to be
used for human habitation requiring water and sewer service and regardless of
whether the unit is owner- or tenant-occupied, and whether the user or
occupant is a lessee for a term or transient.  In rooming houses or similar
establishments where bath facilities are shared, a living unit is defined as
two habitable rooms.



   "SAMPLING STRUCTURE" or "CONTROL STRUCTURE."  An appropriately located
structure with easy access by a pickup truck with trailer from which the
effluent discharged by a wastewater system customer can be effectively
measured for flow and strength by the town, using standard sampling methods.



   "SANITARY SEWER" or "SEWER."  A pipe or conduit for carrying
wastewater and from which storm, surface, and groundwaters are excluded.



   "SEPTIC TANK WASTE" or "SEPTAGE."  The liquid and semi-solid domestic
waste that results from the emptying of septic tanks. The discharge of septic
tank waste into the public sanitary sewer system by any means shall be
prohibited.



   "SEWER CONNECTION FEE."  The initial charge levied against a
waterwater system user or customer for connection to the publicly provided
access point to the public sewer.



   "STANDARD METHODS FOR TESTING AND MEASURING."  Those procedures or
methods established or currently approved by EPA/DEM.



   "STANDARD SAMPLING METHOD."  The method of collecting and storing
individual samples or composite samples of wastewater for  the purpose of
laboratory analysis to determine its nature.  The methods employed will be
those established and currently approved by EPA/DEM.



   "STANDARD STRENGTH WASTES."  Wastes of any origin having strengths of
250 mg/l or less of B.O.D.5, 750 mg/l or less of C.O.D, or containing 200
mg/l or less of suspended solids.



   "SUSPENDED SOLIDS."  Solids that either float on the surface of, or
are in suspension in water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.



   "TOTAL SOLIDS."  Total weight measured in mg/l of all solids,
dissolved, undissolved, organic, or inorganic.



   "TOXIC CONSTITUENTS."  Any constituent of wastes, whether gaseous,
liquid, or solid, which when discharged into the sanitary sewer in sufficient
quantities may tend to interfere with any wastewater treatment process, to
constitute a hazard to human beings or animals, or to inhibit aquatic life or
create a hazard to recreation in the receiving waters of the effluent from
the sewage treatment plant.



   "WASTE DISCHARGE PERMIT."  A permit to be issued by the Director of
Public Works as a necessary condition to being granted, or retaining, a
publicly provided access point for connection to a public sewer for any
industrial user.



   "WASTEWATER" or "WASTES."  A combination of the water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial establishments, institutions, and industrial
establishments.  These wastes shall be treatable.



   "WATERCOURSE."  A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



§ 50.002  TAMPERING WITH OR OBSTRUCTING WATER AND SEWER LINES OR WATER
METERS PROHIBITED.



   (A)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to alter, tamper
with or manipulate any valves, lines or other equipment and appurtenances
comprising a part of the water and sewer systems belonging to the town
including water meters and backflow preventers.  Those actions which
constitute violations of divisions (B) and (C) below shall not be considered
violations of this division.  A person violating the provisions of this
division shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to reconnect
water or sanitary sewer connections, or otherwise turn back on either of
those utilities after they have been lawfully disconnected or turned off by
an authorized employee or agent of the town for nonpayment of water and/or
sewer charges.  In addition to any fee set forth in §§ 50.080, 50.082 or
elsewhere in this chapter, any violation of the provisions of this division
shall cause a customer to pay a fee of $75 before water and/or sewer service
is made available to such customer.  In the enforcement of this division, it
shall be presumed that the occupant (or owner, if the property is vacant) of
any real property serviced by a town water or sanitary sewer connection is
the person who reconnected water or sanitary sewer connections, or otherwise
turned back on either of those utilities after they had been lawfully
disconnected or turned off by an authorized employee or agent of the town. 
In accordance with G.S. 160A-175(b), a violation of this division shall not
be subject to the penalty provisions of G.S. 14-4 or § 10.99 of this code
and shall not be considered a breach of the penal laws of the state.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to turn on or
turn off water and/or sanitary sewer services by using a cutoff valve or
other device which is a part of the town's water or sewer system. 
Violations of this division shall subject the offender to a civil penalty of
$75 to be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if
the offender does not pay the penalty within ten days after he has been cited
for a violation of this division.  In accordance with G.S. § 160A-175(b), a
violation of this division shall not be subject to the penalty provisions of
G.S. § 14-4 or § 10.99 of this code and shall not be considered a breach of
the penal laws of the state.



   (D)   The owner is responsible for ensuring the meter is not blocked
or otherwise obstructed and does not present a hazard to the meter reader.
This may mean trimming grass and bushes around the meter, not blocking by
installing a fence in front or parking a car on top of the meter, and keeping
dogs confined. The minimum hazard clearance around a water meter is not less
than 36 inches. A meter reader hazard shall be considered to be items such as
pampas grass, yucca and other vegetation capable of injury. In the event of a
hazard, failure of the owner to correct the hazard after one notification
shall cause the town to correct/eliminate the hazard.



(Ord. 1119, passed 7-26-90; Am. Ord. 1683, passed 6-14-12)



§ 50.003  WORK ON WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM BY AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL ONLY.



   All work on the water and sewer system and all connections or
disconnections thereto shall be performed by the authorized employees of the
town, their representatives, or plumbers approved by the town.  All work
shall be performed in accordance with the plumbing code of the town and state.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



§ 50.004  VIOLATIONS; RECOVERY OF DAMAGES.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or any person who
shall have broken, damaged, destroyed, uncovered, defaced, or tampered with
any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the wastewater
collection system or the wastewater treatment facilities, shall be liable to
the town for any expense, loss, or damage suffered by the town by reason of
such violation including, but not limited to, the costs of investigation;
expert fees, tests, and analyses; and reasonable attorneys' fees.  If such
violation results in the town's making a disconnection of a building sewer
from a public sewer pursuant to this chapter, the person shall further be
liable to the town for all expense to the town in making such disconnection.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)  Penalty, see § 50.999



Cross-reference:



   Discontinuation of service, see § 50.092



                    WATER USE REGULATIONS



§ 50.016  ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY.



   The Director of the Department of Public Works shall have overall
supervision of the entire water and sewer system under the general direction
of the Board of Aldermen.  The Board may from time to time prescribe the
duties and responsibilities of the Director.  The Director and the
Superintendent of the water and sewer division at all reasonable hours shall
have free access to all premises for the purpose of examining hydrants,
fixtures, or  connections on which town water pressure is maintained.  The
Fire Department personnel shall have free access to fire hydrants at all
times.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to operate, see G.S. § 160A-312



§ 50.017  PERMIT FOR CONNECTION REQUIRED.



   (A)  No person shall connect with the water system of the town until
and unless he has applied in writing for permission to do so to the
Department of Public Works. The application shall be made before any part of
the drainage system of the house or other connection shall be laid or
constructed.  The application shall be accompanied by a plan or drawing
showing the location of the building and the entire proposed connection from
the public water and sewer lines through the building to its terminus,
including the location of all fixtures, traps, ventilating pipes, and the
like.  The application shall state the number of the place, the name of the
street, and the name of the applicant.  A copy of the application and permit
shall be retained by the Department of Public Works. All connections shall be
inspected before they are covered.



   (B)  No person, firm, or corporation shall fail to connect to the
town's water and sewer system.  Any disconnection of service shall make the
structure and appurtenances both unfit for human habitation and unusable for
any purpose whatsoever.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)  Penalty, see § 50.999



Statutory reference:



   Power to require connections, see G.S. § 160A-317



   Permits generally, see G.S. § 160A-417



§ 50.018  TAP AND METER SIZES REQUIRED.



   The required water and sewer tap and meter sizes for all structures
shall be determined by the Department of Public Works based upon flow
capacity of meters of various sizes and water demands of appliances and
equipment to be served through the meter.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1036, passed 12-4-86)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.019  PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY.



   (A)   No person shall furnish, supply, or provide any water from a
private well to pump into any dwelling house, dwelling unit, boarding house,
or commercial establishment in any manner whatsoever.



   (B)   Any property owner may make application for construction of a
well not for the purpose or to be used for human consumption.  Such well
water shall have a maximum depth of 40 feet.  Such wells shall require a
building permit to be obtained by the property owner and submission of all
appropriate forms and documents.  All electrical and plumbing work shall be
inspected and must be approved by the Inspector.  In no case shall any
private water supply be connected in any way to the town's water system or to
any dwelling house, dwelling unit, boarding house, or commercial
establishment.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.020  CUTOFF OF PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY IN TIMES OF EMERGENCY.



   Upon declaration of a state of emergency as set forth in Chapter 93 of
this Code, the town shall have the authority to direct any person having
public water supply to a pier to shut off such public water supply to such
pier.  In such event, the public water supply to such pier shall remain shut
off until authority is granted by the town to restore public water to the
pier.



(Ord. 1291, passed 7-31-97)



SEWERS USER REGULATIONS



§ 50.030  INTENT OF REGULATION OF SEWER USE.



   (A)   It is intended that this subchapter include provisions for
prohibiting the discharge by any wastewater customer into a public sanitary
sewer of substances which may endanger the public health and safety; or of
unpolluted waters which do not require treatment and therefore reduce the
effectiveness of the biological operations of a treatment facility.



   (B)   It is further understood that the biological and chemical
operations which can be designed for wastewater treatment do, by their
scientific nature, limit the types of constituents in wastewater which may be
treated by facilities constructed and maintained within a reasonable cost to
the public.  Consequently, the treatment facilities are designed for the
primary purpose of treating domestic wastewater in sufficient manner to
protect public health.



   Certain industrial wastewater constituents can be treated without
interference at the wastewater facilities, but only in a limited quantity or
concentration.  To ensure that discharges of industrial wastewater into the
public sanitary sewer are within such quantity and concentration limits,
reasonable and adequate regulations are provided in this subchapter.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



§ 50.031  APPLICABILITY OF SEWER USE PROVISIONS.



   All public sanitary sewer users shall comply with all applicable
provisions of this subchapter, as amended, and shall further comply with
applicable federal, state, and local laws, and ordinances and regulations,
including EPA/DEM pretreatment standards, which are at that time in effect. 
In the event of a conflict, the more stringent requirement or higher standard
shall apply.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



§ 50.032  USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or discharge, or to permit
to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within
the town or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, any human or
animal excrement, solid waste, or other materials which are or may become
hazardous, toxic, or injurious to public health or safety.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.033  DISCHARGE TO NATURAL OUTLETS.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the town
or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, any wastewater or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with requirements of EPA/DEM.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



Cross-reference:



   Pretreatment standards, see § 50.048



§ 50.034  PROHIBITION OF SEPTIC TANKS, PRIVIES, AND THE LIKE.



   After the adoption of this chapter, the construction or use of any
facility other than the public sanitary sewer for treatment or disposal of
wastewater inside the town limits shall be prohibited, except when the
facility is constructed or used under a condition set forth below:



   (A)   The construction and use of a septic tank, or similar facility
as determined by the Director of Public Works, may be permitted when it is
determined that a premise cannot, at the time the facility is considered, be
connected to a public sanitary sewer, and that there is reasonable
expectation that a septic tank can function effectively.



   (B)   Any septic tank installed prior to and operating on the date
of adoption of this chapter may continue in operation until the sanitary
facilities on the premise are connected to the public sanitary sewer pursuant
to this chapter, or until the septic tank or its field require repair,
rebuilding, reconstruction, or relocation, whichever event first occurs. No
septic tank shall be allowed except as stated in division (A) above after
January 1, 1984.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, repair,
reconstruct, or rebuild any septic tank or septic privy within the town
limits unless such act is permitted under the provisions of this section.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.035  REQUIREMENT OF SEWER USE.



   (A)   When the owner of a property inside the town limits uses such
property in any manner which results in the generation of wastewater, and
pursuant to this chapter such wastewater is discharged into a public sanitary
sewer, the owner shall install at his expense a suitable building sewer and
any other facilities necessary to connect the building sewer directly to the
public sewer at an access point provided by the town.



   (B)   Whenever a building sewer connected to the public sanitary
sewer becomes clogged, broken, out of order, or detrimental to the use of the
public sewer, the owner having charge of any building or premise through
which the building sewer collects wastewater, shall, upon notification by the
Director of Public Works, reconstruct, alter, clean, or repair the building
sewer as the condition of such may require within 30 days after receiving
notification.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.036  BUILDING SEWERS, CONNECTIONS, AND FEES.



   All costs and expenses incident to the installation of facilities to
connect the privately owned building sewer to the public sanitary sewer
system shall be borne by the owner through a connection/tap fee levied by the
town.  Such fees shall be paid upon application for connection by the owner,
or prior to the required installation of the sewer connection by the town. 
Sewer services connection fees shall be set forth in the fee schedule.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



Cross-reference:



   Fee schedule, see §§ 50.080 through 50.084



§ 50.037  SEPARATE CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.



   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building or unit.  An exception may be granted where one building stands at
the rear of another on an interior lot and it is not economically feasible
for the town to construct a public sewer and access point to the rear of the
building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, driveway, or other
access.  In such event, the building sewer may be extended to the rear
building and the whole considered as one building sewer.  However, if
separate water meters service each building or unit, separate wastewater
service fees shall be charged to each building.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



Cross-reference:



   Fee schedule, see §§ 50.080 through 50.084



§ 50.038  METHOD OF SEWER CONNECTION.



   (A)   All connections to the town sanitary sewer system shall be
made in accordance with provisions and requirements of the plumbing code. 
All such connections shall be made at access points prescribed and provided
by the town; the applicant is responsible for constructing the building sewer
in a manner necessary to insure connection at the access point.



   (B)   If, at the time of the adoption of this chapter, any
connection exists between a building sewer and a public sanitary sewer at a
point other than the access point prescribed and provided by the town, the
town may serve a notice upon the owner immediately upon discovery.  The
owner shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter, and if service is
disconnected, the owner may receive access to a public sanitary sewer only by
applying for and paying a connection fee.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



Cross-reference:



   For fee schedule, see §§ 50.080 through 50.084



§ 50.039  ELEVATION OF SEWER CONNECTION.



   All building sewers shall be brought to the building at an elevation
below the lowest floor level having sanitary facilities.  In all buildings
in which any building drain is below a point which will permit a minimum
average slope of the building sewer of one foot per 100-feet above the top of
the street sewer, wastewater carried by such building sewer shall be lifted
by pumping units or other approved means and discharged through a building
sewer having the minimum average slope.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.040  PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS.



   No connections that will allow inflow to enter the town's wastewater
collection and treatment system shall be permitted. The prohibited
connections shall include but not be limited to the connection of roof
downspouts, exterior foundation drains, or other sources of storm waters or
groundwater to a building sewer which is connected directly or indirectly to
a public sanitary sewer.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.041  PUBLIC HAZARD.



   All excavations for building sewer installations within the public
right-of-way shall be performed by Public Works personnel or under permit
issued by the Director of Public Works, and shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.  Streets,
sidewalks, plazas, and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the town, subject to the
terms and conditions of the permit.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.042  GREASE REMOVAL.



   (A)   Grease and oil traps or other interceptors shall be provided
at the user's expense, when such user operates an establishment preparing,
processing or serving food and/or food products. Grease interceptors may also
be required in other industrial or commercial establishments when they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing oil and/or
grease in amounts in excess of 200 mg/l by weight fat soluble, or for any
flammable wastes. All such traps, tanks, chambers or other interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the Director and shall be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All such interceptors shall be
serviced and emptied of the waste content as required, but not less often
than every 30 days, in order to maintain their minimum design capability to
intercept oils and greases from the wastewater discharged to the public
sanitary sewer.



   (B)   No waste removed from the interceptor shall be reintroduced
into the sanitary sewer or back into the interceptor, which will cause the
interceptor's discharge to exceed sewer use ordinance limits. The owner shall
be responsible for the sanitary disposal of such waste.



   (C)   The owner shall maintain a written record of trap maintenance
for the prior three years. A copy of each monthly service record shall be
sent to the Public Works Department no later than the fifteenth day of the
month following service.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1072, passed 4-14-88; Am. Ord. 1421, passed
8-8-02)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.043  SAND AND GRIT REMOVAL.



   (A)   Sand and grit traps or other interceptors shall be provided at
the owner's expense when they are necessary for the proper handling and
control of liquid wastes containing sand and grit in excessive amounts.  All
such interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Director of
Public Works, and shall be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.  All such interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of their
solids contents as required, but not less often than every 30 days, in order
to maintain their minimum design capability to intercept grit and sand prior
to the discharge of wastewaters to the public sanitary sewer.  Failure to
comply may result in the implementation of legal enforcement procedures.



   (B)   Wastes removed from sand and grit interceptors shall not be
discharged into the public sanitary sewer.  The owner shall be responsible
for the sanitary disposal of such wastes.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.044  PRELIMINARY TREATMENT DEVICES.



   Where preliminary treatment, pretreatment, flow-equalizing facilities,
or grease, oil, grit, and sand traps or other interceptors are provided for
any wastewater, they shall be continuously maintained in satisfactory
condition and effective operation by the owner at his expense.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.045  INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE PERMITS.



   (A)   Any person who owns or operates a facility producing or
proposed to produce wastewater of any quantity, strength, or other quality
which would not, or may not, meet the conditions and limitations set forth in
this subchapter, and who is connected to, or desires to make connection to
the public sanitary sewer, shall make application to the Director of Public
Works for a waste discharge permit authorizing continued discharge, or an
industrial connection for discharging, of the described attendant wastewater.
No industrial waste, pretreated waste, or any waste other than normal
wastewater shall be permitted to connect to the town's sanitary sewer system
without the prior approval of the Director.



   (B)   The Building Inspector will not issue a building permit or
certificate of compliance for any structure for an industrial user until the
applicant presents to him a certified copy of a completed and approved
industrial sewer connection and waste discharge application.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.046  TIME LIMIT FOR OBTAINING INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE PERMIT.



   All persons whose plants, buildings, or premises are connected to the
public sanitary sewer from and after the effective date of this chapter, who
may be subject to the provisions herein, and who have not heretofore obtained
an industrial waste discharge permit, shall have 30 calendar days after
notification within which to make application to the town for a permit as
required.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



§ 50.047  INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION.



   Users seeking a waste discharge permit shall complete and file with the
Director of Public Works an application on a form prescribed by the Director,
accompanied by the applicable fee.  The Director may further require that
the application include any additional information deemed necessary by the
Director in order to determine if pretreatment will be required to meet the
conditions and limitations of this subchapter, or to meet EPA/DEM
pretreatment standards.  The Director may further require any information
which is required by EPA/DEM or the town.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



Cross-reference:



   Fee schedule, see §§ 50.080 through 50.084



§ 50.048  PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works will determine through review of
the industrial discharge permit application and in cooperation with the
applicant whether the waste produced shall be pretreated by the applicant
before it is discharged into the town sewer.  When appropriate, at
facilities already in operation, sampling of wastes to determine
characteristics shall be performed by the applicant at the applicant's cost
as provided herein.  The Director shall advise the applicant of the level of
pretreatment required and of a compliance schedule.  If the Director
determines that such waste must be pretreated, the applicant shall submit to
the Director for approval, plans and specifications of the proposed
pretreatment facilities.  If such plans and specifications are approved as
submitted, or amended by the Director, the applicant shall proceed according
to an agreed schedule to provide such pretreatment facilities.



   (B)   The construction plans for such pretreatment plants or
facilities shall after their approval be placed on file in permanent
reproducible form with the Director without cost to the town.



   (C)   If the pretreatment facilities are completed according to the
approved plans and specifications, and the applicant demonstrates its
effective use and provides a proper sewer connection and industrial waste
discharge application, the Director shall issue the applicant a waste
discharge permit.  The permit shall authorize such connection and permit the
applicant to discharge such waste into the public sewer at the rate and in
the quantity and/or connection stated herein.  These pretreatment facilities
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by
the owner at his expense.



   (D)   The conditions and limits in this subchapter shall be used as
pretreatment plant design criteria and shall be applied to the maximum
estimated rate of flow through the plant.  Customers who are required to
pass wastewater through a grease trap or other interceptor will provide for a
minimum detention period of ten minutes between the influent and effluent
baffles with 20% of the total volume of the grease trap or interceptor being
allowed for a sludge pocket.  This sludge pocket shall be serviced as
required, but at intervals of not longer than 30 days at the owner's
expense.  It shall be kept free of inorganic solids which settle into the
required sludge pocket, and all grease or other floating material shall be
skimmed from the trap or basin tank at intervals of a frequency sufficient to
avoid accumulation of scum covering the surface of the liquid, but not less
frequently than each 30 days.



   (E)   Upon written notification by the Director that a grease
interceptor is required for a given discharge, the user will have a period of
120 days for compliance.  Such compliance consists of the provision to the
Director of detailed plans and specifications for approval and the method of
installation and operability of a grease trap or other interceptor device. 
Failure to comply will result in the implementation of the enforcement
procedures of this subchapter.  There shall be a debris screen included in
pretreatment facilities, if such is required by the Director of Public Works,
immediately preceding and/or following the grease interceptor through which
all industrial waste, excepting flow from toilet and personal sanitary
facilities, shall pass.  A debris screen may be required as the final
feature of a pretreatment facility with a maximum size opening necessary to
protect the public sewer system.



   (F)   The solid matter removed from any interceptor or that which is
retained by the debris screen shall be disposed of in lawful manner, without
nuisance, by the owner at his expense, but shall in no case be placed in the
town's wastewater system.



   (G)   Should the wastewater system customer operate a grease trap,
an interceptor or other pretreatment device in which sludge is collected and
stored, such sludge shall not be placed in the town's wastewater system and
all effluent from such pretreatment plant or device must pass through a
debris screen if required.



   (H)   If it is determined that an applicant discharges wastewater
which does not require pretreatment, the applicant may be issued a permit
permitting the applicant to discharge wastewater to the public sewer at a
publicly provided access point at a rate, and in the quantities and
qualities, stated in the permit.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1072, passed 4-14-88)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.049  INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE PERMIT CANCELLATION.



   If any industrial user is in violation of any condition of his waste
discharge permit or any other provision of this subchapter, and it is
determined pursuant to this subchapter that the user's service shall be
disconnected, the waste discharge permit shall be cancelled upon
disconnection.  Any industrial user whose permit has been cancelled may
receive publicly-provided access to the public sanitary sewer only after
making an application for a new waste discharge permit.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



§ 50.050  INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE PERMIT FEES.



   Each waste discharge permit issued under the provisions hereof shall
terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of its issuance. 
Permit fees for initial permit issuance, annual permit renewal, and
restoration of the permit shall be as set forth in the fee schedule.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



Cross-reference:



   Fee schedule, see §§ 50.080 through 50.084



§ 50.051 INDUSTRIAL USER OWNERSHIP CHANGES.



   In the event an industrial user authorized to connect to the wastewater
system for industrial waste disposal under the provisions hereof is sold,
leased, or its ownership is otherwise changed or the industrial operation
thereof is operated by a person other than that named in the permit, a new
application for a waste discharge permit shall be made by the new owner.  No
permit issued under the provisions hereof shall be assignable to any other
person.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.052  EFFECT OF APPROVALS OF PRETREATMENT FACILITIES; WASTEWATER
CHARACTERISTICS.



   (A)   Any approval by the Director of Public Works of a type, kind,
or capacity of a pretreatment facility installation shall not relieve a
person of the responsibility of subsequently revamping, enlarging, or
otherwise modifying the pretreatment installation to accomplish the original
intended purpose or to meet new or revised standards.  Nor shall any written
or oral agreement as to limits of waste constituents or volumes of
wastewaters be considered as final approval for continuing operation or
otherwise prevent the town from subsequently withdrawing its approval. 
These limits will be subject to monitoring, study, and change as considered
necessary to serve their intended purpose.



   (B)   Changes in the characteristics or volumes of wastewater of any
permit holder will constitute a basis for the Director's requiring a new
application for a waste discharge permit.



   (C)   Furthermore, permits issued may be modified as may be
necessary due to changes in pretreatment requirements by EPA/DEM.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



Cross-reference:



   Pretreatment requirements, see § 50.048



§ 50.053  PERMIT ISSUANCE DOES NOT CONVEY PROPERTY RIGHTS, EXCLUSIVE
PRIVILEGES.



   The issuance of a permit by the Director of Public Works does not
convey any property rights in either real or personal property, or any
exclusive privileges, nor does it authorize any injury to private property,
invasion of personal rights, nor violation of applicable federal, state, or
local laws, ordinances or regulations.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



§ 50.054  DISCHARGE OF INDUSTRIAL OR PRETREATED WASTES TO BE APPROVED.



   No industrial waste, pretreated waste, or any waste other than normal
wastewater shall be permitted to connect to the town's sanitary sewer system
without the prior approval of the Director of Public Works.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.055  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   No person shall cause to be discharged inflow, groundwater,
uncontaminated cooling water, or uncontaminated process water to any public
sanitary sewer.  Such water and other unpolluted water may be discharged to
a sewer designated specifically as a storm sewer, or to a natural outlet,
provided such discharge is approved by the local, state, or federal
jurisdiction having authority.  (Ord., passed 7-28-83) Penalty, see § 50.999



Cross-reference:



   Discharge to natural outlet, see § 50.033



§ 50.056  PROHIBITED WASTES AND LIMITATIONS.



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged from any point any
of the following described wastewaters to any public sanitary sewers:



   (A)   Any liquid or vapor having a discharge temperature higher than
120°F., nor any liquid or vapor having heat in such quantities that the
temperature at the treatment plant influent exceeds 104°F.



   (B)   Any wastewater which contains more than 200 mg/l by weight of
fat soluble oil or grease, or containing any substance that will solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between 32°F. and 150°F. at the point of
discharge into the system. All petroleum based oil and/or grease discharges
are prohibited.



   (C)   Liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature of
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
sewerage facilities or to the operation of the system.  At no time shall two
successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge
into the sewer system, be more than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the
lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Such potentially explosive
materials include, but are not limited to gasoline, kerosene, naphtha,
benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides,
chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, and methane.



   (D)   Any wastewater that contains more than two mg/l by weight, of
hydrochloric acid, hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, or nitrous oxide.



   (E)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
tars, plastics, wood, rags, and other fibrous solids, feathers, offal, whole
blood, paunch contents, manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry and
lime residues, beer or distillery slops, chemical residues, fiberglass,
paint, paint thinners, latex, lacquers, or ink residues, cannery waste,
ground paper products, unshredded bulk solids with particles greater than
l/2-inch in any dimension, discharges from photographic laboratories, or any
other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow
in sewers, or other interference (as defined in § 50.001) with the proper
operation of the wastewater collection system and the wastewater treatment
facilities.



   (F)   Any wastewater having a stabilized pH lower than six or higher
than ten standard units (SU), or having any wastewater that would cause the
wastewater treatment facilities' influent to exceed a minimum of six or a
maximum of eight standard units (SU), or having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to sewers which are constructed of
vitrified clay, cast iron, ductile iron, ABS plastic, PVC plastic, or
concrete; associated or connected structures; equipment; or personnel of the
wastewater collection system, the wastewater treatment facilities, or the
treatment process.



   (G)   Any wastewater containing toxic or poisonous substances in
such concentrations as to constitute a hazard to humans, animals, fish, or
birds; interfere with any wastewater treatment process; or create any hazard
in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant.



   (H)   In no event shall any person exceed the following limits on
toxic or poisonous substances:



 




Fixed Upper Limits for Constituents




Substance

 

Weight (mg/l)




Ammonia

 

100.00




Arsenic

 

1.00




Beryllium

 

0.20




Boron

 

1.00




Cadmium

 

0.01




Chromium

 

2.00




Copper

 

1.00




Cyanide

 

0.10




Iron

 

50.00




Lead

 

3.00




Manganese

 

60.00




Mercury

 

0.20




Methylene chloride

 

0.10




Nickel

 

3.00




Organic nitrogen

 

30.00




Selenium

 

0.20




Silver

 

0.30




Sulfates

 

350.00




Sulfides

 

8.00




Tetrachloroethylene

 

0.50




Trichloroethylene

 

0.50




Zinc

 

0.50










 



   (I)   The limits fixed in division (H) above shall be minimum
requirements of all industrial users but do not relieve the user from
limiting concentrations of these or other elements or chemical substances
which may constitute a public health or safety hazard, or interference with
the public wastewater treatment process, as provided for in this section.



   (J)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance, singly or by
interaction with other wastes, being capable of creating a public health or
safety nuisance, hazard to life, or preventing entry into public sanitary
sewers for their maintenance, inspection, and repair.



   (K)   Any wastes which are of unusual volume, concentration of
solids, or composition that may create obstruction to the flow in sewers or
other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater works and the
proper treatment of the influent.



   (L)   Wastewater containing substances which are not responsive to
treatment by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are responsive
to treatment only to such a degree that the wastewater treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.



   (M)   Any wastewater containing more than 4,000 mg/l total solids by
weight.



   (N)   Wastewaters at a flow rate of containing such concentrations
or quantities of pollutants, that:



      (1)  Exceed for any time period longer than 15 minutes more than
five times the average 24-hour concentration as defined during normal
operation.



      (2)  Would cause a treatment process upset and subsequent loss
of treatment efficiency.



   (O)   Any wastewater containing phenols or other taste-producing
substances in such concentrations as to produce odor or taste in the effluent
so as to effect the taste or odor of the receiving water.



   (P)   Any wastewater containing barium, chlorides, fluorides,
phospherous, or surfactants in such concentrations as to interfere with any
operation of the town's wastewater treatment facility, or to cause the
wastewater treatment plant effluent to fail to meet requirements of other
agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.



   (Q)   Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration that they do not comply with regulations or orders issued by
the appropriate state or federal agency having control over their use, and
which will or may cause damage or hazards to the sewerage facilities or
personnel operating the system.



   (R)   Any concentrated dye wastes, spent tanning solutions, or other
wastes with objectionable color, not removable by the treatment process.



   (S)   Any wastewater containing polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB's).



   (T)   Any wastewater containing any measurable traces of pesticides,
herbicides, or biocides.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1072, passed 4-14-88)  Penalty, see § 50.999



Statutory reference:



   Emission of pollutants, see G.S. § 160A-185



§ 50.057  B.O.D. LIMIT.



   The admission into the public sewers of any water or waste having a
five-day biochemical oxygen demand (B.O.D. 5) in excess of 250 mg/l by weight
on a 24-hour composite sample basis, will be subject to an excess strength
surcharge as stated in § 50.069.  Any sample taken with a five-day
biochemical oxygen demand (B.O.D.5) in excess of 1,000 mg/l, by weight, will
result in the discharger meeting requirements as prescribed in § 50.048, the
remedy to be assessed surcharge rates.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1072, passed 4-14-88)



§ 50.058  CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND.



   The admission into the public sewers of any water or waste having a
chemical oxygen demand (C.O.D.) in excess of 750 mg/l by weight on a 24-hour
composite sample basis, will be subject to an excess strength surcharge as
stated in § 50.069.  Any sample taken with a chemical oxygen demand
(C.O.D.) in excess of 2,500 mg/l, by weight, will result in the discharger
meeting requirements as prescribed in § 50.048.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1072, passed 4-14-88)



§ 50.059  SUSPENDED SOLIDS.



   The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having a
suspended solids content in excess of 200 mg/l by weight on a 24-hour
composite basis, will be subject to an excess strength surcharge as stated in
§ 50.069.  Any sample taken with suspended solids in excess of 700 mg/l by
weight will result in the discharger meeting requirements as prescribed in §
50.048.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1072, passed 4-14-88)



§ 50.060  FLOW EQUALIZATION.



   (A)   The admission into the public sewers of any wastewater in
volumes, or with constituents, such that the transportation of such
wastewater through the public sewer to the treatment facility will not
sufficiently dilute such wastewater to prevent interference with treatment or
to prevent endangerment of public health and safety at the treatment facility
shall be prohibited.



   (B)   Where necessary, facilities for varying the rate of discharge
may be required as part of the building sewer in order to bring constituents
or volume of flow discharged within the limits previously prescribed or to an
otherwise acceptable level, or to hold or equalize flows such that no peak
flow conditions may hamper the operation of any unit of the public sewer or
treatment facility.  Such an equalization unit shall have a capacity
suitable to serve its intended purpose, and be equipped with acceptable
outlet control facilities to provide flexibility in operation and accommodate
changing conditions in the waste flow.  Equalizing facilities shall be
provided to prevent flows from exceeding the following limits:



 


Average Flow Gallons/Day

 

Allowable Ratio of Peak to Average Flow




10,000 to 100,000

 

3




100,000 to 500,000

 

2




More than 500,000

 

l.5




 



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.061  DELETERIOUS DISCHARGES.



   (A)   If any wastewater is discharged, or is proposed to be
discharged, to the public sewers, which contain the constituents or possess
the characteris-tics enumerated in the preceding sections of this subchapter,
and which may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater collection
system, wastewater treatment processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Director of Public Works may as a condition to the waste discharge permit:



      (1)   Reject the wastes.



      (2)    Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers.



      (3)   Require control over the quantities, concentration, or
rates of discharge.



      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of receiving,
handling, and treating the wastes not covered by current charges of fees for
wastewater service.



   (B)   If the Director permits or requires the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design, installation of the plants and
equipment, and their effective operation shall be subject to the prior review
and approval of the Director and the local, state, and federal agencies
having jurisdiction, and shall be subject to the requirements of all other
applicable rules, regulations, ordinances, and laws.



   (C)   In the event a spill or loss into the building sewer of any
deleterious materials is threatened or occurs, the owner shall promptly
notify the Director of the nature of the spill or threatened spill, the
quantity, and if it has occurred, the time of the spill.  The cause of such
spills and losses of deleterious materials shall be corrected, and the costs
of such correction, together with all resulting damages, shall be borne by
the owner.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.062  WATER QUALITY CHANGES.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works shall, from time to time, have
tests made to determine the quality of waste being discharged into the public
sewer from individual users of the wastewater system, from connections of
building sewers carrying composite waste from domestic users or industrial
users, and from connections including the premises of industrial waste
discharge permit holders under the provisions hereof.  If, at any time, such
waste becomes of such a quality or quantity that it requires pretreatment,
the Director shall have the authority to require that proper permits be
obtained and proper pretreatment facilities be installed by the permit holder
at his expense.



   (B)   In the event of a significant change in a wastewater system
user's wastes being discharged to the public sanitary sewer, the user shall
promptly notify the Director of the nature of the change in quality or
strength and in volume.  These changes shall be subject to verification by
the town.  Appropriate remedies for the adequate treatment of such wastes
thus tested may be required by the Director. "SIGNIFICANT" is defined here to
mean a change of 10% or more in strength or volume of wastes, based on the
average flow.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.063  STANDARDS OF WASTE DISCHARGE AND DELIVERY.



   (A)   The delivery of all effluent from a user to the public
sanitary sewer shall be at a reasonable and uniform discharge rate, as
produced without storage, except that which is necessary in the pretreatment
or equalization facilities of the waste producer.



   (B)   Wastes will be accepted which have satisfactory conditions or
quality after pretreatment by the industrial user in a pretreatment facility
or by a process which has been approved by the Director of Public Works, is
continuously maintained and operated by the producer at no cost to the town,
and is continuously subject to inspection by the Director or his designated
representative.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.064  SEPTIC TANK AND PORTABLE TOILET WASTES.



   After the date of adoption of this chapter, the discharge of septic
tank waste into the public sanitary sewer system by any means shall be
prohibited.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.065  QUALITY DETERMINATION; EFFLUENT SAMPLING.



   (A)   Periodic measurements of flow, suspended solids, B.O.D., and
other appropriate waste characteristics for surcharge determination and other
purposes shall be made by those permittees specifically designated by the
Director of Public Works. The Director shall determine the number of 24-hour
flow measurements and samples required.  Continuous monitoring may be
required by the Director in cases involving large fluctuations in quantity or
quality of wastes, or if the wastewater appears to have characteristics which
may damage the receiving system.



   (B)   All public sanitary sewer users whose total average sewage
discharge is greater than 50,000 gallons per day, or whose total average
discharge has a flow or pollutant loading requiring utilization of greater
than 5% of the design capacity of the town's collection system, shall, unless
exempted by the Director, install and maintain, at the user's expense,
facilities for continuously measuring and sampling the total waste
discharge.  This requirement may be waived for a particular user only when
the quantity, flow rate, and characteristics of the wastewater can be
adequately determined without such structures; when the physical arrangement
of industrial plant facilities with respect to sewer facilities make such an
arrangement unusually costly and other means of ascertaining the quantity,
flow rate, and characteristics can be devised; or when previous sampling
facilities have been built by either the town or a prior owner.



      (1)   When the Director shall determine for such facilities
discharging less than 50,000 gallons per day that the nature of the discharge
or conditions of the permit warrant continuous monitoring and sampling, the
Director may require the user to install and maintain sampling facilities as
stated heretofore.



      (2)   Any sampling facility previously built by the town shall
become the maintenance responsibility of the user after the adoption of this
chapter, unless the Director determines that it is in the best interest of
the town to continue maintenance.



   (C)   All flow measurements, sampling, and analysis shall be
performed by qualified personnel.  All laboratory analyses of industrial
wastewater samples shall be performed by an EPA/DEM certified laboratory in
accordance with current standard chemical analysis methods for wastewater
established by EPA/DEM.  All samples shall represent the normal wastewater
flow from the premises over a 24-hour period.  The samples shall be
composited according to the flow, either manually with at least one sample
collected hourly, or by automatic integrated sampling equipment.



   (D)   Unless otherwise prescribed by the Director, self-monitoring
reports of the sampling shall be submitted to the town quarterly in
accordance with the following schedule:



 


Monitoring Period

 

Report Due Date




January l - March 31

 

April 15




April l - June 30

 

July 15




July l - September l

 

October 15




October l - December 31

 

January 15




 



   (E)   Where a permittee operates as an integrated complex involving
varying processes and having separate industrial waste sewer connections
within the same contributory area, the permittee may be considered as one
unit with multiple connections.  An analysis for each connection may be
combined in proportion to the flow from the connection and the weighted
average of the results thus obtained may be used as the measure of the total
flow and concentration of the wasterwater discharged into the public sanitary
sewer.



   (F)   The handling, storage, and analysis of all samples taken for
the determination of the characteristics of waste discharged shall be
performed in accordance with standard methods.



   (G)   The town may test for quality, to include sampling, any of the
waste being discharged to the public sanitary sewers at any time.  A duly
authorized representative of the Director may enter an industrial user's
facility at any time, by appropriate application at the plant office during
business or operational hours, for this purpose or for reviewing operations
in the plant to estimate the quality of wastes being produced.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.066  QUANTITY DETERMINATION.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided, the quantity of wastewater
delivered to the public sanitary sewers shall be the same as the water
delivered to the producer by the town water system.



   (B)   Should the user evaporate or otherwise legally dispose of
water delivered by the town's water system, it shall be the obligation of the
user to install at his expense such meters or other flow measurement devices
to accurately determine the portion or quantity of the metered water
delivered to the wastewater system.



   (C)   The Director of Public Works may establish a constant ratio,
factor, or percentage to be applied to the metered water quantity delivered
by the town in order to estimate the quantity of wastewater delivered by the
user. Determination of this factor shall be the responsibility of the user as
will be the demonstration of the accuracy and generality of the factor to
obtain the Director's approval thereof.  The value of this factor will be
periodically reviewed for accuracy and may be revised.



   (D)   All domestic and industrial users served by the town
wastewater system shall pay sewer user charges to the town.  Where no
payment procedure is established, it shall be the obligation of the owner in
all instances to immediately submit to the Director a statement concerning
water consumption and disposal upon which wastewater service fees can be
determined. If changes in the consumption and disposal conditions so stated
take place after billing rates and charges have been initially established, a
further statement is required to be submitted on forms supplied by the
Director.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)  Penalty, see § 50.999



Cross-reference:



   Fee schedule, see §§ 50.080 through 50.084



§ 50.067  POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works and other duly authorized agents
or employees of the town bearing proper credentials and identification shall
be permitted to enter all properties, privately and publicly owned, for the
purposes of meter reading, inspection, observation, measurement, gauging,
sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
The Director or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into
any processes, including those of the metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining,
ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing
on the volume, nature, and source of discharges to the town's wastewater
collection system, storm sewers, or other natural outlets.



   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties
referred to above, the Director or duly authorized employees and agents of
the town shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the owner.



   (C)   The property owner shall not be released from liability to any
extent in the event that a town agent or employee is injured while making
inspections which are pursuant to this subchapter on privately-owned property
as a result of negligence on the part of the private property owner or any of
his agents or employees.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



§ 50.068  SEWER SERVICE CONNECTION FEES; USER CHARGES.



   (A)   Sewer service connection fees shall be charged pursuant to the
fee schedule to cover the cost of providing an access point to the public
sewer for the applicant.  These fees shall be as specified in the fee
schedule.



   (B)    Sanitary sewer service rates shall be as established in the
fee schedule.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



Cross-reference:



   Fee schedule, see §§ 50.080 through 50.084



§ 50.069  EXTRA STRENGTH WASTEWATER SURCHARGES.



   (A)    Standard strength wastewater shall be defined as that
wastewater having a maximum B.O.D.5, C.O.D., and suspended solids
concentration as follows:



 


Type of Concentration

 

Amount



B.O.D.5
 

250 mg/l



C.O.D.
 

750 mg/l



Suspended Solids (SS)
 

200 mg/l




 



   (B)   Industrial wastewater surcharges shall be assessed to any
industrial users discharging wastewater, including constituents, at a
concentration exceeding any of the limits established in this section. 
Surcharge rates shall be as set forth in the fee schedule and in consultation
with the Director of Public Works.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



§ 50.070  DISCONTINUANCE OF WASTEWATER TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL SERVICE; WHEN
PERMISSIBLE.



   The town may discontinue wastewater treatment and disposal service to a
customer when:



   (A)   A government agency having jurisdiction informs the town that
the effluent from the publicly-owned wastewater treatment facility is no
longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found
that the customer is delivering wastewater to the wastewater system that
cannot be sufficiently treated or that requires treatment that is not
provided by the town.



   (B)   The customer commits any of the following actions:



      (1)   Discharges industrial wastewater of a quality or
quantity that is in violation of the waste discharge permit; commits any
action prohibited by the permit or provision of this subchapter; or fails to
comply with any required provision of the permit or provision of this
subchapter.



      (2)   Discharges waters or wastes having a deleterious effect
upon the wastewater system.



      (3)   Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate
in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater system or the
wastewater treatment process.



      (4)   Fails to pay user charges or other fees for wastewater
services when due.



      (5)   Discharges prohibited wastes to the public sanitary
sewer.



      (6)   Makes a connection of a building sewer to a public
sanitary sewer at a point other than the publicly provided access point.



      (7)   Discharges inflow, or uncontaminated cooling water or
process water into the public sanitary sewer.



      (8)   Fails to properly clean and dispose of wastes collected
in grease or grit interceptors.



      (9)   Discharges industrial wastewater under provisions of a
waste discharge permit issued to a person other than the customer discharging
the wastewater.



          (10)   Fails to renew an expired waste discharge permit.



          (11)   Fails to meet compliance schedules.



        (12)   Otherwise violates the provisions of this subchapter
or fails or omits to perform in such a manner as to constitute good cause for
disconnection contrary to the purpose and intent of this subchapter.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1072, passed 4-14-88)



WATER AND SEWER RATES



§ 50.080  SCHEDULE OF CONNECTION CHARGES; USAGE RATES.



   (A)     (A)   Water and sewer rates, connection charges, and
other applicable charges as set forth in the schedule of fees listed below
shall be determined from time to time by the Board of Aldermen and kept on
file in the office of the Town Clerk. Adjustments to water and sewer rates
shall be applicable to the first billing following the effective date of the
modified rate.



   (B)   The revenue derived from the fees as set forth hereinafter, to
include fees derived from utility system operation fees, shall be used for
the retirement of water and sewer bonds, the payment of debt service and
capital improvement projects, operation and maintenance of the water and
sewer system and other expenditures permitted by applicable law (collectively
the "water and sewer expenses"). Money collected from the payment of the
utility system operation fees shall be placed in the Water and Sewer Fund and
shall be used only to pay current water and sewer expenses. No part of such
fees shall be used for the payment of water and sewer expenses to be
furnished in the future. In order to ensure that such utility system
operation fees are spent for water and sewer expenses currently furnished,
the following steps shall be followed:



      (1)   In preparing a budget for the upcoming fiscal year, the
Town Manager shall estimate the amount of utility system operation fees to be
collected in such upcoming fiscal year;



      (2)   An amount equal to the estimated utility system
operation fees shall be allocated in the budget for such fiscal year for
payment of water and sewer expenses during such fiscal year; and



      (3)   Prior to the end of the current fiscal year, the Town
Manager or his/her designee will evaluate any net overage or loss of utility
system operation fee revenue collected. Any overage so calculated will be
spent on current water and sewer expenses within the next fiscal year.



      (4)   Utility system operation fees shall be due and payable
at the time of submitting a new building construction application.



   (C)   (1)   The following fees are hereby established by the
Board of Aldermen:



 


Essential Water and Sewer Fees




Meter Size

 

Water Tap Fee

 

Water
Utility System Operation Fee

 

Sewer Tap Size

 

Sewer Tap Fee

 

Sewer
Utility System Operation Fee

 

Water
Fixed Monthly System Maintenance Charge

 

Sewer
Fixed Monthly System Maintenance Charge





3/4" x 5/8"
 
The greater of $550 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
$2,400
 
4”
 
The greater of $1,000 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
$2,500
 
$16
 
$25


1"
 
The greater of $700 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
2,400
 
4”
 
The greater of $1,000 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
2,500
 
16
 
25


1-1/2"
 
The greater of $2,200 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
8,240
 
4”
 
The greater of $1,000 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
2,500
 
54
 
93


2"
 
The greater of $2,200 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
14,645
 
6"
 
The greater of $1,000 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
4,500
 
127
 
195


3"
 
The greater of $2,200 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
30,205
 
6"
 
The greater of $1,000 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
4,500
 
210
 
325


4"
 
The greater of $2,200 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
50,345
 
8"
 
The greater of $2,200 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
25,635
 
450
 
729


6"
 
The greater of $2,200 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
146,460
 
8"
 
The greater of $2,200 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
25,635
 
739
 
1,162




 



 


Non-Essential Water Fees




Meter Size

 

Water Tap Fee

 

Water
System Operation Fee

 

Sewer Tap Size

 

Sewer Tap Fee

 

Sewer
System Operation Fee

 

Water
Fixed Monthly System Maintenance Charge

 

Sewer
Fixed Monthly System Maintenance Charge



3/4" x 5/8"
 
The greater of $550 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
$2,400
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
16
 
N/A


1"
 
The greater of $700 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
2,400
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
16
 
N/A


1-1/2"
 
The greater of $2,200 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
8,240
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
54
 
N/A


2”
 
The greater of $2,200 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
14,645
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
127
 
N/A



 



      (2)   Areas within the municipal boundaries of the town which
lie west of the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway are provided wastewater
collection and treatment service through a system owned and operated by Cape
Fear Public Utility Authority. In these areas the following fees shall apply,
and are hereby established by the Board of Aldermen:



 


Essential Water Fees - Mainland




Meter Size

 

Water Tap Fee

 

Sewer Tap Size

 

Sewer Tap Fee

 

Water
Utility System Operation Fee

 

Water
Fixed Monthly System Maintenance Charge

 

Sewer
Fixed Monthly System Maintenance Charge





3/4" x 5/8"
 
The greater of $550 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
$2,400
 
$16
 
N/A


1"
 
The greater of $700 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
2,400
 
16
 
N/A


1-1/2"
 
The greater of $2,200 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
8,240
 
54
 
N/A


2"
 
The greater of $2,200 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
14,645
 
127
 
N/A


3"
 
The greater of $2,200 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
30,205
 
210
 
N/A


4"
 
The greater of $2,200 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
50,345
 
450
 
N/A


6"
 
The greater of $2,200 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
146,460
 
739
 
N/A




 



 


Non-Essential Water Fees - Mainland




Meter Size

 

Water Tap Fee

 

Sewer Tap Size

 

Sewer Tap Fee

 

Water
Utility System Operation Fee

 

Water
Fixed Monthly System Maintenance Charge

 

Sewer
Fixed Monthly System Maintenance Charge



3/4" x 5/8"
 
The greater of $550 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
2,400
 
16
 
N/A


1"
 
The greater of $700 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
2,400
 
16
 
N/A


1-1/2"
 
The greater of $2,200 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
8,240
 
54
 
N/A


2”
 
The greater of $2,200 or Actual Cost + 15%
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
14,645
 
127
 
N/A



 



      (3)    A utility system operation fee for water taps for piers
and irrigation systems which shall not be connected to the town’s
wastewater system shall be charged as specified in § 50.080(C)(1) and (2).



      (4)    In order to equitably distribute the cost of water and
sewer service among all residents, it is the policy of the town to charge
system maintenance charges for water and sewer service to customers who
temporarily discontinue water and sewer service.  Therefore, fees shall be
charged as follows in the event water and sewer service is discontinued at
the request of a customer:



         (a)   Water and sewer during the entire time service is
discontinued shall be charged fees only as specified in § 50.082.



         (b)   Customers who do not pay the system maintenance
charges for water and sewer during any time service is discontinued shall be
charged a disconnect fee as specified in § 50.082.  Such customers shall
also pay the then existing Utility System Impact Fee at the time service is
restored.



         (c)   Water and Sewer Usage Charges



 


Water - Essential

 

$1.52 per 100 cubic feet




Water - Non-essential

 

$2.65 per 100 cubic feet (0-4,000 cubic feet)




$3.20 per 100 cubic feet (>4,000-10,000 cubic feet)




$5.00 per 100 cubic feet (>10,000 cubic feet)




Sewer

 
$2.65 per 100 cubic feet


Jetting pilings
 
$25.00 per piling


Bulk water
 
$2.40 per 100 cubic feet with a minimum $25 charge



 



      (5)   Water usage charges for customers outside the town
limits shall be double the charges set forth above.



      (6)   Billing charges shall based on metered water usage at
the established water rate, sewer usage (based on 100% of water use) at the
established rate, water system maintenance charge and sewer system
maintenance charge.



      (7)   Special charges:



         (a)   Meter testing - $25 if meter is found to be within
AWWA standards.



         (b)   Water cut on/off - $30 each during working hours.



         (c)   Water cut on/off - $50 each after hours, weekends,
holidays.



         (d)   Read meter request (except for property changes) -
$10 each.



         (e)   Late fee is 10% of the bill after 30 days.



      (8)   Tap fees (based upon meter, or user, connection size)
shall include actual construction costs, permitting costs and engineering
costs plus a 15% additional charge. However, for taps 2” and larger, water
or sewer, owner/developer may choose to have the tap(s) installed privately
only if such work meets the requirements and specifications of the town and
other agencies as may be involved.



      (9)   Minimum commercial sewer tap size in 6”.



      (10)   Tap upgrade installations shall be the actual cost of
the change plus the difference between impact fees.



      (11)   Tap installation planning cycle:  The town requires a
minimum of three weeks from the receipt of an order for installation until
completion.  However, for taps that may involve engineering, permitting or
other agencies, the time to completion may be considerably longer.



      (12)   All persons, firms, or corporations which construct
buildings for which building permits are issued after July 1, 2009, and such
buildings are sprinkled or contain standpipe systems where sprinkler or
standpipe systems are connected to the utility system shall not be charged a
utility system impact fee.



   (D)    All new construction and renovations of existing buildings in
excess of 50% of the building's physical value shall be required to install
taps and meters of the size required by the town in accordance with § 50.018.



   (E)   (1)   Utility system impact fees as set forth in division
(C) of this section will be charged for all new structures connecting to the
utility system for which building permits are issued after December 16,
1986.  Structures, the use of which is modified after December 16, 1986 so
that a larger water tap is required, will be charged the tap fees for the
larger water and sewer taps plus the difference between the utility system
impact fee for the existing water tap size and the impact fee for the larger
tap size required for the new use.



      (2)   In instances where owners of existing buildings or the
town install a larger tap and meter size to meet current town standards and
the installation of such larger tap and meter size is not the result of a
change in use or expansion in use, there will be no charge made for the
utility system impact fee or tap fees.



      (3)   When an existing building is replaced with a new
building on the same lot (and such lot is directly served by an existing
water and sewer tap) and there is no change in use or expansion of use which
requires a larger tap or meter size, there will be no charge made for the
utility system impact fee or tap fees.



   (F)    All persons, firms, or corporations which construct buildings
for which building permits are issued after December 16, 1986, and such
buildings are sprinkled or contain standpipe systems where sprinkler or
standpipe systems are not otherwise required by the North Carolina State
Building Code, shall receive credit for the actual cost of the sprinkler
and/or standpipe system up to 25% of the utility system impact fee, but in no
case shall the credit be less than $1,500.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1036, passed 12-4-86; Am. Ord. 1091, passed
3-9-89; Am. Ord. 1156, passed 9-12-91; Am. Ord. 1182, passed 6-17-92; Am.
Ord. 1297, passed 1-8-98; Am. Ord. 1418, passed 7-11-02; Am. Ord. 1512,
passed 7-13-06; Am. Ord. 1537, passed 6-28-07; Am. Ord. 1576, passed 6-25-08;
Am. Ord. 1607, passed 6-25-09; Am. Ord. 1661, passed 7-14-11; Am. Ord. 1683,
passed 6-14-12; Am. Ord. 1731, passed 6-12-14; Am. Ord. 1761, passed 6-8-16;
Am. Ord. 1762, passed 1-12-17)



Statutory reference:



    Authority to fix rates, see G.S.§ 160A-314



§ 50.081  REESTABLISHMENT OF WATER SERVICE WHICH HAS BEEN TERMINATED FOR
NONPAYMENT.



   The town will reestablish service upon payment by the customer of the
past due balance including all late payment charges and applicable
reconnection fees.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1036, passed 12-4-86) 



§ 50.082  DISCONNECTION, RECONNECTION AND METER READING FEES.



   (A)   Customers whose service has been terminated for nonpayment and
who pay their past due balances and late payment charges shall pay a
reconnection fee of $50 to cover the cost of reestablishing water service to
the customer.  The town shall reestablish water service within a reasonable
amount of time after notification of payment by Town Hall.



   (B)   Customers who request that their water service be disconnected
shall pay a disconnect fee of $30 during normal business hours and $50 during
non-business hours.  There shall be a reconnect fee of $30 during normal
business hours and $50 during non-business hours. Business hours shall be
based upon Water Division schedule, 7:00 a.m. until 4:00 p.m.



   (C)   Customers who request a meter reading without disconnection,
except for property transfers, shall pay a fee of $10 per reading.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1036, passed 12-4-86; Am. Ord. 1512, passed
7-13-06; Am. Ord. 1537, passed 6-28-07; Am. Ord. 1683, passed 6-14-12)



§ 50.083  SPECIAL RATES.



   All water received as a special use shall be charged at a rate as set
forth in the fee schedule of § 50.080.  A meter rental fee and installation
or removal fee for the meter shall also be assessed for the special use of
water per application as set forth in the fee schedule of § 50.080.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



§ 50.084  BILLING; PAYMENT OF ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   The owner of improved property within the town shall be liable
for the payment of all water and sewer services furnished to such premises,
and if the charges are not paid, legal action may be taken to collect these
charges.  All bills for water and sewer services shall be rendered to the
owner.



   (B)   Upon failure of the owner to pay the amount charged for either
water or sewer services within the time set forth on billing, both services
may be discontinued without prejudice to the right of the town to recover for
services rendered before discontinuance, as set forth in divisions (1)
through (4) below, and services shall not be restored until the account is
paid.  These rates shall generally be determined on the basis of water
consumption measured for each customer through a metering device installed,
maintained, and read by the town.



      (1)    It is the policy of the town before terminating utility
service, to give the customer a fair opportunity to avoid termination either
by paying charges due or showing that the charges are in error.  As soon as
possible following the past due date, written notice of delinquency shall be
sent to the customer by first-class mail.



      (2)   Notice.  The notice shall contain the following
information:



         (a)    The amount which must be paid to avoid
termination;



         (b)    The date on which termination will occur, which
must be at least ten days after the mailing date; and



         (c)   A statement that the customer may appear at the
office of the Town Manager or his or her designated representative between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on any business day and request an
informal hearing with the Town Manager or his or her designee, for the
purpose of showing error or working out a satisfactory extended payment
arrangement.



      (3)    Certification. The employee responsible for mailing the
notice shall certify the date on which the notice was mailed, on a form or in
a record book or electronic medium designed for that purpose.



      (4)    Termination. If the customer does not make acceptable
payment arrangements and fails to show cause why service should not be
terminated, service may be terminated on or after the date specified in the
notice of termination.  Service may be terminated between the hours of 8:30
a.m. and 400 p.m. on business days from Monday through Thursday only.  If
the customer fails to comply with agreed upon extended payment arrangements,
service may be terminated without further notice.



   (C)   For the purpose of spreading more evenly the capital costs
associated with providing the required amount and quality of water and the
collection and treatment of wastewater, systems service charges shall be made
according to the size of the water meter for each billing period on both
water and sewer.  These charges, for customers both inside and outside the
town limits, shall be as set forth in the fee schedule of § 50.080.



   (D)   Whenever water or sewer service is discontinued for any
reason, a fee shall be charged for such discontinuance. Charges for such
service work shall be determined from time to time by the Board of Aldermen
and charge schedules shall be kept on file in the offices of the Town Clerk
and the Director of Public Works.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



DISCONTINUATION, SUSPENSION OF SERVICE



§ 50.090  PROCEDURE FOR DISCONTINUATION OF SERVICE.



   (A)   The town shall serve a written notice to any person allegedly
violating any provision of this chapter.  The notice shall state the
specific nature of the violation and provide the person not less than ten
days to:



      (1)   Correct the violation; or



      (2)   Inquire regarding the notice, and, if the person feels
he or she is not in violation, or that compliance requires greater than ten
days, request a hearing before the Director of Public Works.  If the person
does not respond within the time prescribed in the notice, the town may
immediately discontinue service to this person upon the expiration of the
prescribed time.  If the user receives notice due to non-payment of a bill,
the town may suspend service, after notice, at the direction of the Town
Clerk.



   (B)   If the person allegedly in violation of a provision of this
chapter requests a hearing before the Director, the Director shall, within
five days of the person’s claims, establish the time and place for the
hearing.  If, as a result of the hearing, the Director determines that the
person is in violation of the provision as alleged in the notice, he or she
shall order the person to correct the condition giving rise to the violation,
and establish a reasonable time for compliance.  If the Director cannot, at
the hearing, determine the existence or extent of the alleged violation, he
or she may order the suspension of services.  In the case of suspension of
services, the person is entitled to request a second hearing following the
period of suspension, and in the event he or she does so, no further action
may be taken by the town until the conclusion of the second hearing.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



§ 50.091  SUSPENSION OF SERVICE.



   If an industrial user is suspected of discharging wastewater into a
public sanitary sewer which is causing operational problems at the public
wastewater treatment facility, pump station, or public sanitary sewer; the
discharge would be in violation of this chapter; and the user has been issued
a written notice but has denied the alleged violation, the town may require
that the user cease to discharge into a public sanitary sewer, upon a hearing
by the Director of Public Works, for up to 30 days.  The suspension shall be
only for the purpose of clearly determining the operational effect of the
user's discharge; the suspension shall not be made if it will likely endanger
the public health, safety, or welfare or otherwise create a public health or
safety nuisance.  Depending upon the results of the suspension on the
operation of the wastewater treatment facilities, the town may take
appropriate action to either restore service or discontinue further service.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



§ 50.092  DISCONTINUATION IN PROTECTION OF HEALTH AND WELFARE.



   When any public sanitary sewer user discharges, or threatens to
discharge, any wastewater which is prohibited by this chapter which may cause
a present or imminent and substantial endangerment to the health and welfare
of persons, or is likely to cause the disruption or inhibition of the
operation of the town's treatment facilities, the Director may immediately,
upon written notice or verbal notification to the user, discontinue service
to the user.  In such event, the town shall serve a written notice to the
user after discontinuation of service and shall, where feasible, follow the
procedural requirements of this chapter. If, upon fulfillment of such
requirements, it is determined that no violation has occurred, service to the
user shall be restored at no cost to the user.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



EXTENSION OF SERVICE



§ 50.100  APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF EXTENSION.



   (A)   Any property owner who desires water or sanitary sewer service
shall apply in writing to the Board of Aldermen requesting the extension of
water or sanitary sewer service.  No request for the extension of services
shall be considered unless submitted in writing in accordance with the
requirements of this subchapter.



   (B)   The town may require the applicant to submit as part of the
written application such information, plans, or other data to determine
adequately if the requirements of this subchapter shall be met.



   (C)   When application is made for water and sewer extensions to
serve an area or development project that is planned as part of a larger
project or subdivision, all of which is not to be developed at the time
application is made, the owner shall submit plans in sufficient detail to
determine the size and type of facilities necessary to serve the entire
development or subdivision when completed.



   (D)   No extension to the water or sanitary sewer system of the town
shall be made and no application shall be approved except in accordance with
the requirements of this subchapter.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



§ 50.101  GENERAL EXTENSION REQUIREMENTS.



   All extensions of either water or sanitary sewer service shall be
governed by the size of water lines and sanitary sewer lines to be installed
and the other required system facilities shall be determined by the Town
Manager or his designee in accordance with recognized standards and accepted
engineering practices and design.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1536, passed 6-14-07)



§ 50.102  GENERAL APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All water and sewer lines and appurtenances shall be designed by a
licensed registered architect or engineer and shall bear his seal.  Proposed
plans shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works in the amount of
seven copies. The plans shall be reviewed by the Director and all town
department heads, who shall submit their comments to the Director.  The
Director shall then, in consultation with the Water and Sewer Division
Superintendent, submit a report to the Board of Aldermen within 30 days of
receipt of the plans.  Any department head who does not comment within ten
working days, shall be considered to have no adverse comment.  Such
extensions, if approved, shall be paid for and the total cost borne by the
property owner.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



§ 50.103  SPECIFICATIONS FOR EXTENSION; OWNERSHIP.



   (A)   Any water or sanitary sewer mains extended under the
provisions of this subchapter shall be installed and constructed in
accordance with the approved plans, specifications, and other requirements of
the town.  All facilities installed, whether within or outside the town,
shall become the property of the town and shall be under its jurisdiction and
control for all purposes at the time the facilities are connected to the town
system.



   (B)   When required, the property owner shall grant to the town
those utility easements the town may require.  In addition, a deed to the
town for water or sewer facilities installed which are located outside the
town, the cost of which is borne by individual property owners, shall be
executed prior to the time any extension provided for in this subchapter is
connected to the town system.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



§ 50.104  ADDITIONAL SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT MAY BE REQUIRED.



   The Board of Aldermen may, at its discretion, as a condition under
which water or sewer service shall be extended, require the owner of a
proposed subdivision to enter into an agreement to improve the proposed
streets therein at his own expense and in accordance with the provisions of
this code and other ordinances governing the acceptance of public streets for
the town.  If required, this section shall apply to subdivisions which are
located either within or outside the town limits.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



§ 50.105  APPROVED SUBDIVISION OR DEVELOPED PROPERTY.



   When an application is received requesting the extension of water or
sanitary sewer service to serve property within the town which is developed
or has been previously approved as a subdivision, or where streets have
previously been dedicated and accepted by the town, and where such area is
not part of a new unapproved subdivision, the Director of Public Works or
other person designated by the Board of Aldermen shall estimate the cost of
the project and present the application for such extension, the estimated
cost, and other required information to the Board for its consideration.  If
the application is approved by the Board, and subject to the availability of
funds, the town shall install the extensions which have been approved.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



§ 50.106  APPROVED EXTENSION PROJECT; ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.



   (A)   All costs associated with any extension of water or sanitary
sewer service, regardless of the length of such extension, shall be paid in
full by the property owner benefitted by such extension.



   (B)   Before undertaking any extension of water or sewer service,
the affected property owner shall provide the town with an estimate of the
cost of such work prepared by a licensed engineer.



   (C)   The Town Manager or his designee shall determine whether the
improvements shall be installed by the town or by the property owner. If such
improvements are installed by the property owner, no work shall be undertaken
until all necessary permits are acquired by the property owner and plans and
specifications acceptable to the town describing the work to be undertaken
have been approved by the town. All work carried out by the property owner
shall be performed by a licensed utility contractor.



   (D)   If such improvements are installed by the town, no work shall
be undertaken until the property owner has deposited with the town a sum
equal to the estimated cost of installation (as approved by the town in its
sole discretion) plus the amount necessary to reimburse the town for the cost
of its services associated with the extension of services.



   (E)   Upon completion of the project, if the cost of extension of
such service, to include the town's cost, exceeds the deposit made by the
property owner, the property owner shall, within ten days of receipt of
written notice from the town, pay the town the difference between its deposit
and the final cost. If the cost of the project, to include the town's fees,
are less than the amount deposited by the property owner, the town shall
within ten days of a determination of the final cost remit any unused balance
to the property owner.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1536, passed 6-14-07)



Statutory reference:



   Power to assess, see G.S. § 160A-216



§ 50.107  PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT OR UNAPPROVED SUBDIVISION.



   When an application is received requesting the extension of water or
sanitary sewer service to a proposed development or subdivision within the
town which has not been approved by the Board of Aldermen, the Director of
Public Works or other person designated by the Board shall estimate the cost
of the project and present the application for the extension, the estimated
cost, and other required information to the Board for consideration.  If the
application is approved, and subject to the approval of the development or
subdivision by the town, the town shall install the extension under the
conditions set out in this chapter.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



§ 50.108  FINANCING OF EXTENSION WITHIN TOWN LIMITS.



   (A)   Prior to the beginning of any construction, the property owner
shall advance to the town funds in an amount equal to the total estimated
cost of the proposed extension.



   (B)   Upon receipt of such funds, a written contract shall be
entered into by and between the town and the property owner under which the
town shall use such funds upon the following terms and conditions:



      (1)   The funds shall be deposited in a special account of the
town for which a separate accounting will be made.



      (2)   At the time construction of the extension is completed
and the total cost thereof is determined, if the amount deposited exceeds the
total cost, that portion in excess of the amount deposited will be refunded
to the owner without interest.  If the amount deposited is less than the
total cost, the owner shall pay such additional amount to the town, and this
condition shall be a part of the written contract.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



Cross-reference:



   Financing extensions outside town limits, see § 50.112



§ 50.109  SURETY BOND; REFUND OR REIMBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.



   (A)   In lieu of depositing funds, the owner may provide a surety
bond or some other form of security that will insure payment to the town of
his proportionate share of the cost of extension.



   (B)   No refund or reimbursement of funds shall be made to the owner
who pays the total cost of extension except as provided for in § 50.108.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



§ 50.110  EXCEPTIONS FROM FOLLOWING EXTENSION PROCEDURE AUTHORIZED.



   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the Board of Aldermen from
extending water or sanitary sewer mains within the town on its own motion
without receipt of an application from property owners, and from assessing
the cost of such an extension in accordance with this chapter when, in the
opinion of the Board, the general public interest demands such an extension
of service.  The Board may decline to assess the cost of such an extension
and pay for the same from town funds.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



§ 50.111  EXTENSION OUTSIDE TOWN; APPLICATION.



   All applications for water and sewer extensions outside the corporate
limits shall be made in the same manner and under the same requirements as
provided for in this chapter.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



Statutory reference:



    Special rates for water and sewer, see G.S. § 160A-58.5



§ 50.112  FINANCING OF EXTENSION OUTSIDE TOWN LIMITS.



   If an application is approved by the Board of Aldermen the owner shall
pay for the entire cost of the extension.  However, the town may participate
to the extent agreed upon by the Board in the cost of larger mains which are
in excess of the size of mains required to serve the project.  No
reimbursement shall be made upon annexation and all water and sewer lines
connected to the town system and located outside the town shall become the
property of the town at the time such facilities are connected.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



Cross-reference:



   Financing extensions within town limits, see § 50.108



§ 50.113  DEPOSIT OF FUNDS; CONTRACT FOR EXTENSION OUTSIDE TOWN LIMITS.



   Prior to the beginning of any construction, the owner shall deposit
with the town funds in an amount equal to the total estimated cost of such
extension. Upon receipt of such funds a written contract shall be entered
into by and between the town and the property owner in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.  The contract shall provide that in the event
the amount of the total funds deposited exceeds the amount of the extension
cost when completed, that portion in excess of the total cost shall be
refunded to the owner without interest. The contract shall also provide that
if the amount deposited is less than the total cost, the owner shall pay the
additional amount to the town.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



§ 50.114  SURETY BOND OR PRIVATE CONSTRUCTION FOR EXTENSION OUTSIDE TOWN
LIMITS.



   In lieu of depositing funds the owner may execute a surety bond
guaranteeing payment for such extension or the owner may have such extension
work performed under private contract with the approval of the Board of
Aldermen.  However, the work shall be performed in accordance with all
construction requirements of the town and subject to inspection and approval
of the town.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



§ 50.115  ANNEXATION.



   If the property for which an application has been made for water and
sewer service is contiguous to the town, the owner of such property agrees to
annexation, and if the property is annexed to the town, an extension may be
made to such property and the cost thereof financed in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.



(Ord., passed 7-28-83)



§ 50.116  CUTOFF OF PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY AT PIERS.



   No pier shall be provided with public water unless it has installed by
the owner of such pier a device for cutting off the public water supply to
such pier.  Such cutoff device shall be installed on property owned by the
pier owner and shall be installed in accordance with regulations promulgated
by the Department of Public Works.  The owner of any pier having a supply of
public water for which no cutoff device currently exists shall comply with
the provisions of this section on or before April 1, 1998.  Any owner
failing to comply with the provisions of this section shall have the public
water supply to that owner's pier terminated.



(Ord. 1292, passed 7-31-97)



WATER SUPPLY SHORTAGE



§ 50.120  ISSUANCE OF WATER SHORTAGE PROCLAMATION.



   In the event of an existing or threatening state of emergency
endangering the safety, health or welfare of the people of the town, or
threatening damage or destruction of property, arising from the shortage or
threatened shortage of water, the Town Manager or the Public Works Director
is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring
the existence of such state of emergency, and to define and impose such
appropriate prohibitions and restrictions resulting from the water shortage
applicable to all persons within the jurisdiction of the town in order to
meet the requirements of the predetermined state of emergency.



(Ord. 1644, passed 12-9-10)



§ 50.121  CONDITIONS DEEMED EMERGENCY.



   A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever the availability
and supply of water is critical due to a mechanical malfunction or breakdown
of the town's pumps or distribution system, a rapid drawdown of the water
supply {aquifer}, salt water intrusion, or specific triggers (as defined in
the Water Shortage Response Plan) would require the reduction of water usage
in order to protect the availability of water for human consumption, for
firefighting purposes and other protection of lives and property, and the
conservation of water is necessary in order to protect lives, safety and
property within the town.



(Ord. 1644, passed 12-9-10)



§ 50.122  RESTRICTIONS, LIMITATIONS IMPOSED.



   (A)   The Town Manager or Public Works Director is hereby authorized
and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all persons the
existence of such state of emergency.



   (B)   Such proclamation may specify the authorized uses of water
within the town, and may place limitations, prohibitions and restrictions
upon the usage of water for residential, business, commercial, industrial and
municipal uses. Such proclamation may limit the use of water for non-crucial
uses such as the watering of lawns, washing of automobiles, and similar
activities and may be expanded thereafter to include other activities.
Specifically exempted from restrictions are those activities by the Public
Works Department deemed necessary to maintain water quality to necessary
standards. The proclamation will use predetermined stages of water
restrictions found in § 50.127.



(Ord. 1644, passed 12-9-10)



§ 50.123  PROCLAMATION, RESTRICTIONS, AND THE LIKE SHALL BE WRITTEN.



   Upon the declaration of a proclaimed state of emergency arising from
the availability or shortage of water, such proclamation and all
restrictions, prohibitions, and limitations on the use of water shall be in
writing and duly signed by the Town Manager or the Public Works Director. All
restrictions, prohibitions, and limitations upon the use of water during the
proclaimed state of emergency shall be in writing and specifically described
and identified so that the citizens and the residents of the town shall have
available the specific activities authorized and the specific activities
prohibited.



(ord. 1644, passed 12-9-10)



§ 50.124  END OF EMERGENCY; LIFTING OR MODIFICATION OF RESTRICTIONS.



   The Town Manager or Public Works Director shall proclaim the end of
such state of emergency and shall have the authority to modify, lift or
suspend any restrictions, limitations or prohibitions stated in such
proclamation of emergency as soon as the circumstances warrant.



(Ord. 1644, passed 12-9-10)



§ 50.125  WATER SHORTAGE RESPONSE TRIGGERS.



 

Stage
 
Well Operating Conditions


1
 
Aquifer level > 25' below msl for 3 weeks


2
 
Aquifer level > 27' below msl for 3 weeks


3
 
Weekly average pumping time > 14 hrs and aquifer level > 27' msl for 3 weeks


4
 
Weekly average pumping time > 18 hrs and aquifer level > 27' msl for 3 weeks


5
 
Weekly average pumping time > 20 hrs and aquifer level > 27' msl for 3 weeks



 



(Ord. 1644, passed 12-9-10)



§ 50.126  NON-ESSENTIAL WATER USAGE ND IRRIGATION CONTROL.



   For the purposes of controlling non-essential (irrigation) water usage,
the Town of Wrightsville Beach shall be divided into the following zones.



   (A)   Zone 1. The north end of Wrightsville Island beginning at the
center of Salisbury Street (East and West) and continuing north past 2700 N
Lumina; this shall include all properties north of the aforementioned
dividing line.



   (B)   Zone 2. The south end of Wrightsville Island beginning at the
center of Stone Street to the center of the Causeway bridge on Wrightsville
Island and continuing south to Jack Parker Blvd; this shall include all
properties south of the aforementioned dividing line.



   (C)   Zone 3. The center of Wrightsville Beach beginning at the
center of Salisbury Street (East and West) and continuing south to the center
of Stone Street to the center of the Causeway bridge on Wrightsville Island;
this shall include all properties between the dividing lines for Zones 1 and
2 and all of Harbor Island and the annexed areas on the west side of the
Intracoastal Waterway.



(Ord. 1644, passed 12-9-10)



§ 50.127  WATER SHORTAGE RESPONSE.



   (A)   STAGE 1: Voluntary Reductions. All water users will be asked
to reduce their normal water use by 5%. Customer education and outreach
programs will encourage water conservation and efficiency measures including:
irrigating landscapes a maximum of one inch per week; preventing water waste,
runoff and watering impervious surfaces; watering plants deeply to encourage
root growth; washing only full loads in clothes and dishwashers; using
spring-loaded nozzles on garden hoses; and identifying and repairing all
water leaks.



   (B)   STAGE 2: Mandatory Reductions I. All customers are expected to
reduce their water use by 10% in comparison to their previous month's water
usage/or monthly average of previous water bills. In addition to continuing
to encourage all voluntary reduction actions, the following restrictions
apply: outdoor use of drinking water for washing impervious surfaces is
prohibited; all testing and training purposes requiring drinking water (e.g.
fire protection) will be limited; watering of lawns, grass, shrubbery, trees,
flowers or vegetable gardens shall be limited to an inch per week as follows:



      (1)   Zone 1 - Sunday and Wednesday between the hours of 12:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m.



      (2)   Zone 2 - Monday and Thursday between the hours of 12:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m.



      (3)   Zone 3 - Tuesday and Friday between the hours of 12:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m.



      (4)   There shall be no watering on Saturday.



   (C)   STAGE 3: Mandatory Reductions II. Customers must continue
actions from all previous stages and further reduce water use by 20% compared
to their previous month's water usage/or monthly average of previous water
bills; watering of lawns, grass, shrubbery, trees, flowers or vegetable
gardens shall be limited to a half inch per week as follows:



      (1)   Zone 1 - Wednesday between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and
8:00 a.m.



      (2)   Zone 2 - Monday between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 8:00
a.m.



      (3)   Zone 3 - Tuesday between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and
8:00 a.m.



      (4)   There shall be no watering on Thursday,  Friday, 
Saturday and Sunday.



   (D)   STAGE 4: Emergency Reductions. Customers must continue all
actions from previous stages and further reduce their water use by 25%
compared to their previous month's water usage/or monthly average of previous
water bills. A ban on all use of drinking water except to protect public
health and safety is implemented.



   (E)   STAGE 5: Water Rationing. Is to provide drinking water to
protect public health. All customers are only permitted to use water at the
minimum required for public health protection. Firefighting is the only
allowable outdoor water use.



(Ord. 1644, passed 12-9-10)



§ 50.128  WATER SHORTAGE RESPONSE ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The provisions of the water shortage response plan will be
enforced by Town of Wrightsville Beach Utility Department and police
personnel. Violators may be reported to the town's dedicated water emergency
hotline or the e-mail contact listed on the town's website through the online
work order system; entries may remain anonymous. Citations are assessed
according to the following schedule depending on the number of prior
violations and current level of water shortage.



 


Water Shortage Level

 

First Violation

 

Second Violation

 

Third



Violation



Voluntary Reduction (Stage 1)
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A


Mandatory Reductions (Stages 2  and 3)
 
Warning
 
$250
 
Discontinuation of service


Emergency Reduction (Stage 4)
 
$250
 
Discontinuation of service
 
Discontinuation of service


Water Rationing (Stage 5)
 
$500
 
Discontinuation of service
 
Discontinuation of service



 



   (B)   Drought surcharge rates, if applicable, are effective in
Stages 3, 4 and 5.



(Ord. 1644, passed 12-9-10)



STORMWATER MANAGEMENT



§ 50.130  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be officially known as the "Stormwater Management
Ordinance." It is referred to herein as "this subchapter."



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.131  AUTHORITY.



   The town is authorized to adopt this subchapter pursuant to North
Carolina law, including but not limited to Article 14, Section 5 of the
Constitution of North Carolina; G.S. § 143-214.7 and rules promulgated by
the Environmental Management Commission thereunder; Session Law 2006-246;
Chapter 160A, §§ 174, 185 and Chapter 153A, Article 18.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.132  FINDINGS.



   (A)   It is hereby determined that:



      (1)   Development and redevelopment alter the hydrologic
response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and
volumes, flooding, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, nonpoint and point
source pollution, and sediment transport and deposition, as well as reducing
groundwater recharge;



      (2)   These changes in stormwater runoff contribute to
increased quantities of water-borne pollutants and alterations in hydrology
that are harmful to public health and safety as well as to the natural
environment; and



      (3)   These effects can be managed and minimized by applying
proper design and well-planned controls to manage stormwater runoff from
development sites.



   (B)   Further, the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972
("Clean Water Act") and Federal Phase II Stormwater Rules promulgated under
it, as well as rules of the North Carolina Environmental Management
Commission promulgated in response to Federal Phase II requirements, compel
certain urbanized areas, including this jurisdiction, to adopt minimum
stormwater controls such as those included in this subchapter.



   (C)   Therefore, the town establishes this set of water quality and
quantity regulations to meet the requirements of state and federal law
regarding control of stormwater runoff and discharge.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.133  PURPOSE.



   (A)   General.  The purpose of this subchapter is to protect,
maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general
welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the
adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint
and point source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment
and illicit discharges into municipal stormwater systems. It has been
determined that proper management of construction-related and
post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private
property and infrastructure; safeguard the public health, safety, and general
welfare; and protect water and aquatic resources.



   (B)   Specific.  This subchapter seeks to meet its general purpose
through the following specific objectives and means:



      (1)    Establishing decision-making processes for development
that protect the integrity of watersheds and preserve the health of water
resources;



      (2)   Requiring that new development and redevelopment
maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development
state as nearly as practicable for the applicable design storm to reduce
flooding, stream bank erosion, non-point and point source pollution and
increases in stream temperature, and to maintain the integrity of stream
channels and aquatic habitats;



      (3)   Establishing minimum post-development stormwater
management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of
stormwater runoff quantity and quality;



      (4)   Establishing design and review criteria for the
construction, function, and use of structural stormwater BMPs that may be
used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards;



      (5)   Encouraging the use of better management and site design
practices, such as the use of vegetated conveyances for stormwater and the
preservation of greenspace, riparian buffers and other conservation areas to
the maximum extent practicable;



      (6)   Establishing provisions for the longterm responsibility
for and maintenance of structural and nonstructural stormwater BMPs to ensure
that they continue to function as designed, are maintained appropriately, and
pose no threat to public safety;



      (7)   Establishing administrative procedures for the
submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans,
for the inspection of approved projects, and to assure appropriate long-term
maintenance;



      (8)   Controlling illicit discharges into the municipal
separate stormwater system;



      (9)   Controlling erosion and sedimentation from construction
activities; and



      (10)   Assigning responsibility and processes for approving
the creation and maintenance of adequate drainage and flood damage prevention
measures.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.134  APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION.



   (A)   General.  Beginning with and subsequent to its effective
date, this subchapter shall be applicable to all development and
redevelopment, including, but not limited to, site plan applications,
subdivision applications, and grading applications.



   (B)   No development or redevelopment until compliance and permit. 
No development or redevelopment shall occur except in compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter or unless exempted. Development for which a
permit is required pursuant to this subchapter shall not occur except in
compliance with the provisions, conditions, and limitations of the permit.



      (1)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply within the
areas designated on the map titled "USMP Stormwater Map of the Town of
Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina" (the "stormwater map"), which is adopted
simultaneously herewith. The stormwater map and all explanatory matter
contained thereon accompanies and is hereby made a part of this subchapter.



      (2)   The stormwater map shall be kept on file by the
Stormwater Manager and shall be updated to take into account changes in the
land area covered by this subchapter and the geographic location of all
structural BMPs permitted under this subchapter. In the event of a dispute,
the applicability of this subchapter to a particular area of land or BMP
shall be determined by reference to the North Carolina Statutes, the North
Carolina Administrative Code, and local zoning and jurisdictional boundary
ordinances.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.135  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Meaning and intent.  All provisions, terms, phrases, and
expressions contained in this subchapter shall be construed according to the
general and specific purposes set forth in §50.133. If a different or more
specific meaning is given for a term defined elsewhere in the Town of
Wrightsville Beach or New Hanover County's code of ordinances, the meaning
and application of the term in this subchapter shall control for purposes of
application of this subchapter.



   (B)   Text controls in event of conflict.  In the event of a
conflict or inconsistency between the text of this subchapter and any
heading, caption, figure, illustration, table, or map, the text shall control.



   (C)   Authority for interpretation.  The Stormwater Manager or his
designee has authority to determine the interpretation of this subchapter.
Any person may request an interpretation by submitting a written request to
the Stormwater Manager, who shall use his best efforts to respond in writing
within 30 days. The Stormwater Manager shall keep on file a record of all
written interpretations of this subchapter.



   (D)   References to statutes, regulations, and documents.  Whenever
reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, manual,
including the design manual, or document, it shall be construed as a
reference to the most recent edition of such that has been finalized and
published with due provision for notice and comment, unless otherwise
specifically stated.



   (E)   Computation of time.  The time in which an act is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If a
deadline or required date of action falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday
observed by the Town of Wrightsville Beach, the deadline or required date of
action shall be the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or holiday
observed by the town. References to days are calendar days unless otherwise
stated.



   (F)   Delegation of authority.  Any act authorized by this
subchapter to be carried out by the Stormwater Manager of the town may be
carried out by his or her designee.



   (G)   Usage.



      (1)   Mandatory and discretionary terms.  The words "shall",
"must", and "will" are mandatory in nature, establishing an obligation or
duty to comply with the particular provision. The words "may" and "should"
are permissive in nature.



      (2)   Conjunctions.  Unless the context clearly indicates the
contrary, conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: The word "and"
indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions and events apply.
The word "or" indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events apply.



      (3)   Tense, plurals, and gender.  Words used in the present
tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular number include the
plural number and the plural number includes the singular number, unless the
context of the particular usage clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in
the masculine gender include the feminine gender, and vice versa.



   (H)   Measurement and Computation.  Lot area refers to the amount
of horizontal land area contained inside the lot lines of a lot or site.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.136  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "BUILT-UPON AREA (BUA)."  That portion of a development project that
is covered by impervious or partially impervious surface including, but not
limited to, buildings; pavement and gravel areas such as roads, parking lots,
and paths; and recreation facilities such as tennis courts. "Built-upon area"
does not include a wooden slatted deck, the water area of a swimming pool, or
pervious or partially pervious paving material to the extent that the paving
material absorbs water or allows water to infiltrate through the paving
material.



   "COASTAL AREA MANAGEMENT ACT (CAMA)." An act that requires the
establishment of a cooperative program of coastal land management between
local government and the State of North Carolina for preparing, adopting and
enforcing local land use plans. CAMA requires that local governments within
the 20 coastal counties prepare land use plans that provide for the
protection, preservation, orderly development, and management of the coastal
area of North Carolina.



   "DESIGN MANUAL."  The stormwater design manual approved for use by the
town for the proper implementation of the requirements of the Federal Phase
II Stormwater Program. All references herein to the design manual are to the
latest published edition or revision.



   "DEVELOPMENT."  Any land-disturbing activity that increases the amount
of built-upon area or that otherwise decreases the infiltration of
precipitation into the soil.



   "FLOODPLAIN."  The 1% Annual Chance Floodplain as delineated by the
North Carolina Floodplain Mapping Program in the Division of Emergency
Management.



   "HIGH QUALITY WATERS (HQW)."  Supplemental classification intended to
protect waters with quality higher than state water quality standards. In
general, there are two means by which a water body may be classified as HQW:



      (1)   By definition; or



      (2)   They may be supplementally classified as HQW through the
rule-making process.



   "LARGER COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE."  Any area where multiple
separate and distinct construction or land-disturbing activities will occur
under one plan. A plan is any announcement or piece of documentation
(including but not limited to a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch,
advertisement, loan application, drawing, permit application, zoning request,
or computer design) or physical demarcation (including but not limited to
boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings) indicating that
construction activities may occur on a specific plot.



   "OWNER."  The legal or beneficial owner of land, including but not
limited to a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee,
or long-term or commercial lessee, or any other person or entity holding
proprietary rights in the property or having legal power of management and
control of the property. "Owner" shall include long-term commercial tenants;
management entities, such as those charged with or engaged in the management
of properties for profit; and every person or entity having joint ownership
of the property. A secured lender not in possession of the property does not
constitute an owner, unless the secured lender is included within the meaning
of "owner" under another description in this definition, such as a management
entity.



   "REDEVELOPMENT."  Any development on previously-developed land, other
than a rebuilding activity that results in no net increase in built-upon area
and provides equal or greater stormwater control than the previous
development.



   "SA WATERS."  Surface waters that are used for shellfishing or
marketing purposes and all SC and SB uses.  All SA waters are also HQW by
definition. Stormwater controls are required under CAMA.  No domestic
discharges are permitted in these waters.



   "SB WATERS."  Surface waters that are used for primary recreation,
including frequent or organized swimming and all SC uses. Stormwater controls
are required under CAMA and there are no categorical restrictions on
discharges.



   "SC WATERS."  All tidal salt waters protected for secondary recreation
such as fishing, boating and other activities involving minimal skin contact;
aquatic life propagation and survival; and wildlife. Stormwater controls are
required under CAMA and there are no categorical restrictions on discharges.



   "STRUCTURAL BMP."  A physical device designed to trap, settle out, or
filter pollutants from stormwater runoff; to alter or reduce stormwater
runoff velocity, amount, timing, or other characteristics; to approximate the
pre-development hydrology on a developed site; or to achieve any combination
of these goals. Structural BMP includes physical practices such as
constructed wetlands, vegetative practices, filter strips, grassed swales,
and other methods installed or created on real property.  "Structural BMP"
is synonymous with "structural practice," "stormwater control facility,"
"stormwater control practice," "stormwater treatment practice," "stormwater
management practice," "stormwater control measures," "structural stormwater
treatment systems," and similar terms used in this subchapter.



   "SUBSTANTIAL PROGRESS." For the purposes of determining whether
sufficient progress has been made on an approved plan, one or more of the
following construction activities toward the completion of a site or
subdivision plan shall occur: obtaining a grading permit and conducting
grading activity on a continuous basis and not discontinued for more than 30
days; or installation and approval of on-site infrastructure; or obtaining a
building permit for the construction and approval of a building foundation.
"Substantial progress" for purposes of determining whether an approved plan
is null and void is not necessarily the same as "substantial expenditures"
used for determining vested rights pursuant to applicable law.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.137  DESIGN MANUAL.



   (A)   Reference to design manual. 



      (1)   The Stormwater Manager shall use the policy, criteria,
and information, including technical specifications and standards, in the
design manual as the basis for decisions about stormwater permits and about
the design, implementation and performance of structural and non-structural
stormwater BMPs.



      (2)   The design manual includes a list of acceptable
stormwater treatment practices, including specific design criteria for each
stormwater practice. Stormwater treatment practices that are designed,
constructed, and maintained in accordance with these design and sizing
criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance
standards of the Phase II and other applicable stormwater laws.



   (B)   Relationship of design manual to other laws and regulations. 
If the specifications or guidelines of the design manual are more restrictive
or apply a higher standard than other laws or regulations, that fact shall
not prevent application of the specifications or guidelines in the design
manual.



   (C)   Changes to standards and specifications.  If the standards,
specifications, guidelines, policies, criteria, or other information in the
design manual are amended subsequent to the submittal of an application for
approval pursuant to this subchapter but prior to approval, the new
information shall control and shall be utilized in reviewing the application
and in implementing this subchapter with regard to the application.



   (D)   Amendments to design manual.  The Design manual may be
updated and expanded from time to time, based on advancements in technology
and engineering, improved knowledge of local conditions, or local monitoring
or maintenance experience. Prior to amending or updating the design manual,
proposed changes shall be generally publicized and made available for,
review, and an opportunity for comment by interested persons shall be
provided.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.138  RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS, REGULATIONS AND PRIVATE AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   Conflict of laws.  This subchapter is not intended to modify
or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law.
The requirements of this subchapter are in addition to the requirements of
any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. Where any
provision of this subchapter imposes restrictions different from those
imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law,
whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective
standards for human or environmental health, safety, and welfare shall
control.



   (B)   Private agreements.  This subchapter is not intended to
revoke or repeal any easement, covenant, or other private agreement. However,
where the regulations of this subchapter are more restrictive or impose
higher standards or requirements than such an easement, covenant, or other
private agreement, the requirements of this subchapter shall govern. Nothing
in this subchapter shall modify or repeal any private covenant or deed
restriction, but such covenant or restriction shall not legitimize any
failure to comply with this subchapter. In no case shall the town be
obligated to enforce the provisions of any easements, covenants, or
agreements between private parties.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.139  SEVERABILITY.



   If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or
clause of this subchapter shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of
any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.140  EFFECTIVE DATE AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Effective date.  This subchapter shall take effect on June
28, 2007.



   (B)   Final approvals, complete applications. 



      (1)   All development and redevelopment projects for which
complete and full applications were submitted and approved by the town prior
to the effective date of this subchapter and which remain valid, unexpired,
unrevoked and not otherwise terminated at the time of development or
redevelopment shall be exempt from complying with all provisions of this
subchapter dealing with the control and/or management of discharge provisions.



      (2)   A phased development plan shall be deemed approved prior
to the effective date of this subchapter if it has been approved by all
necessary government units, it remains valid, unexpired, unrevoked and not
otherwise terminated, and it shows:



         (a)   For the initial or first phase of development, the
type and intensity of use for a specific parcel or parcels, including at a
minimum, the boundaries of the project and a subdivision plan that has been
approved.



         (b)   For any subsequent phase of development,
sufficient detail so that implementation of the requirements of this
subchapter to that phase of development would require a material change in
that phase of the plan.



   (C)   Violations continue.  Any violation of provisions existing on
the effective date of this subchapter shall continue to be a violation under
this subchpater and be subject to penalties and enforcement under this
subchapter unless the use, development, construction, or other activity
complies with the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.141  REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING ENTITIES.



   (A)   Stormwater Manager.



      (1)   Designation.  A Stormwater Manager shall be designated
by the Board of Aldermen to administer and enforce this subchapter.



      (2)   Powers and duties.  In addition to the powers and
duties that may be conferred by other provisions of the town ordinances and
other laws, the Stormwater Manager shall have the following powers and duties
under this subchapter:



         (a)   To review and approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove applications for approval of plans pursuant to this subchapter.



         (b)   To make determinations and render interpretations
of this subchapter.



         (c)   To establish application requirements and
schedules for submittal and review of applications and appeals, to review and
make recommendations to the Board of Aldermen on applications for development
or redevelopment approvals.



         (d)   To enforce the provisions of this subchapter in
accordance with its enforcement provisions.



         (e)   To maintain records, maps, forms and other
official materials as relate to the adoption, amendment, enforcement, and
administration of this subchapter.



         (f)   To provide expertise and technical assistance to
the Board of Aldermen, upon request.



         (g)   To designate appropriate other person(s) who shall
carry out the powers and duties of the Stormwater Manager.



         (h)   To take any other action necessary to administer
the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.142  REVIEW PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Permit required; must apply for permit.  A stormwater permit
is required for all development and redevelopment unless exempt pursuant to
this subchapter. A permit may only be issued subsequent to a properly
submitted and reviewed permit application, pursuant to this section.



   (B)   Effect of permit.  A stormwater permit shall govern the
design, installation, and construction of stormwater management and control
practices on the site, including structural BMPs and elements of site design
for stormwater management other than structural BMPs. The permit is intended
to provide a mechanism for the review, approval, and inspection of the
approach to be used for the management and control of stormwater for the
development or redevelopment site consistent with the requirements of this
subchapter, whether the approach consists of structural BMPs or other
techniques such as low-impact or low-density design. The permit does not
continue in existence indefinitely after the completion of the project;
rather, compliance after project construction is assured by the maintenance
provisions of this subchapter.



   (C)   Authority to file applications.  All applications required
pursuant to this subchapter shall be submitted to the Stormwater Manager by
the land owner or the land owner's duly authorized agent.



   (D)   Establishment of application requirements, schedule, and fees.



      (1)   Application contents and form. The Stormwater Manager
shall establish requirements for the content and form of all applications and
shall amend and update those requirements from time to time. At a minimum,
the stormwater permit application shall describe in detail how
post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled and managed, the design
of all stormwater facilities and practices, and how the proposed project will
meet the requirements of this subchapter.



      (2)   Submission schedule.  The Stormwater Manager shall
establish a submission schedule for applications. The schedule shall
establish deadlines by which complete applications must be submitted for the
purpose of ensuring that there is adequate time to review applications, and
that the various stages in the review process are accommodated.



      (3)   Permit review fees.  The Board of Aldermen shall
establish permit review fees as well as policies regarding refund of any fees
upon withdrawal of an application, and may amend and update the fees and
policies from time to time.



      (4)   Administrative manual.  For applications required under
this subchapter, the Stormwater Manager shall compile the application
requirements, submission schedule, fee schedule, a copy of this subchapter,
and information on how and where to obtain the design manual in an
administrative manual, which shall be made available to the public.



   (E)   Submittal of Complete Application. 



      (1)   Applications shall be submitted to the Stormwater
Manager pursuant to the application submittal schedule in the form
established by the Stormwater Manager, along with the appropriate fee
established pursuant to this section.



      (2)   An application shall be considered as timely submitted
only when it contains all elements of a complete application pursuant to this
subchapter, along with the appropriate fee. If the Stormwater Manager finds
that an application is incomplete, the applicant shall be notified of the
deficient elements and shall be provided with an opportunity to submit a
complete application. However, the submittal of an incomplete application
shall not suffice to meet a deadline contained in the submission schedule
established above.



   (F) Review.  Within 45 calendar days after a complete application is
submitted, the Stormwater Manager shall review the application and determine
whether the application complies with the standards of this subchapter.



      (1)   Approval.  If the Stormwater Manager finds that the
application complies with the standards of this subchapter, the Stormwater
Manager shall approve the application. The Stormwater Manager may impose
conditions of approval as needed to ensure compliance with this subchapter. 
The conditions shall be included as part of the approval.



      (2)   Fails to comply.  If the Stormwater Manager finds that
the application fails to comply with the standards of this subchapter, the
Stormwater Manager shall notify the applicant and shall indicate how the
application fails to comply. The applicant shall have an opportunity to
submit a revised application.



      (3)   Revision and subsequent review. 



         (a)   A complete revised application shall be reviewed
by the Stormwater Manager within 45 calendar days after its re-submittal and
shall be approved, approved with conditions or disapproved.



         (b)   If a revised application is not resubmitted within
30 calendar days from the date the applicant was notified, the application
shall be considered withdrawn and a new submittal for the same or
substantially the same project shall be required along with the appropriate
fee for a new submittal.



         (c)   One re-submittal of a revised application may be
submitted without payment of an additional permit review fee. Any
re-submittal after the first re-submittal shall be accompanied by an
additional permit review fee, as established pursuant to this subchapter.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.143  APPLICATIONS FOR APPROVAL.



   (A)   Concept plan and consultation meeting.



      (1)   Before a stormwater management permit application is
deemed complete, the Stormwater Manager or developer may request a
consultation on a concept plan for the post-construction stormwater
management system to be utilized in the proposed development project. This
consultation meeting should take place at the time of the preliminary plan of
subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of
this meeting is to discuss the post-construction stormwater management
measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess
constraints, opportunities and potential approaches to stormwater management
designs before formal site design engineering is commenced. Local watershed
plans, the CAMA Land Use Plan, and other relevant resource protection plans
should be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan.



      (2)   To accomplish this goal, the following information
should be included in the concept plan, which should be submitted in advance
of the meeting:



         (a)   Existing conditions/proposed site plans. 
Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate
at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent
streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (if available);
boundaries of existing predominant vegetation; proposed limits of clearing
and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking
areas and other impervious surfaces.



         (b)   Natural resources inventory.  A written or
graphic inventory of natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it
exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should
include a discussion of soil conditions, geologic features, topography,
wetlands, and native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location
and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas
such as ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks. Particular
attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide
particular opportunities or constraints for development and stormwater
management.



         (c)    Stormwater management system concept plan.  A
written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater
management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed
structural stormwater controls; low-impact design elements; location of
existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and
storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits;
relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and
preliminary location of any proposed stream channel modifications, such as
bridge or culvert crossings.



   (B)   Stormwater management permit application.



      (1)   The stormwater management permit application shall
detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled and managed
and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this subchapter,
including the section entitled Standards. All such plans shall be prepared by
a qualified registered North Carolina professional engineer, surveyor, soil
scientist or landscape architect, and the engineer, surveyor, soil scientist
or landscape architect shall perform services only in their area of
competence, and shall verify that the design of all stormwater management
facilities and practices meets the submittal requirements for complete
applications, that the designs and plans are sufficient to comply with
applicable standards and policies found in the Design Manual, and that the
designs and plans ensure compliance with this subchapter.



      (2)   The submittal shall include all of the information
required in the submittal checklist established by the Stormwater Manager.
Incomplete submittals shall be treated pursuant to § 50.142(E).



   (C)   As-built plans and final approval.



      (1)   Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate
of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant shall certify that the completed
project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plans and
designs, and shall submit actual "as built" plans (both hardcopy and
electronic format) for all stormwater management facilities or practices
after final construction is completed.



      (2)   The plans shall show the final design specifications for
all stormwater management facilities and practices and the field location,
size, depth, and planted vegetation of all measures, controls, and devices,
as installed. The designer of the stormwater management measures and plans
shall certify, under seal, that the as-built stormwater measures, controls,
and devices are in compliance with the approved stormwater management plans
and designs and with the requirements of this subchapter. A final inspection
and approval by the Stormwater Manager shall occur before the release of any
performance securities.



   (D)   Other permits.  No certificate of compliance or occupancy
shall be issued by the Town of Wrightsville Beach Planning and Inspections
Department without final as-built plans and a final inspection and approval
by the Stormwater Manager, except where multiple units are served by the
stormwater practice or facilities, in which case the Town of Wrightsville
Beach Planning and Inspections Department may elect to withhold a percentage
of permits or certificates of occupancy until as-built plans are submitted
and final inspection and approval has occurred.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.144  APPROVALS.



   (A)   Effect of approval.  Approval authorizes the applicant to go
forward with only the specific plans and activities authorized in the permit.
The approval shall not be construed to exempt the applicant from obtaining
other applicable approvals from local, state, and federal authorities.



   (B)   Time limit/expiration. 



      (1)   An approved plan shall become null and void if the
applicant fails to make substantial progress on the site within one year
after the date of approval. The Stormwater Manager may grant a single,
one-year extension of this time limit, for good cause shown, upon receiving a
written request from the applicant before the expiration of the approved plan.



      (2)   In granting an extension, the Stormwater Manager may
require compliance with standards adopted since the original application was
submitted unless there has been substantial reliance on the original permit
and the change in standards would infringe the applicant's vested rights.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.145  APPEALS.



   (A)   Right of appeal.  Any aggrieved person affected by any
decision, order, requirement, or determination relating to the interpretation
or application of this subchapter made by the Stormwater Manager, may file an
appeal to the Board of Adjustment within 30 days.



   (B)   Filing of appeal and procedures.  Appeals shall be taken
within the specified time period by filing a notice of appeal and specifying
the grounds for appeal on forms provided by the Town of Wrightsville Beach.
The Stormwater Manager shall transmit to the Town Manager all documents
constituting the record on which the decision appealed from was taken. The
hearing conducted by the Board of Adjustment shall be conducted in the nature
of a quasi-judicial proceeding with all findings of fact supported by
competent, material evidence.



   (C)   Review by superior court.  Every decision of the Board of
Adjustment shall be subject to superior court review by proceedings in the
nature of certiorari. Petition for review by the superior court shall be
filed with the clerk of superior court within 30 days after the latter of the
following:



      (1)   The written decision of the Board of Adjustment is
filed; or



      (2)   A written copy of the decision is delivered to every
aggrieved party who has filed a written request for such copy with the Board
of Adjustment at the time of its hearing of the case.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.146 GENERAL STANDARDS.



   All development and redevelopment to which this subchapter applies
shall comply with the standards of this section.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.147  IMPERVIOUS SURFACE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Setback requirement.



      (1)   All impervious surfaces, except for roads, paths, and
water dependent structures, shall be located at least 30 feet landward of all
perennial and intermittent surface waters.



      (2)   A perennial or intermittent surface water shall be
deemed present if the feature is shown on either the most recent version of
the soil survey map prepared by the Natural Resources Conservation Service of
the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) or the most recent
complete version of the 1:24,000 scale (7.5 minute) quadrangle topographic
maps prepared by the United States Geologic Survey (USGS). An exception to
this requirement may be allowed when surface waters are not present in
accordance with the provisions of 15A NCAC 2B .0233 (3)(a) or similar
site-specific determination made by the Division of Water Quality, using
Division-approved methodology.



   (B)   Land draining to shellfish waters.  All development
activities that are located within 75 feet of waters designated by the
Environmental Management Commission as estuarine shellfishing waters or 575
feet from designated Outstanding Resource Waters shall be limited to a
maximum impervious surface density of 36%.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.148  STRUCTURAL STORMWATER CONTROL REQUIREMENTS.



   Owners of property subject to this subchapter and required to install
structural stormwater control measures shall implement those measures in
compliance with each of the following standards:



   (A)   The measures shall control and treat runoff from the first one
and one-half inches of rain. Runoff volume drawdown time for wet detention
ponds shall be a minimum of 48 hours, but not more than 120 hours.



   (B)   All structural stormwater treatment systems used shall be
designed to have a minimum of 90% average annual removal for Total Suspended
Solids (TSS).



   (C)   General engineering design criteria for all projects shall be
in accordance with 15A NCAC 2H .1008(c), as explained in the design manual.



   (D)   The measure shall discharge the storage volume at a rate equal
or less than the pre-development discharge rate for the one-year, 24-hour
storm, or as specified in the design manual.



   (E)   The approval of the stormwater permit shall require
enforceable restrictions on property usage that runs with the land, including
recorded deed restrictions and protective covenants, to ensure that future
development and redevelopment maintains the site consistent with the approved
project plans.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.149  STANDARDS FOR STORMWATER CONTROL MEASURES.



   (A)   Evaluation according to contents of design manual.  All
stormwater control measures and stormwater treatment practices (also referred
to as Best Management Practices, or BMPs) required under this subchapter
shall be evaluated by the Stormwater Manager according to the policies,
criteria, and information, including technical specifications and standards
and the specific design criteria for each stormwater practice, in the design
manual. The Stormwater Manager shall determine whether proposed BMPs will be
adequate to meet the requirements of this subchapter.



   (B)   Determination of adequacy; presumptions and alternatives. 
Stormwater treatment practices that are designed, constructed, and maintained
in accordance with the criteria and specifications in the design manual will
be presumed to meet the minimum water quality and quantity performance
standards of this subchapter. Whenever an applicant proposes to utilize a
practice or practices not designed and constructed in accordance with the
criteria and specifications in the design manual, the applicant shall have
the burden of demonstrating that the practice(s) will satisfy the minimum
water quality and quantity performance standards of this subchapter. The
Stormwater Manager may require the applicant to provide the documentation,
calculations, and examples necessary for the Stormwater Manager to determine
whether such an affirmative showing is made.



   (C)   Separation from seasonal high water table.  For BMPs that
require a separation from the seasonal high-water table, the separation shall
be provided by at least 12 inches of naturally occurring soil above the
seasonal high-water table.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.150 VARIANCES.



   (A)   Any person may petition the town for a variance granting
permission to use the person's land in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
subchapter. To qualify for a variance, the petitioner must show all of the
following:



      (1)   Unnecessary hardships would result from strict
application of this subchapter.



      (2)   The hardships result from conditions that are peculiar
to the property, such as the location, size, or topography of the property.



      (3)   The hardships did not result from actions taken by the
petitioner.



      (4)   The requested variance is consistent with the spirit,
purpose, and intent of this subchapter; will secure public safety and
welfare; and will preserve substantial justice.



   (B)   The town may impose reasonable and appropriate conditions and
safeguards upon any variance it grants.



   (C)   Statutory exceptions.  Notwithstanding division (A) of this
section, exceptions from the 30-foot landward location of built-upon area
requirement as well as the deed restrictions and protective covenants
requirements shall be granted in any of the following instances:



      (1)   When there is a lack of practical alternatives for a
road crossing, bridge, or utility crossing as long as it is located,
designed, constructed, and maintained to minimize disturbance, provide
maximum nutrient removal, protect against erosion and sedimentation, have the
least adverse effects on aquatic life and habitat, and protect water quality
to the maximum extent practicable through the use of BMPs.



      (2)   When there is a lack of practical alternatives for a
stormwater management facility; a stormwater management pond; or a utility,
including, but not limited to, water, sewer, or gas construction and
maintenance corridor, as long as it is located 15 feet landward of all
perennial and intermittent surface waters and as long as it is located,
designed, constructed, and maintained to minimize disturbance, provide
maximum nutrient removal, protect against erosion and sedimentation, have the
least adverse effects on aquatic life and habitat, and protect water quality
to the maximum extent practicable through the use of BMPs.



      (3)   A lack of practical alternatives may be shown by
demonstrating that, considering the potential for a reduction in size,
configuration, or density of the proposed activity and all alternative
designs, the basic project purpose cannot be practically accomplished in a
manner which would avoid or result in less adverse impact to surface waters.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.151  ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR SA WATERS.



   (A)   In addition to the standards for stormwater handling set out
in the Design Manual, development and redevelopment that is located within
one-half mile of and that drains in whole or part to class SA waters shall
design and implement the best stormwater practices that ensure reduction of
fecal coliform loading. The best practices are ones that result in the
highest degree of fecal die-off and control sources of fecal coliform to the
maximum extent practicable while still meeting the other requirements of this
subchapter.



   (B)   No direct discharge or expansion of discharges to SA waters. 
No new direct points of stormwater discharge to SA waters or increases in the
volume of stormwater flow through conveyances or increases in capacity of
conveyances in existing stormwater conveyance systems that drain to Class SA
waters are permitted. Any modification or redesign of a stormwater conveyance
system within the contributing drainage basin must not increase the net
amount or rate of stormwater discharge through existing outfalls to Class SA
waters. Diffuse flow of stormwater at a nonerosive velocity to a vegetated
buffer or other natural area capable of providing effective infiltration of
the runoff from the one-year, 24-hour storm shall not be considered a direct
point of stormwater discharge. Consideration shall be given to soil type,
slope, vegetation, and existing hydrology when evaluating infiltration
effectiveness.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.152  GENERAL STANDARDS FOR MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Function of BMPs as intended.  The owner of each structural
BMP installed pursuant to this subchapter shall maintain and operate it so as
to preserve and continue its function in controlling stormwater quality and
quantity at the degree or amount of function for which the structural BMP was
designed.



   (B)   Annual maintenance inspection and report.



      (1)   The Stormwater Manager will conduct annual inspections
of all structural BMPs installed pursuant to this subchapter. At the
Stormwater Manager's discretion, the town may require the person responsible
for maintenance of any structural BMP installed to submit to the Stormwater
Manager an inspection report from one of the following persons performing
services only in their area of competence: a qualified registered North
Carolina professional engineer, surveyor, landscape architect, soil
scientist, aquatic biologist, or person certified by the North Carolina
Cooperative Extension Service for stormwater treatment practice inspection
and maintenance.



      (2)   The inspection report shall contain all of the following:



         (a)   The name and address of the land owner;



         (b)   The recorded book and page number of the lot of
each structural BMP;



         (c)   A statement that an inspection was made of all
structural BMPs;



         (d)   The date the inspection was made;



         (e)   A statement that all inspected structural BMPs are
performing properly and are in compliance with the terms and conditions of
the approved maintenance agreement required by this subchapter; and



         (f)   The original signature and seal of the engineer,
surveyor, or landscape architect.



      (3)   All inspection reports shall be on forms supplied by the
Stormwater Manager. An original inspection report shall be provided to the
Stormwater Manager, if requested, beginning one year from the date of
as-built certification and each year thereafter on or before the date of the
as-built certification.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.153  OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT.



   (A)   In general.



      (1)   Prior to the conveyance or transfer of any lot or
building site to be served by a structural BMP pursuant to this subchapter,
and prior to issuance of any permit for development or redevelopment
requiring a structural BMP pursuant to this subchapter, the applicant or
owner of the site must execute an operation and maintenance agreement that
shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site, portions of the site,
and lots or parcels served by the structural BMP. Until the transference of
all property, sites, or lots served by the structural BMP, the original owner
or applicant shall have primary responsibility for carrying out the
provisions of the maintenance agreement.



      (2)   The operation and maintenance agreement shall require
the owner or owners to maintain, repair and, if necessary, reconstruct the
structural BMP, and shall state the terms, conditions, and schedule of
maintenance for the structural BMP. In addition, it shall grant to the Town
of Wrightsville Beach a right of entry in the event that the Stormwater
Manager has reason to believe it has become necessary to inspect, monitor,
maintain, repair, or reconstruct the structural BMP; however, in no case
shall the right of entry, of itself, confer an obligation on the town to
assume responsibility for the structural BMP.



      (3)   The operation and maintenance agreement must be approved
by the Stormwater Manager prior to plan approval, and it shall be referenced
on the final plat and shall be recorded with the county Register of Deeds
upon final plat approval. A copy of the recorded maintenance agreement shall
be given to the Stormwater Manager within 14 days following its recordation.



   (B)   Special requirement for homeowners' and other associations. 
For all structural BMPs required pursuant to this subchapter and that are to
be or are owned and maintained by a homeowners' association, property owners'
association, or similar entity, the required operation and maintenance
agreement shall include all of the following provisions:



      (1)   That the association shall continuously operate and
maintain the stormwater control and management facilities.



      (2)   That the town shall have a right of entry to inspect,
monitor, maintain, repair, and reconstruct structural BMPs.



      (3)   That the town shall be allowed to recover from the
association and its members any and all costs the town expends to maintain or
repair the structural BMPs or to correct any operational deficiencies.
Failure to pay the town all of its expended costs, after 45 days written
notice, shall constitute a breach of the agreement. In case of a deficiency,
the town shall thereafter be entitled to bring an action against the
association and its members to pay, or foreclose upon the lien hereby
authorized by the agreement against the property, or both. Interest,
collection costs, and attorney fees shall be added to the recovery.



      (4)   That this agreement shall not obligate the town to
maintain or repair any structural BMPs, and the town shall not be liable to
any person for the condition or operation of structural BMPs.



      (5)   That this agreement shall not in any way diminish,
limit, or restrict the right of the town to enforce any of its ordinances as
authorized by law.



      (6)   That the association, or similar entity, shall indemnify
and hold harmless the Town of Wrightsville Beach for any costs and injuries
arising from or related to the structural BMP, unless the town has agreed in
writing to assume the maintenance responsibility for the BMP and has accepted
dedication of any and all rights necessary to carry out that maintenance.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.154  INSPECTION PROGRAM.



   (A)   Inspections and inspection programs by the Town of
Wrightsville Beach may be conducted or established on any reasonable basis,
including but not limited to routine inspections; random inspections;
inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and
joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or
safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing
maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water,
groundwater, and material or water in BMPs; and evaluating the condition of
BMPs.



   (B)   If the owner or occupant of any property refuses to permit
such inspection, the Stormwater Manager shall proceed to obtain an
administrative search warrant pursuant to G.S. § 15-27.2 or its successor.
No person shall obstruct, hamper or interfere with the Stormwater Manager
while carrying out his or her official duties.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.155  NOTICE TO OWNERS.



   (A)   Deed recordation and indications on plat.  The applicable
operations and maintenance agreement pertaining to every structural BMP shall
be referenced on the final plat and shall be recorded with the county
Register of Deeds upon final plat approval. If no subdivision plat is
recorded for the site, then the operations and maintenance agreement shall be
recorded with the county Register of Deeds so as to appear in the chain of
title of all subsequent purchasers under generally accepted searching
principles.



   (B)   Signage.  Where appropriate in the determination of the
Stormwater Manager to assure compliance with this subchapter, structural BMPs
shall be posted with a conspicuous sign stating who is responsible for
required maintenance. The sign shall be maintained so as to remain visible
and legible.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.156  RECORDS OF INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES.



   The owner of each structural BMP shall keep records of inspections,
maintenance, and repairs for at least five years from the date of creation of
the record and shall submit the same upon reasonable request to the
Stormwater Manager.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.157  NUISANCE.



   The owner of each stormwater BMP, whether structural or non-structural
BMP, shall maintain it so as not to create or result in a nuisance condition.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.158  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Authority to enforce.  The provisions of this subchapter
shall be enforced by the Stormwater Manager, his or her designee, or any
authorized agent of the Town of Wrightsville Beach. Whenever this section
refers to the Stormwater Manager, it includes his or her designee as well as
any authorized agent of the Town of Wrightsville Beach.



   (B)   Violation unlawful.  Any failure to comply with an applicable
requirement, prohibition, standard, or limitation imposed by this subchapter,
or the terms or conditions of any permit or other development or
redevelopment approval or authorization granted pursuant to this subchapter,
is unlawful and shall constitute a violation of this subchapter.



   (C)   Each day a separate offense.  Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation or offense.



   (D)   Responsible persons/entities.



      (1)   Any person who erects, constructs, reconstructs, alters
(whether actively or passively), or fails to erect, construct, reconstruct,
alter, repair or maintain any structure, BMP, practice, or condition in
violation of this subchapter shall be subject to the remedies, penalties,
and/or enforcement actions in accordance with this section. Persons subject
to the remedies and penalties set forth herein may include any architect,
engineer, builder, contractor, developer, agency, or any other person who
participates in, assists, directs, creates, causes, or maintains a condition
that results in or constitutes a violation of this subchapter, or fails to
take appropriate action, so that a violation of this subchapter results or
persists; or an owner, any tenant or occupant, or any other person, who has
control over, or responsibility for, the use or development of the property
on which the violation occurs.



      (2)   For the purposes of this section, responsible person(s)
shall include but not be limited to:



         (a)   Person maintaining condition resulting in or
constituting violation.  An architect, engineer, builder, contractor,
developer, agency, or any other person who participates in, assists, directs,
creates, causes, or maintains a condition that constitutes a violation of
this subchapter, or fails to take appropriate action, so that a violation of
this subchapter results or persists.



         (b)   Responsibility for land or use of land.  The
owner of the land on which the violation occurs, any tenant or occupant of
the property, any person who is responsible for stormwater controls or
practices pursuant to a private agreement or public document, or any person,
who has control over, or responsibility for, the use, development or
redevelopment of the property.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.159  REMEDIES.



   The remedies and penalties provided herein are not exclusive; may be
exercised singly, simultaneously, or cumulatively; may be combined with any
other remedies authorized under the law; and may be exercised in any order.



   (A)   Withholding of certificate of occupancy.  The Stormwater
Manager or other authorized agent may refuse to issue a certificate of
occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being
constructed on the site and served by the stormwater practices in question
until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial
measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the
violations described therein.



   (B)   Disapproval of subsequent permits and development approvals. 
As long as a violation of this subchapter continues and remains uncorrected,
the Stormwater Manager or other authorized agent may withhold, and the Board
of Aldermen may disapprove, any request for permit or development approval or
authorization provided for by this subchapter or the (zoning, subdivision,
and/or building regulations, as appropriate) for the land on which the
violation occurs.



   (C)   Injunction, abatements, etc.  The Stormwater Manager, with
the written authorization of the Town Manager, may initiate an action in a
court of competent jurisdiction for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and
order of abatement to correct a violation of this subchapter. Any person
violating this subchapter shall be subject to the full range of equitable
remedies provided in the General Statutes or at common law.



   (D)   Correction as public health nuisance, costs as lien, etc. If
the violation is deemed dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or
public safety and is within the geographic limits prescribed by North
Carolina G.S. § 160A-193, the Stormwater Manager, with the written
authorization of the Town Manager, may cause the violation to be corrected
and the costs to be assessed as a lien against the property.



   (E)   Stop work order.  The Stormwater Manager may issue a stop
work order to the person(s) violating this subchapter. The stop work order
shall remain in effect until the person has taken the remedial measures set
forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or
violations described therein. The stop work order may be withdrawn or
modified to enable the person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure
such violation or violations.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07; Am. Ord. 1590, passed 1-29-09)



§ 50.160  PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Initiation/complaint.  Whenever a violation of this
subchapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a
written complaint. Such complaint shall state fully the alleged violation and
the basis thereof, and shall be filed with the Stormwater Manager, who shall
record the complaint. The complaint shall be investigated promptly by the
Stormwater Manager.



   (B)   Inspection.  The Stormwater Manager shall have the authority,
upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter and inspect any land,
building, structure, or premises to ensure compliance with this subchapter.



   (C)   Notice of violation and order to correct.



      (1)   When the Stormwater Manager finds that any building,
structure, or land is in violation of this subchapter, the Stormwater Manager
shall notify, in writing, the property owner or other person violating this
subchapter. The notification shall indicate the nature of the violation,
contain the address or other description of the site upon which the violation
is occurring, order the necessary action to abate the violation, and give a
deadline for correcting the violation.  If civil penalties are to be
assessed, the notice of violation shall also contain a statement of the civil
penalties to be assessed, the time of their accrual, and the time within
which they must be paid or be subject to collection as a debt.



      (2)   The Stormwater Manager may deliver the notice of
violation and correction order personally, by the Code Enforcement
Administrator, by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or
by any means authorized for the service of documents by Rule 4 of the North
Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure.



      (3)   If a violation is not corrected within a reasonable
period of time, as provided in the notification, the Stormwater Manager may
take appropriate action under this subchapter to correct and abate the
violation and to ensure compliance with this subchapter.



   (D)   Extension of time.



      (1)   A person who receives a notice of violation and
correction order, or the owner of the land on which the violation occurs, may
submit to the Stormwater Manager a written request for an extension of time
for correction of the violation. On determining that the request includes
enough information to show that the violation cannot be corrected within the
specified time limit for reasons beyond the control of the person requesting
the extension, the Stormwater Manager may extend the time limit as is
reasonably necessary to allow timely correction of the violation, up to, but
not exceeding 90 days. The Stormwater Manager may grant 30-day extensions in
addition to the foregoing extension if the violation cannot be corrected
within the permitted time due to circumstances beyond the control of the
person violating this subchapter.



      (2)   The Stormwater Manager may grant an extension only by
written notice of extension. The notice of extension shall state the date
prior to which correction must be made, after which the violator will be
subject to the penalties described in the notice of violation and correction
order.



   (E)   Enforcement after time to correct.  After the time has
expired to correct a violation, including any extension(s) if authorized by
the Stormwater Manager, the Stormwater Manager shall determine if the
violation is corrected. If the violation is not corrected, the Stormwater
Manager may act to impose one or more of the remedies and penalties
authorized by this subchapter.



   (F)   Emergency enforcement.  If delay in correcting a violation
would seriously threaten the effective enforcement of this subchapter or pose
an immediate danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, then the
Stormwater Manager may order the immediate cessation of a violation. Any
person so ordered shall cease any violation immediately. The Stormwater
Manager may seek immediate enforcement, without prior written notice, through
any remedy or penalty authorized by this section.



(Ord. 1538,passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.161  ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS.



   (A) Illicit discharges.  No person shall cause or allow the discharge,
emission, disposal, pouring, or pumping directly or indirectly to any
stormwater conveyance, the waters of the state, or upon the land in manner
and amount that the substance is likely to reach a stormwater conveyance or
the waters of the State, any liquid, solid, gas, or other substance, other
than stormwater. Prohibited substances include but are not limited to: oil,
anti-freeze, chemicals, fertilizer, animal waste, paints, garbage, litter and
rubbish.  It is also prohibited to deposit in any manner (sweeping, blowing,
etc) yard waste, to include but not limited to: grass and plant trimmings,
leaves and thatch. Non-stormwater discharges associated with the following
activities are allowed provided that they do not significantly impact water
quality:



      (1)   Water line flushing;



      (2)   Landscape irrigation;



      (3)   Rising ground waters;



      (4)   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at
40 CFR 35.2005(20));



      (5)   Uncontaminated pumped ground water;



      (6)   Discharges from potable water sources;



      (7)   Foundation and footing drains;



      (8)   Air conditioning condensation;



      (9)   Irrigation water;



      (10)   Lawn watering;



      (11)   Individual residential car washing;



      (12)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;



      (13)   Street wash water; and



      (14)   Other non-stormwater discharges for which a valid NPDES
discharge permit has been approved and issued by the State of North Carolina,
and provided that any such discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer
system shall be authorized by the Town of Wrightsville Beach.



   (B)   Illicit connections.



      (1)   Connections to a stormwater conveyance or stormwater
conveyance system that allow the discharge of non-stormwater, other than the
exclusions described in division (A) above, are unlawful. Prohibited
connections include, but are not limited to: floor drains, waste water from
washing machines or sanitary sewers and wash water from commercial vehicle
washing or steam cleaning.



      (2)   Where such connections exist in violation of this
section and said connections were made prior to the adoption of this
provision or any other ordinance prohibiting such connections, the property
owner or the person using said connection shall remove the connection within
one year following the effective date of this subchapter.  However, the
one-year grace period shall not apply to connections which may result in the
discharge of hazardous materials or other discharges which pose an immediate
threat to health and safety, or are likely to result in immediate injury and
harm to real or personal property, natural resources, wildlife, or habitat.



      (3)   Where it is determined that said connection:



         (a)   May result in the discharge of hazardous materials
or may pose an immediate threat to health and safety, or is likely to result
in immediate injury and harm to real or personal property, natural resources,
wildlife, or habitat, or



         (b)   Was made in violation of any applicable regulation
or ordinance, other than this section; the Stormwater Manager shall designate
the time within which the connection shall be removed. In setting the time
limit for compliance, the Stormwater Manager shall take into consideration:



            1.   The quantity and complexity of the work,



            2.   The consequences of delay,



            3.   The potential harm to the environment, to the
public health, and to public and private property, and



            4.   The cost of remedying the damage.



   (C)   Spills.



      (1)   Spills or leaks of polluting substances released,
discharged to, or having the potential to released or discharged to the
stormwater conveyance system, shall be contained, controlled, collected, and
properly disposed. All affected areas shall be restored to their preexisting
condition.



      (2)   Persons in control of the polluting substances
immediately prior to their release or discharge, and persons owning the
property on which the substances were released or discharged, shall
immediately notify the Town of Wrightsville Beach Public Works Department of
the release or discharge, as well as making any required notifications under
state and federal law. Notification shall not relieve any person of any
expenses related to the restoration, loss, damage, or any other liability
which may be incurred as a result of said spill or leak, nor shall such
notification relieve any person from other liability which may be imposed by
state or other law.



   (D)   Nuisance.  Illicit discharges and illicit connections which
exist within the Town of Wrightsville Beach are hereby found, deemed, and
declared to be dangerous or prejudicialed to the public health or public
safety and are found, deemed, and declared to be public nuisances. Such
public nuisances shall be abated in accordance with the procedures set forth
in Chapter 130: Offenses Against Public Peace And Safety.



(Ord. 1538, passed 5-24-07)



§ 50.162  STORMWATER FEES.



   (A)   Stormwater fees as set forth in the Schedule of Fees listed
below shall be determined from time to time by the Board of Aldermen and kept
on file in the office of the Town Clerk.  Adjustments to the stormwater fees
shall be applicable to the first building following the effective date of the
modified rate.



   (B)   The following fees are hereby established by the Board of
Aldermen:



 


Parcel size in square feet

 
Monthly fee


<2,000
 
$2


>2,000 and <8,000
 
$5


>8,000 and <20,000
 
$6



 



 


Parcel size in square feet

 
Monthly fee


>20,000 and <100,000
 
$10


>100,000
 
$20



 



   For the purposes of this section, “parcel” shall mean a tax parcel
as identified on the records of the New Hanover County Tax Office.



(Ord. 1516, passed 8-24-06)



§ 50.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in this section.  If the violation is
continued, each day's violation shall be a separate offense.



   (B)   Any violation of this chapter shall subject the offender to a
civil penalty to be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of
a debt if the offender does not pay any penalty called for hereunder within
the prescribed period of time after notice of violation of the chapter. 
Penalties shall be as prescribed herein but in no case less than $10 per day.



   (C)   This chapter may be enforced by an appropriate equitable
remedy such as an injunction or order of abatement issuing from any court of
competent jurisdiction.



   (D)   This chapter may be enforced by any, all, or a combination of
the remedies as authorized and prescribed above.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision
of §§ 50.120 through 50.126, including any mandatory water conservation
measure.



   (F)   A violation of §§ 50.130 through 50.162 may subject the
violator to a civil penalty to be recovered in a civil action in the nature
of a debt if the violator does not pay the penalty within 30 days after
notice of the violation is issued by the Stormwater Manager.



      (1)   Civil penalties.



         (a)   Any person who allows, acts in concert,
participates, directs, or assists directly or indirectly in the creation of a
violation of §§ 50.130 through 50.162 is subject to a civil penalty. A
civil penalty may be assessed from the date the violation first occurs.



         (b)   Civil penalties may be assessed up to the full
amount of penalty to which the town is subject for violations of its NPDES
stormwater permit, or up to $5,000 for each violation of §§ 50.130 through
50.162, whichever is greater. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate violation.



         (c)   No penalty shall be assessed until the person
alleged to be in violation has been served notice of the violation as
described in § 50.160(C). Refusal to accept the notice shall not relieve the
violator of the obligation to pay such penalty.



         (d)   Penalties may be assessed concurrently with a
notice of violation for any of the following:



            1.   Obstructing, hampering or interfering with an
authorized town representative who is in the process of carrying out official
duties under §§ 50.130 through 50.162;



            2.   A repeated violation for which a notice of
violation was previously given to the person responsible for the violation; or



            3.   Willful violation of §§ 50.130 through
50.162.



         (e)   In determining the amount of a civil penalty, the
Stormwater Manager shall consider any relevant mitigating and aggravating
factors including, but not limited to the following:



            1.   Degree and extent of harm caused by the
violation;



            2.   Cost of rectifying the damage;



            3.   Amount of money saved through noncompliance;



            4.   Whether the violator took reasonable measures
to comply with this chapter;



            5.   Knowledge of the requirements by the violator
and/or reasonable opportunity or obligation to obtain such knowledge;



            6.   Whether the violator voluntarily took
reasonable measures to restore any areas damaged by the violation;



            7.   Whether the violation was committed willfully;



            8.   Whether the violator reported the violation
to an appropriate authority;



            9.   Technical and economic reasonableness of
reducing or eliminating the discharge; and



            10.   Prior record of the violator in complying or
failing to comply with §§ 50.130 through 50.162 or any other water
pollution control ordinance or regulation.



         (f)   The Stormwater Manager shall determine the amount
of the civil penalty to be assessed under this section and shall make written
demand for payment upon the person in violation and shall set forth in detail
a description of the violation for which the penalty was imposed. Notice of
said assessment shall be by registered or certified mail or other means
reasonably calculated to give adequate notice. If a violator does not pay a
civil penalty assessed by the town within 30 days after it is due, the
Stormwater Manager shall request the Town Attorney to institute a civil
action to recover the amount of the assessment. The civil action shall be
brought in New Hanover County Superior Court or in any other court of
competent jurisdiction. Such civil action must be filed within three years of
the date the notice of assessment was served on the violator.



         (g)   An assessment that is not contested is due when
the violator is served with a notice of assessment. An assessment that is
contested is due at the conclusion of the administrative and judicial review
of the assessment.



         (h)   Civil penalties collected pursuant to this chapter
shall be credited to the town’s water and sewer fund as a non-tax revenue.



         (i)   A violation of §§ 50.130 through 50.162 shall
not constitute a misdemeanor or infraction punishable under G.S. § 14-4, but
instead shall be subject to the civil penalties fixed by this section.



      (2)   Cost recovery. The town may also recover from the
violator:



         (a)   Costs to restore damaged property based on
restoration costs, which include, but are not limited to, cleanup costs,
value of animal and plant life damaged, and town administrative costs;



         (b)   Compensation for damage to or destruction of the
stormwater system.



   (G)   In no case shall the maximum penalty per day exceed the amount
as specified in § 50.999(F)(1)(b).



(Ord., passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1422, passed 8-8-02; Am. Ord. 1538, passed
5-24-07; Am. Ord. 1590, passed 1-29-09)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



Chapter



   70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



   71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



   72.   BICYCLE REGULATIONS



   73.   PEDESTRIANS



   74.   STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING



   75.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      SCHEDULE I:   SPEED LIMITS



      SCHEDULE II:   TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS



      SCEHEDULE III:   ESTABLISHMENT OF ONE-WAY STREETS



   76.   PARKING SCHEDULES



      SCHEDULE I:   PARKING LIMITED TO CERTAIN TIMES



      SCHEDULE II:   DIAGONAL PARKING




      SCHEDULE III:   PROHIBITED PARKING





      SCHEDULE IV:   PENALTIES FOR OVERTIME PARKING IN A METERED
SPACE AND OTHER VIOLATIONS OF THE PARKING ORDINANCES




CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Compliance with title



   70.03   Obedience to police



   70.04   Authority of police and fire officials



   70.05   Public employees to obey traffic regulations



   70.06   Exemptions for authorized emergency vehicles



   70.07   Regulations to apply to push carts; bicycles



Traffic Control Devices



   70.15   Obedience to traffic devices required



   70.16   Standards for signs and signs required for enforcement of
chapter



   70.17   One-way streets and alleys; signs required



   70.18   No turn signs and turning markers



   70.19   Stop signs; location; design



   70.20   Yield signs



   70.21   Zones of quiet; school zones



   70.22   No parking and safety zone markers



   70.23   Traffic control signal legend



   70.24   Flashing signals



   70.25   Traffic lanes



   70.26   Display of unauthorized signs, signals, or markings



   70.27   Interference with traffic control devices prohibited



   70.28   Schedule of traffic and parking regulations



Registration; Display of Decal



   70.35   License tax imposed



   70.36   Display of decal



   70.37   Payment of tax



   70.38   Amount of tax



   70.39   Nonresident owners



Trailers, Motor Homes, Travel Trailers, and Campers



   70.46   Definitions



   70.47   Parking prohibitions



   70.48   Parking on public property for the purpose of habitation
prohibited



   70.49   Parking on private property; permit required



 



   70.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Traffic regulations, see Ch. 71



Statutory reference:



   Power of local authorities, see G.S. § 20-169



   Registration of vehicles, see G.S. § 20-84



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this title the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "ALLEY."  A thoroughfare through the middle of a block.



   "AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE." Vehicles of the Fire Department, police
vehicles and ambulances, and emergency vehicles of municipal departments or
public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the Chief of
Police.



   "BICYCLE."  Every device propelled by human power upon which any
person may ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is over 20 inches
in diameter.



   "BLOCK."  A portion of any street located between two intersections
adjacent to each other.



   "BUSINESS DISTRICT."  The territory contiguous to a highway when 75%
or more of frontage thereon for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by
buildings in use for business.



   "COMMERCIAL VEHICLE."  Every vehicle designed, maintained, or used
primarily for the transportation of property. (See also "MOTOR VEHICLE" and
"VEHICLE.")



   "CROSSWALK."  That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at
intersections.  Any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian
crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.



   "CURB LOADING ZONE."  A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.  (See also "FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE" and "PASSENGER CURB
LOADING ZONE.")



   "DRIVER."  Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of
a vehicle.



   "FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE."  A space adjacent to a curb for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or
passengers.  (See also "CURB LOADING ZONE" and "PASSENGER CURB LOADING
ZONE.")



   "INTERSECTION."  The area embraced within the prolongation of the
lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of two or
more highways which join one another at an angle, whether or not one highway
crosses the other.



   "LANED ROADWAY."  A roadway which is divided into two or more
clearly-marked lanes for vehicular traffic.



   "MOTORCYCLE."  Every  motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of
the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact
with the ground, but excluding a tractor.



   "MOTOR VEHICLE."  Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every
vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley
wires, but not operated upon rails.  (See also "COMMERCIAL VEHICLE" and
"VEHICLE.")



   "OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES." All signs, signals, markings, and
devices not inconsistent with this title placed or erected by authority of
the Board of Aldermen or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of
regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.



   "OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS."  Any device, whether manually,
electrically, or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately
directed to stop and to proceed.



   "PARK."  The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading.



   "PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE."  A place adjacent to a curb reserved
for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers.



   "PEDESTRIAN."  Any person afoot.



   "POLICE OFFICER."  Every officer of the Police Department or any
officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.



   "PRIVATE ROAD" or "DRIVEWAY."  Every road or driveway not open to the
use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel.



   "PUBLIC CONVEYANCE."  Any vehicle other than a taxicab or railroad
train for transporting for fare.



   "RESIDENCE DISTRICT."  The territory contiguous to a highway not
comprising a business district, where 75% or more of the frontage on the
highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is mainly occupied by dwellings
and buildings in use for business.



   "RIGHT-OF-WAY."  The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.



   "ROADWAY."  That portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder.



   "SAFETY ZONE."  The area or space officially set apart within a
roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so
marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times
while set apart as a safety zone.



   "SIDEWALK."  That portion of a street between the curb lines or the
lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the
use of pedestrians.



   "STANDING."  Any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.



   "STOP."



      (1)    "STOP."  When required, means complete cessation of
movement.



      (2)   "STOP" or "STOPPING."  When prohibited, means any
stopping of a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic
control sign or signal.



   "STREET" or "HIGHWAY."  The entire width between property lines of
every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the
use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.



   "THROUGH HIGHWAY."  Every street or highway or portion thereof at the
entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is
required by law to stop before entering or crossing the same and when stop
signs are erected as provided in this chapter.



   "TRAFFIC."  Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles,
streetcars, and other conveyances either singly or together while using any
street for purposes of travel.



   "VEHICLE."  Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn, except devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks; provided, that a bicycle or
a ridden animal shall be deemed a "VEHICLE." (See also "COMMERCIAL VEHICLE"
and "MOTOR VEHICLE")



(Am. Ord. 1626, passed 4-22-10)



§ 70.02  COMPLIANCE WITH TITLE.



   No person shall do any act forbidden or shall fail to perform any act
required in this title.



('72 Code, § ll-2)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Violation of ordinances, see G.S. § 14-4



§ 70.03  OBEDIENCE TO POLICE.



   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order or direction by a police officer.



('72 Code, § ll-3)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.04  AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE OFFICIALS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the police officers to enforce all
street traffic laws and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street
traffic.



   (B)   Police officers are authorized to direct all traffic by voice,
hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws. However, in the event of a
fire or other emergency, to expedite traffic, or to safeguard pedestrians,
police officers may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding
the provisions of the traffic laws.



('72 Code, § 11-4)



   (C)   Fire Department officials when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.



Statutory reference:



   Firemen as traffic officers, see G.S § 20-114.1



§ 70.05  PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle
owned by, or used in the service of the United States government, this state,
county, or town.  No driver shall violate any of the provisions of this
title, except as otherwise permitted in this title or by state statute.



('72 Code, § 11-5)



§ 70.06  EXEMPTIONS FOR AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   (A)   The provisions of this title regulating the operation,
parking, and standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency
vehicles.  However, a driver when operating the vehicle in any emergency,
unless otherwise directed by a police officer, may:



      (1)   Park or stand, notwithstanding the provisions of this
title.



      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only
after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.



      (3)    Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does
not endanger life or property.



      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or
turning in specified directions so long as he does not endanger life or
property.



   (B)   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the
driver of any authorized emergency vehicle from the consequences of his
reckless disregard of the safety of others.



('72 Code, § 11-6)



Statutory reference:



   Emergency vehicles, see G.S. § 20-156



§ 70.07  REGULATIONS TO APPLY TO PUSH CARTS; BICYCLES.



   Every person propelling any push cart or riding a bicycle or an animal
upon a roadway and every person driving any animal-driven vehicle shall be
subject to the provisions of this title applicable to the driver of any
vehicle, except those provisions which, by their very nature, can have no
application.



('72 Code, § 11-7)



Cross-reference:



   Bicycle regulations, see Ch. 72



TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES



§ 70.15  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC DEVICES REQUIRED.



   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the directions of any official
traffic control device applicable thereto and placed in accordance with the
traffic ordinances of this town, unless otherwise directed by a police
officer, subject to the exceptions (as set forth in § 70.06) granted the
driver of an authorized emergency vehicle.



('72 Code, § 11-9)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Traffic control, see G.S. § 160A-300



§ 70.16  STANDARDS FOR SIGNS AND SIGNS REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   Signs utilized for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of
this chapter shall be placed in locations as approved by the Town Manager or
his designee and consistent with standards promulgated by the Manual of
Uniform Traffic Devices promulgated by the U.S. Department of
Transportation.  In the event a series of signs are placed (for example, a
series of "no parking" signs), such signs shall be located so that a sign can
be read from the preceding sign taking into consideration the line of sight
and field conditions.  All such signs shall be installed in accordance with
guidelines provided for in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Devices promulgated
by the U.S. Department of Transportation.  Except where circumstances
dictate otherwise, signs shall be installed on the right side of the road and
at a height of at least seven feet.



   (B)   No provisions of this title for which signs are required shall
be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, a sign as required by the provisions of this chapter has
not been installed.  Whenever a particular section does not state that signs
are required, the section shall be effective without signs being placed to
give notice thereof.



('72 Code, § 11-10)  (Am. Ord. 1330, passed 4-8-99)



§ 70.17  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS; SIGNS REQUIRED.



   Whenever any ordinance designates any one-way street or alley there
shall be signs giving notice thereof, and no regulation shall be effective
unless the signs are in place.  Signs indicating the direction of lawful
traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of
traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.



Cross-reference:



   One-way streets, see § 71.04



Statutory reference:



   One-way traffic, see G.S. § 20-165.1



§ 70.18  NO TURN SIGNS AND TURNING MARKERS.



   Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected, or installed indicating
that no right, left, or "U" turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall
disobey the directions of the sign.  When authorized markers, buttons, or
other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to
be traveled by vehicles traversing or turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle
shall disobey the directions of the indications.



('72 Code, § 11-11)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



   No right- or left-turn streets, see § 71.07



   "U" turns restricted, see § 71.08



Statutory reference:



   Turning at intersections, see G.S. § 20-153



§ 70.19  STOP SIGNS; LOCATION; DESIGN.



   (A)   On through streets located within the town, there shall be a
stop sign on each street intersecting such through street or intersecting a
portion thereof unless traffic at any intersection is controlled at all times
by traffic control signals.  However, at the intersection of two through
streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street
not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of
the streets.



   (B)   The Board of Aldermen may determine and designate
intersections where a particular hazard exists upon other than through
streets and may determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more
entrances to any stop intersection, and shall erect a stop sign at every
place where a stop is required.



   (C)   Every sign erected pursuant to this title shall bear the word
"Stop" in letters not less than eight inches in height and the signs shall at
nighttime be rendered luminous by steady or flashing internal illumination,
or by a fixed floodlight projected on the face  of  the sign,  or  by
efficient reflecting elements on the face of the sign.  Every stop sign
shall be located as near as practicable at the nearest line of the crosswalk
on the side of the intersection or, if none, at the nearest line of the
roadway.



(Am. Ord. 1330, passed 4-8-99)



Cross-reference:



   Stopping at through streets, see § 71.01



   Stopping at certain intersections,  see § 71.02



Statutory reference:



   Stop signs, see G.S. § 20-158



§ 70.20  YIELD SIGNS.



   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience to
the sign, slow down and yield the right-of- way to any pedestrian crossing
the roadway on which he is driving and to any vehicle in movement on the main
traveled or through highway or street which is approaching, so as to arrive
at the intersection at approximately the same time as the vehicle entering
the main traveled or through street or highway.



Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Erection of yield signs, see G.S. § 20-158.l



§ 70.21  ZONES OF QUIET; SCHOOL ZONES.



   (A)   Whenever authorized signs are placed indicating a zone of
quiet, the person operating a motor vehicle within the zone shall not sound
the horn or any other warning device, except in an emergency.



   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are placed designating any street or
part thereof as a school zone, drivers of motor vehicles using the street
shall exercise the greatest care for protection of children.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.22  NO PARKING AND SAFETY ZONE MARKERS.



   Whenever authorized signs or markings are placed, erected, or installed
indicating no parking zones or safety zones, no driver of a vehicle shall
disobey the regulations in connection therewith.



('72 Code, § ll-12)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



   Stopping, standing, or parking regulations, see Ch. 74



Statutory reference:



   Safety zone defined, see G.S. § 20-4.01



§ 70.23  TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.



   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals 
exhibiting  the  words "Go," "Caution," "Stop," or exhibiting differently
colored lights, successively, one at a time, the following colors only shall
be used, and the terms and lights shall indicate as follows:



   (A)   "Green" or "Go."



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight
through or turn right or left unless a sign at the place prohibits either
turn.  But vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles
and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time the signal is
exhibited.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.



   (B)   "Yellow" or "Caution", when shown following the green or "Go"
signal.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if the stop cannot be
made in safety, a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal are advised that there is
insufficient time to cross a roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to
cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.



   (C)   "Red" or "Stop."



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at the point as may be
indicated by a clearly visible line and shall remain standing until green or
"Go" is shown alone.



      (2)   No pedestrian facing the signal shall enter the roadway
unless he can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.



   (D)   "Red with green arrow."



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may cautiously enter
the intersection only to continue the movement in the direction indicated by
the arrow but shall not interfere with other traffic.



      (2)   No pedestrian facing the signal shall enter the roadway
unless he can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.



('72 Code, § ll-13)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Vehicle control signs and signals, see G.S. § 20-158



§ 70.24  FLASHING SIGNALS.



   Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used they shall require
obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:



   (A)   Flashing red stop signal.  When a red lens is illuminated by
rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, and
the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a
stop at a stop sign.



   (B)   Flashing yellow caution signal. When a yellow lens is
illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past the signal only with caution.



('72 Code, § ll-14)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.25  TRAFFIC LANES.



   When traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep the vehicle within the
boundaries of any lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or
preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.



Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Driving within lanes, see G.S. § 20-146



§ 70.26  DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS, OR MARKINGS.



   (A)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of
any street or highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which
purports to be, is in imitation of, or resembles an official traffic control
device, sign, or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official
traffic control device, sign, or signal.



   (B)   No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public
authority permit upon any street or highway any traffic sign or signal
bearing thereon any commercial advertising.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.27  INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic control device,
sign, or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any other
part thereof.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.28  SCHEDULE OF TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   In addition to the provisions of this title which establish
specific traffic and parking regulations and restrictions, such traffic and
parking regulations and restrictions and the locations and/or times where and
when the same are effective may be set out upon official traffic and parking
schedules as amended from time to time by the Board of Aldermen and as set
forth in Chapters 75 and 76 of this title.  Provided, that the Town Manager
shall have the authority to establish traffic and parking regulations and
restrictions where he deems necessary due to emergency situations or other
situations requiring the immediate establishment of such regulations and
restrictions where he deems necessary due to emergency situations or other
situations requiring the immediate establishment of such regulations and
restrictions in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.  Any
such regulations and restrictions enacted by the Town Manager shall be
effective for a period of 30 days, at which time such regulations or
restrictions shall expire.



   (B)   No person shall operate any vehicle in violation of traffic
and parking regulations and restrictions as established and set forth in the
traffic and parking schedules contained in Chapter 75 and 76 of this title.



(Ord. 1136, passed 2-14-91; Am. Ord. 1330, passed 4-8-99)



REGISTRATION; DISPLAY OF DECAL



§ 70.35  LICENSE TAX IMPOSED.



   (A)   Subject to division (B) of this section, each owner of a motor
vehicle that displays a current North Carolina license plate and resides
within the town shall pay an annual license tax for each such vehicle in the
amounts set forth in § 70.38.  For purposes of this section, the owner of a
motor vehicle shall be that person owning the motor vehicle on January 1 of
each year.



   (B)   The requirements of division (A) of this section shall not
apply to:



      (1)   Motor vehicles owned by the town, New Hanover County,
the State of North Carolina, or the United States of America.



      (2)   Trailers.



   (C)   The term "RESIDES WITHIN THE TOWN", when referring to motor
vehicles, includes but is not limited to the following:



      (1)   Those vehicles owned or principally used by a person who
establishes a residence within the town, temporarily or permanently, for a
period of 30 days, and which vehicle is used in the town, or normally stored
in the town when not in use.



      (2)   Those vehicles used and maintained and normally stored
within the town in connection with a business located in the town.  It shall
be a rebuttal presumption that when a vehicle is registered by the North
Carolina Department of Motor Vehicles at an address within the town, such
address is a place of residence for the vehicle.



(Ord. 1274, passed 6-13-96)



§ 70.36  DISPLAY OF DECAL.



   Each motor vehicle subject to the annual license tax as described in §
70.35 shall display an identification decal inside the lower left-hand corner
of the windshield of such motor vehicle.  Each decal shall contain an
identification number which shall be registered with the owner's name and a
record thereof shall be maintained by the town.



(Ord. 1274, passed 6-13-96)



§ 70.37  PAYMENT OF TAX.



   The annual license tax imposed in accordance with § 70.35 shall be
paid annually on or before the first day of April of each year.  Payment
shall be made at the Wrightsville Beach Police Department at 321 Causeway
Drive, Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina.  At the time payment is made, a
decal as described in § 70.36 shall be issued for each vehicle subject to
the tax.



(Ord. 1274, passed 6-13-96)



§ 70.38  AMOUNT OF TAX.



   The annual license tax as required in § 70.35 shall be $15. If paid
after April 1, the tax shall be $30.



(Ord. 1274, passed 6-13-96; Am. Ord. 1736, passed 12-11-14; Am. Ord. 1757,
passed 2-11-16)



§ 70.39  NONRESIDENT OWNERS.



   Payment of the annual license tax and display of the decals as
described in § 70.36 shall be permitted but not required for motor vehicles
owned by nonresident property owners.



(Ord. 1274, passed 6-13-96)



TRAILERS, MOTOR HOMES, TRAVEL TRAILERS, AND CAMPERS



§ 70.46  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "CAMPER."  A separate vehicle designed for human habitation and which
can be attached to or detached from a pickup truck, automobile, or other
motor vehicle.



   "MOTOR HOME."  A self-contained vehicle designed for human habitation,
with its own motive power and with a passageway from the body of the home to
the driver's and front passenger's seats (including vehicles commonly termed
"vans.")



   "MOTOR VEHICLE."  Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every
vehicle designed to run upon the highways which is pulled by a self-propelled
vehicle.



   "PICKUP TRUCK CAMPER."  A motor vehicle designed primarily for the
transportation of property which has been modified for human habitation by
the erection of a weather-type canopy roof, or cover over the rear bed of the
vehicle.



   "TRAILER."  A vehicle without motive power designed for human
habitation on its own structure and to be drawn by a vehicle with motive
power.



(Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87; Am. Ord. 1245, passed 1-12-95)



§ 70.47  PARKING PROHIBITIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any of the vehicles defined
in § 70.46 within the corporate limits of the town, except in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 70.48  PARKING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle as defined
in this chapter for the purpose of habitation overnight upon any public
property within the corporate limits of the town, including but not being
limited to, public streets and street rights-of-way, sidewalks, parking lots,
and any other public areas.



(Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87; Am. Ord. 1245, passed 1-12-95)  Penalty, see §
151.999



§ 70.49  PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY FOR PURPOSE OF HABITATION PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a camper, motor home,
pickup camper or trailer for the purpose of habitation overnight upon any
private property located within the corporate limits of the town.



(Ord. 1256, passed 8-17-95; Am. Ord. 1257, passed 9-14-95)  Penalty, see §
151.999



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)  Failure to comply with §§ 70.35 through 70.37 in a timely
manner shall subject the violator to a civil penalty of $15 for each
offense.  (Ord., passed 12-13-79)



   (B)  In accordance with G.S. § 160A-175, and unless provided
otherwise, violation of any provision of this title for which a penalty is
not already otherwise provided shall be a misdemeanor as provided in G.S. §
14-4, punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding $50 or by
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days.



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section




   71.01   Stopping; through streets





   71.02   Stopping; certain intersections





   71.03   Stopping when traffic obstructed





   71.04   One-way streets





   71.05   Driving through funeral processions





   71.06   Left turns at certain intersections





   71.07   No right- or left-turn streets





   71.08   "U" turns restricted





   71.09   Backing a vehicle





   71.10   Emerging from alley or private driveway





   71.11   Driving on sidewalk prohibited





   71.12   Riding coasters, roller skates, and skateboards; restricted





   71.13   Moving cars from parked position





   71.14   Driving within designated  traffic lanes





   71.15   Boarding or alighting from vehicles





   71.16   Riding on vehicles not designed for passenger use





   71.17   Entering or jumping on vehicles without permission





   71.18   Persons required to stay inside vehicles





   71.19   Limit of three persons in front seat





   71.20   Right turn on red





   71.21   Definition of truck





   71.22   Trucks prohibited on certain streets




Cross-reference:



   Traffic schedules, see Ch. 75



Statutory reference:



   Operation of vehicles and rules of the road, see G.S. § 20-138 et seq.



§ 71.01  STOPPING; THROUGH STREETS.



   (A)   Those streets and parts of streets designated on the official
map are declared to be through streets for the purpose of this section.



   (B)   When stop signs are placed, erected, or installed upon
highways intersecting a through street at the entrance thereto or at the
entrance to any intersection, every driver of a vehicle shall stop in
obedience to the signs before entering the intersection and shall not proceed
into or across the through street until he has first determined that no
conflict with traffic will be involved.



('72 Code, § 11-35)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.02  STOPPING; CERTAIN INTERSECTIONS.



   Those intersections designated on the official map are declared to be
stop intersections when entered from the streets first named.  When stop
signs are placed, erected,  or  installed at the intersections, every
driver of a vehicle or streetcar shall stop in obedience to the signs before
entering the intersections and shall not proceed into or across the through
street until he has first determined that no conflict with traffic will be
involved.



('72 Code, § 11-36)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.03  STOPPING WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.



   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk, unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk
to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed.



('72 Code, § 11-37)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.04  ONE-WAY STREETS.



   Upon those streets and parts of streets designated on the official map,
vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs
indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every
intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.



('72 Code, § 11-38)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.05  DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.



   No vehicle shall be driven through a funeral procession, except Fire
Department vehicles, police patrols, and ambulances when they are responding
to calls.



('72 Code, § 11-39)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.06  LEFT TURNS AT CERTAIN INTERSECTIONS.



   In making left turns at the street intersections designated on the
official map, all traffic shall travel to the left of the center of the
intersections as may indicated by buttons, markers, or other directing signs.



('72 Code, § 11-40)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Turning at intersections, see G.S. § 20-153



§ 71.07  NO RIGHT- OR LEFT-TURN STREETS.



   No vehicle shall make a left turn or a right turn respectively at any
street intersection designated on the official map as a no right- or
left-turn street.



('72 Code, § 11-41)



§ 71.08  "U" TURNS RESTRICTED.



   (A)    No driver shall turn any vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction in the business district, except at street intersections,
in the streets or portions of streets designated in the official map.



('72 Code, § 11-42)



   (B)    No "U" turns shall be permitted at the intersectionof North
Lumina Avenue and Salisbury Street when entering said intersection from east
or west Salisbury Street. (Ord. 1009, passed 4-24-86)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.09  BACKING A VEHICLE.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not back it into any intersection or over
a crosswalk and shall not in any event back a vehicle unless the movement can
be made in safety.  He shall have given ample warning to those who may be
behind, by hand and horn or other signal.



('72 Code, § 11-43)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.10  EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR PRIVATE DRIVEWAY.



   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building
shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into
the sidewalk areas extending across any alleyway, and upon entering the
roadway he shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the
roadway.



('72 Code, § 11-44)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.11  DRIVING ON SIDEWALK PROHIBITED.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk.



(Ord. 1105, passed 10-12-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.12  RIDING COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES, AND SKATEBOARDS; RESTRICTED.



   No person upon roller skates or a skateboard or riding in or by means
of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device shall go upon any roadway,
unless to cross a street at a crosswalk or intersection, except upon streets
set aside as play streets.



('72 Code, § 11-49)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.13  MOVING CARS FROM PARKED POSITION.



   Cars parked shall move out in the direction headed, or if they are
parked at an angle with the curb they shall back out on that angle until they
have cleared the other cars and shall then proceed in the direction they are
most nearly headed in.



('72 Code, § 11-50)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.14  DRIVING WITHIN DESIGNATED TRAFFIC LANES.



   All vehicles operated on any roadway which has been clearly marked with
lanes for traffic shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from the lane until the driver has first
ascertained that the movement can be made with safety.



('72 Code, § 11-51)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.15 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLES.



   No person shall board or alight from any public conveyance or other
vehicle while the vehicle is in motion.



('72 Code, § 11-52)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.16  RIDING ON VEHICLES NOT DESIGNED FOR PASSENGER USE.



   No person shall ride on any public conveyance or vehicle or any portion
thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers.  This provision
shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty
or to persons riding within truck bodies in spaces intended for merchandise.



('72 Code, § 11-53)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.17  ENTERING OR JUMPING ON VEHICLES WITHOUT PERMISSION.



   No person shall enter, jump on, or ride any automobile or other vehicle
without the consent of the owner or driver.



('72 Code, § 11-54)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.18  PERSONS REQUIRED TO STAY INSIDE VEHICLES.



   No person when riding shall allow any part of his body to protrude
beyond the limits of the vehicle in which he is riding, except to give
signals as are by law required, and no person shall hang on to any vehicle
whatsoever.



('72 Code, § 11-55)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.19  LIMIT OF THREE PERSONS IN FRONT SEAT.



   No driver or person in charge of any motor vehicle shall permit more
than three persons, including the driver, to ride in the front or driver's
seat of a motor vehicle.



('72 Code, § 11-56)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.20  RIGHT TURN ON RED.



   Any vehicle after coming to a complete stop for a red light facing the
vehicle, may make a right turn after yielding to pedestrians and other
vehicles except at those intersections where right turns are prohibited.



(Ord., passed 1-9-75)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.21  DEFINITION OF TRUCK.



   For the purposes of title 7 of the Code, the term "TRUCK" shall mean
trucks that have any of the following characteristics:



   (A)   Tractor-trailer units, with or without trailers attached.



   (B)   Trucks exceeding 25 feet in length.



   (C)   Trucks exceeding seven feet in width.



   (D)   Trucks having a gross weight of 2½ tons or more.



(Ord. 1287, passed 7-10-97)



§ 71.22  TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.



   No person may drive any truck over the streets set forth in Ch. 75,
Sch. II.



(Ord. 1287, passed 7-10-97)



CHAPTER 72:  BICYCLE REGULATIONS



Section



   72.01   Effect of regulations



   72.02   Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles



   72.03   Obedience to traffic control devices



   72.04   Riding on bicycles



   72.05   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths



   72.06   Speed



   72.07   Carrying articles



   72.08   Riding on sidewalks; prohibited



   72.09   Lamps required at night



   72.10   Clinging to motor vehicles



   72.11   Riding on handlebars; prohibited



   72.12   Riding without hands; prohibited



Statutory reference:



   Racing prohibited on highway, see G.S. § 20-171.2



   State definition, see G.S. § 20-171.l



§ 72.01  EFFECT OF REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever
a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein.



§ 72.02  TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES.



   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of
the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver
of a vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable
to vehicles or by this title applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as
to special regulations in this chapter and except as to those provisions of
laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no application.



Cross-reference:



   Traffic regulations, see Ch. 71



§ 72.03  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of
official traffic control signals, signs, and other control devices applicable
to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.



   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no
right, left, or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall
disobey the direction of any sign, except where the person dismounts from the
bicycle to make any turn, in which event the person shall then obey the
regulations applicable to pedestrians.



Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



   Pedestrian regulations, see Ch. 73



   Traffic control devices, see §§ 70.15 through 70.27



§ 72.04  RIDING ON BICYCLES.



   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than
astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.



   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time
than the number for which it is designed and equipped.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.05  RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.



   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as
near to the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due
care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.



   (B)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more
than two abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles.



   (C)   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent
to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use the path and shall not use the roadway.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.06  SPEED.



   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable
and prudent under the conditions then existing.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.07  CARRYING ARTICLES.



   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or
article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the
handlebars.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.08  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS; PROHIBITED.



   No person shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk or walkway within the
town.



('72 Code, § 11-48)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.09  LAMPS REQUIRED AT NIGHT.



   No person shall ride a bicycle on any street or highway between sunset
on any day and sunrise on the following day, unless it is equipped with an
operating and lighted lantern or lamp.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.10  CLINGING TO MOTOR VEHICLES.



   No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller
skates, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any public
conveyance or moving vehicle upon any roadway.



('72 Code, § 11-46)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.11  RIDING ON HANDLEBARS; PROHIBITED.



   No operator of a motorcycle, or bicycle, when upon a street, shall
carry any person upon the handlebar, frame, or tank of any such vehicle, nor
shall any person so ride upon any such vehicle.



('72 Code, § ll-47)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.12  RIDING WITHOUT HANDS; PROHIBITED.



   No person shall ride a bicycle or motorcycle on any street without
having his hands upon the handlebars.



('72 Code, § 11-48)  Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 73:  PEDESTRIANS



Section



   73.01   Traffic control signals



   73.02   Crosswalk use



   73.03   Crossing at right angles



   73.04   Pedestrian shall yield right of-way



   73.05   Walking along roadway



   73.06   Drivers to exercise due care



Cross-reference:



   Traffic control devices, see Ch. 70



Statutory reference:



   Blind person's right-of-way, see G.S. § 20-175.l



   Standing, sitting, lying on streets prohibited, see G.S. § 20-174.l



§ 73.01  TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS.



   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as declared in
§ 70.23 but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights
and be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter.



Statutory reference:



   Pedestrians subject to traffic



     devices, see G.S. § 20-172



§ 73.02  CROSSWALK USE.



   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.



Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Right-of-way at crosswalks, see G.S. § 20-173



§ 73.03  CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES.



   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route
at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb,
except in a crosswalk.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.04  PEDESTRIAN SHALL YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Crossing at other than crosswalk, see G.S. § 20-174



§ 73.05  WALKING ALONG ROADWAY.



   (A)   Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any
pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.



   (B)   Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along
and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the
roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite
direction.



(G.S. § 20-174)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.06  DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE.



   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter every driver
of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian
upon any roadway; shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary; and
shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person upon a roadway.



(G.S. § 20-174)  Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 74:  STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING



Section



General Provisions



   74.01   Stopping in streets prohibited; exceptions



   74.02   Obstructing passage of other vehicles



   74.03   Unattended vehicles



   74.04   Parking restrictions; all times



   74.05   Parking restrictions; certain hours



   74.06   Reserved



   74.07   Parking restrictions; one hour



   74.08   Parking restrictions; twelve minutes



   74.09   Parking in stands; prohibited



   74.10   Parking parallel to curb



   74.11   Backing vehicle to curb; prohibited



   74.12   Vehicle parked with left side to curb prohibited



   74.13   Parking within lines



   74.14   Parking and standing; purposes prohibited



   74.15   Parking and standing; certain places prohibited



   74.16   Moving vehicle of another into restricted area



   74.17   Parking meter; overtime prohibited



   74.18   Obstructing street end water access; prohibited



   74.19   Loading and unloading zones



   74.20   Passenger and commercial zones



   74.21   Operator to comply with chapter; effect of proof of
ownership of vehicle



   74.22   Fire lanes



   74.23   Handicapped parking



   74.24   Regulation of parking on private property pursuant to G.S.
§ 160A-301



   74.25   Designated lifeguard parking



   74.26   Designated tow-away zone



Parking Meters



   74.35   Definitions



   74.36   Authorization; responsibility



   74.37   Operation of meters



   74.38   Hours of operation



   74.38.1   Limitation on number of vehicles per parking space



   74.39   Designation of parking meters zones



   74.40   Parking without paying the required fee



   74.41   Rates



   74.42   Residential parking permits



   74.43   Commercial I and II and contractor parking permits



   74.44   Fraudulent use of parking permit



   74.45   Creation of Harbor Island Residential Parking District



   74.46   Parking restrictions in the Harbor Island Residential
Parking District



   74.47   Exceptions



   74.48   Old Causeway Drive, Keel Street and Marina Street



   74.49   Parking restrictions for Gene Floyd Drive and the public
parking lot adjacent to tennis courts located on the Town Hall complex



Enforcement



   74.50   Notice to violator



   74.51   Contents of notice



   74.52   Settlement of claim



   74.53   Other remedies



   74.54   Fines to be paid to General Fund



   74.55   Immobilization of vehicles



   74.56   Appeal of parking violations



 



   74.99  Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Parking schedules, see Ch. 76



Statutory reference:



   Off street parking facilities, see G.S. § 160A-536



   Signals on stopping, standing, or turning, see G.S. § 20-154



   Stopping on highway prohibited, see G.S. § 20-161



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 74.01  STOPPING IN STREETS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.



   No vehicle shall stop in any street except for the purpose of parking
as prescribed in this chapter, unless the stop is made necessary by the
approach of fire apparatus, by the approach of a funeral or other procession
which is given the right-of-way, by the stopping of a public conveyance, by
the lowering of railway gates, by the giving of traffic signals, by the
passing of some other vehicle or a pedestrian, or by some emergency.  In any
case covered by these exceptions the vehicle shall stop so as not to obstruct
any footway, pedestrian aisle, safety zone, crossing, or street intersection
if it can be avoided.



('72 Code, § ll-15)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.02  OBSTRUCTING PASSAGE OF OTHER VEHICLES.



   No vehicle shall so stand on any street as to interrupt or interfere
with the passage of public conveyances or other vehicles.



('72 Code, § ll-16)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.03  UNATTENDED VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave the engine or motor of any
motor vehicle running while it is standing parked upon the streets.



Penalty, see § 74.99



Statutory reference:



   Leaving vehicle unattended prohibited, see G.S. § 20-163



§ 74.04  PARKING RESTRICTIONS; ALL TIMES.



   When signs are placed, erected, or installed giving notice thereof, or
the curbing has been painted yellow in lieu of signs, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon such streets located within the town.



('72 Code, § 11-17)  (Am. Ord. 1331, passed 4-8-99)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.05 PARKING RESTRICTIONS; CERTAIN HOURS.



   When signs are placed, erected, or installed in each block giving
notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours of l:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m., upon any of the streets designated on the official map, unless
other hours are designated.  However, this section shall not apply to
vehicles parked on the streets between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
when the owners thereof are at work in the building or on the premises in
front of or near which the vehicles are parked.



('72 Code, § 11-18)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.06  (RESERVED)



§ 74.07  PARKING RESTRICTIONS; ONE HOUR.



   When signs are placed, erected, or installed in each block giving
notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than one hour at
any time between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. of any day upon any of
the streets designated on the official map.  The changing of the position of
a vehicle from one point directly to another point within the same block
shall be deemed to be one continuous parking period.



('72 Code, § 11-20)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.08  PARKING RESTRICTIONS; TWELVE MINUTES.



   When signs and/or parking meters are placed, erected or installed in
each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer
than 12 minutes at any time upon any streets or other locations designated in
the parking schedule set forth in Chapter 76. The changing of the position of
a vehicle from one point directly to another point within the same block
shall be deemed to be one continuous parking.



('72 Code, § 11-21) (Am. Ord. 1442, passed 4-24-03)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.09  PARKING IN STANDS; PROHIBITED.



   Those streets or parts of streets designated on the official map shall
be reserved as stands for that specific purpose and at that exact location. 
No automobile or other vehicle shall park therein, except those for which the
space or stand has been designated.



('72 Code, § 11-23)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.10  PARKING PARALLEL TO CURB.



   Where not otherwise indicated by this chapter and where the street is
not marked to show how vehicles shall park, all vehicles shall park parallel
to the curb and not more than 12 inches therefrom.



('72 Code, § 11-25)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.11  BACKING VEHICLE TO CURB; PROHIBITED.



   Except as provided herein, no vehicle shall remain backed up to a curb
except when actually loading or unloading. Provided, however, that this
prohibition shall not apply to motorcycles which shall be permitted to park
with the rear of the motorcycle backed up to a curb. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to events sponsored by the Town.



('72 Code, § 11-26) (Am. Ord. 1574, passed 4-24-08; Am. Ord. 1602, passed
6-11-09)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.12  VEHICLE PARKED WITH LEFT SIDE TO CURB PROHIBITED.



   No vehicle shall stop with its left side to the curb in the business
district. However, on one-way streets vehicles shall stop headed in the
direction of traffic.



('72 Code, § 11-27) (Am. Ord. 1442, passed 4-24-03)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.13  PARKING WITHIN LINES.



   On any street or public parking lot which is marked off with lines
indicating the parking spaces for cars, the cars shall be parked between the
lines.



('72 Code, § 11-28; Am. Ord. 1337, passed 6-24-99)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.14  PARKING AND STANDING; PURPOSES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any street for the
principal purposes of:



   (A)   Displaying it for sale.



   (B)   Washing, greasing, or repairing the vehicle, except for
repairs necessitated by an emergency.



   (C)   Storage thereof by garages, dealers, or other persons when the
storage is not incident to the bona fide use and operation of the automobile
or other vehicles.



   (D)   Storage in any marked parking space of any detached trailer or
van when the towing unit has been disconnected or for the purpose of
transferring merchandise or freight from one vehicle to another.



   (E)   Advertising.



('72 Code, § 11-31) (Am. Ord. 1570, passed 2-25-08)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.15  PARKING AND STANDING; CERTAIN PLACES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic control device in any of the following places:



   (A)   On the sidewalk.



   (B)   Within an intersection.



   (C)   On a crosswalk.



   (D)   Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic
control signal located at the side of a street or roadway.



   (E)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.



   (F)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure or within any
underbase structure.



   (G)   Within 15 feet in either direction of the entrance to a hotel,
theater, hospital, sanatorium, or any public building.



   (H)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, standing, or
parked at the edge or curb of a street.



   (I)   On any town property that is not clearly designated for
parking purposes. Designation for parking purposes shall be accomplished by
the use of signs indicating that the property is available for parking
purposes. Provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to
town property on which parking is authorized by ordinance, to parking in
connection with special events sponsored or approved by the town, to parking
by town owned vehicles and to parking authorized by a permit issued by the
Town Manager or his or her designee.



('72 Code, § 11-33) (Am. Ord. 1633, passed 7-15-10)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.16  MOVING VEHICLE OF ANOTHER INTO RESTRICTED AREA.



   No person shall move a vehicle which he does not own into any
prohibited area or sufficiently away from the curb to constitute a violation
of this chapter.



('72 Code, § 11-32)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.17  PARKING METER; OVERTIME PROHIBITED.



   Any person parking any vehicle overtime nearby, abreast of, or in front
of any parking meter shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in § 74.99.



(Ord., passed 5-10-79)



§ 74.18  OBSTRUCTING STREET END WATER ACCESS; PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park, leave, place, or cause to be
parked, left, or placed, either permanently or temporarily on any street ends
or street rights-of-way between the paved or traveled portion of the street
and the waters of the sounds, creeks, channels, and ocean contiguous to the
shores of the town any motor vehicles, trailers of any kind, boats, or
personal property of any kind unless otherwise designated by the Board of
Aldermen.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to launch any boats or vessels from
street ends or street rights-of-way between the paved or traveled portion of
the street and the waters of the sounds, creeks, channels, and ocean
contiguous to the shores of the town, by trailer or vehicle of any kind, and
no vehicle or trailer shall be driven, pulled, or trailed in any way across
street ends or street rights-of-way as described hereinabove.



   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions of (A) and (B) above, boats may
be launched from street ends and transported to the ocean or sound at street
ends by sand dolly.  Sand dollies may be left at street ends during daylight
hours only, and then only if they do not block or impede access of others
over street ends to the water.



   (D)   All sand dollies left at street ends under the provisions of
(C) above shall have the owner's name and address clearly displayed and
attached thereto.



(Ord., passed 8-9-79)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.19  LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES.



   (A)   Whenever vehicle loading and unloading zones are designated in
Chapter 76 and when signs are placed, erected, or installed giving notice
thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park any
vehicle for any purpose or period of time except in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Whenever a passenger loading and unloading zone is designated
and signed, no person may park any vehicle in any such zone for any purpose
other than the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, and then only
for a period not to exceed 15 minutes. The driver of such vehicle must remain
in or at the vehicle.



   (C)   Whenever a commercial vehicle loading and unloading zone is
designated and signed, no person may park any vehicle in any such zone for
any purpose other than the expeditious loading or pick up of material and
goods or unloading and delivery. No person shall park any vehicle in a
commercial loading zone for more than one hour unless the person obtains a
permit for loading or unloading from the Chief of Police as provided herein.



   (D)   The Chief of Police is authorized to issue permits for parking
in a commercial vehicle loading and unloading zone for more than one hour for
the purpose of loading and unloading when he or she finds that such parking
is necessary to complete the loading or unloading and the extended parking
will not endanger the public's safety.



(Am. Ord. 1444, passed 4-24-03; Am. Ord. 1545, passed 8-9-07)  Penalty, see
§ 74.99



§ 74.20  PASSENGER AND COMMERCIAL ZONES.



   The streets, or parts thereof, designated on the official map, are
designated as passenger and commercial loading and unloading zones, and no
person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle therein during the hours of 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m. for any purpose other than the expeditious loading or
unloading of passengers or commercial products, and then only for a period
not to exceed one hour.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.21  OPERATOR TO COMPLY WITH CHAPTER; EFFECT OF PROOF OF OWNERSHIP OF
VEHICLE.



   The person actually operating or in control of the operation of the
vehicle at the time the vehicle is parked, shall be charged with the duty of
complying with the provisions of this chapter.  However, proof of ownership
of any vehicle found parked in violation of this chapter shall be prima facie
evidence that the owner parked the vehicle.



§ 74.22  FIRE LANES.



   Pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 20-162(b), and for the protection
and safety of the lives and property of the citizens of the town, there are
hereby established certain fire lanes as set forth in this section.  Fire
lanes may be designated on private property which constitutes a public
vehicular area as that term is defined by G.S. § 20-4.01(32) (or by a
subsequent statute amending this statutory section) and on any highway or
street as that term is defined in G.S. § 20-4.01(13)(or by a subsequent
statute amending this statutory section).



   (A)    Fire lanes may be designated on any portion of a highway or
street or public vehicular area as those terms are defined herein when the
parking or placing of vehicles or obstructions in the area designated as a
fire lane would interfere with the proper ingress or egress of fire fighting
trucks or other emergency vehicles, equipment or personnel.



   (B)    Fire lanes shall be clearly marked by appropriate aboveground
signs, or signs and pavement markings.  The person or legal entity in
possession of the property on which a designation of a fire lane is made
shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of the required signs
or pavement markings.  All signs and pavement markings utilized under the
provisions of this section shall be approved by the town.



   (C)    No person shall park a vehicle or permit it to stand, whether
attended or unattended, or put or place any object, structure, or
obstruction, in a fire lane which has been established under the provisions
of this section; however, persons loading or unloading supplies or
merchandise may park temporarily in a fire lane located in a shopping center
or mall parking lot as long as the vehicle is not left unattended.  It shall
be lawful for governmental vehicles or nongovernmental emergency vehicles,
including rescue squad vehicles, to stop, stand, or travel within such fire
lanes when required to do so in the performance of their official duties.



   (D)    The following fire lanes are hereby established in accordance
with this section:  That portion of the Galleria at Wrightsville Shopping
Center property designated as fire lanes by signs, pavement markings, or
other appropriate markings.



(Ord. 1012, passed 4-24-86)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.23  HANDICAPPED PARKING.



   No person shall park or leave standing a vehicle in any parking space
located on a public street or in an off-street parking facility owned or
leased by the town and designated for use by the public as parking facilities
and which has been appropriately designated for the handicapped when the
vehicle so parked does not display the distinguishing license plate, placard
or identification card as provided in G.S. § 20-37.6.



(Ord. 1131, passed 1-10-91)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.24  REGULATION OF PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY PURSUANT TO G.S. §
160A-301.



   (A)   In accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 160A-301(d), the
Board of Aldermen hereby regulates the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in those areas identified in division (E) below.



   (B)   No person may mark any vehicle in any part of an area
designated in division (E) below in which parking is prohibited.  No parking
areas shall be designated by yellow curb markings, no parking signs, or other
traffic control devices which indicate that parking is prohibited in the
locations and under the circumstances described therein.  The owner or
person in general charge of the operation and control of the areas shall
designated all areas in which parking is prohibited.



   (C)   Parking is permitted only at specified times or for a specific
duration within those portions of the areas designated in division (E) below
which have been designated as limited parking areas.  Limited parking areas
shall be designated by signs or other traffic control devices which indicate
the circumstances and times during which parking shall be allowed.  No
person may park a vehicle in any limited parking areas except as allowed by
the sign or traffic control device regulating that area.  The owner or
person in general charge of the operation and control of the area shall
designated all areas in which the duration or time of parking is limited or
in which parking is restricted to certain vehicles.



   (D)   A change of position of a vehicle from one point directly to
another point within the same parking lot shall be deemed one continuous
parking period.  The parking period shall be as designated on traffic signs
erected within the parking lot regulating the parking time limit.  It shall
be the responsibility of the owner or person in general control of the
operation and control of that area to erect such signs.



   (E)   The designated areas subject to the provisions of this section
are as follows:



      (1)   Parking lot of the United States Post Office located at
26 Causeway Drive, Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina.



(Ord. 1307, passed 4-23-98)



§ 74.25 DESIGNATED LIFEGUARD PARKING.



   Designated lifeguard parking spaces shall be used only by Town of
Wrightsville Beach municipal vehicles or those vehicles appropriately
identified as being operated by a member of the Town of Wrightsville Beach
Ocean Rescue. All other vehicles will be subject to penalties outlined in
Chapter 76, Schedule IV.



(Ord. 1597, passed 5-14-09)



§ 74.26  DESIGNATED TOW-AWAY ZONE.



   Bob Sawyer Drive, extending from the intersection with Causeway Drive
to a point immediately north of the Public Safety Building Emergency Vehicle
Exit Driveway is designated as a tow-away zone.  Any vehicle parked on the
roadside or roadway will be issued a parking citation and the vehicle will be
subject to removal at owner expense.



(Ord. 1660, passed 7-14-11)



PARKING METERS



§ 74.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “COMPACT PARKING SPACE.” A parking space marked as a compact
parking space and intended for use by a small vehicle where the entire
vehicle fits within the marked lines of the parking space.



   “METERED PARKING.” Parking that is regulated through the use of
parking meters, pay stations, pay by telephone or any other electronic or
mechanical means.



   "OPERATOR."  Every person who shall operate a vehicle as the owner
thereof, or as the agent, employee or by permission of the owner, or who is
in actual physical control of a vehicle.



   "PARK" or "PARKING."  The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, upon a street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and  while
actually engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers or loading or
unloading merchandise or in obedience to traffic  regulations, signals, or
signs or an involuntary stopping of a vehicle  by reason of causes beyond
the control of the operator of the vehicle.



   “PARKING DISTRICT.” An area encompassing specific streets in which
special parking rules and procedures apply.



   "PARKING METER."  Any mechanical device or meter, not  inconsistent
with this subchapter, placed or erected for the regulation of parking by
authority of this subchapter, installed in such a manner as to indicate, by
proper legend, the legal parking time established by the town and which, when
operated, shall at all times indicate the balance of legal parking time and,
at the expiration of such period, shall indicate illegal or overtime parking.



   “PARKING METER SPACE.”  Any space within a parking meter zone
where the available time for parking is regulated either through a parking
meter or other means and duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle
by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the surface of
the street.



   “PARKING METER ZONE.”  The portion of any street wherein parking
is regulated through the use of parking meters, pay stations, pay by
telephone or any other electronic or mechanical means.



   “STREET.”  Any public street, avenue, road, alley, highway, lane,
path or other public place located in the town and established for the use of
vehicles.



   “VEHICLE.”  Any device in, upon or by which any person or property
is taken or may be transported upon a highway, except a device which is
operated upon rails or tracks.



(Ord. 1081, passed 7-14-88; Am. Ord. 1678, passed 5-10-12; Am. Ord. 1745,
passed 5-28-15)



§ 74.36  AUTHORIZATION; RESPONSIBILITY. 



   (A)   The Board of Aldermen shall have the authority and
responsibility to order the installation, operation, setting of rates and
maintenance of parking meters on public streets and in off-street parking
facilities operated by the town.  Each parking meter so installed shall be
capable of displaying a signal indicating that such meter has been activated
and of showing the remaining balance of legal parking time, upon the deposit
of valid coin or coins of the United States of America.  Each meter shall be
so designed as to continue in operation from the deposit of coin until the
expiration of the periods of time fixed by authority of this subchapter and
which are posted on the meter or on a sign posted in the vicinity of the
meter.



   (B)   In the event any such meter may be de-activated by an
appropriate act or agent of the town, then the requirements and provisions of
this subchapter shall not apply during the time of such intentional
de-activation by the town.



(Ord. 1081, passed 7-14-88)



§ 74.37  OPERATION OF METERS.



   (A)   All persons parking a vehicle in a parking meter space shall
deposit a valid coin or coins of the United States of America in the adjacent
parking meter in order to activate such meter immediately after the vehicle
is parked in such parking meter space.  Coin or coins of sufficient value
may be inserted in such meter at the time to cause the indicator to indicate
the maximum permissible legal parking duration permitted for that parking
space, or an amount of time less than the maximum allowable time.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any parking
meter any slug, device, or substitute for coins of the United States of
America.



   (C)   The purposes of the parking meters are to provide a readily
visible means of enforcing the parking duration regulations in effect for the
parking space and to facilitate the frequent turnover of space usage.



(Ord. 1081, passed 7-14-88)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.38  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   Metered parking shall be in effect for the regulation of
parking within the town as specified in this chapter during the following
dates and times:



      (1)   In the Harbor Island Residential Parking District as
established pursuant to § 74.45, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, from May 1 through September 15 daily between the hours of 10:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m.



      (2)   On the portions of Marina and Keel Streets designated as
a parking meter zone from May 1 through September 15 daily between the hours
of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.



      (3)   On Old Causeway Drive as established pursuant to  74.48
from May 1 through September 15 daily between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m.



      (4)   In the South Lumina parking lot (624 S. Lumina Ave.) at
access #36; on the north and south sides of East and West Salisbury Street to
include the area extending from the eastern end of Salisbury Street at
Johnnie Mercer’s Pier at access #16 westward to the end of Salisbury Street
at the foot of the bridge located on the east side of Banks Channel; in the
Shell Island lot (2398 N. Lumina Ave.) at access #4 (the L-shaped lot); and
in the Shell Island lot (2698 N. Lumina Ave.) at access #2 from May 1 through
October 31 daily between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.



      (5)   On Gene Floyd Drive located south of the Town Hall
complex and in the public parking lot adjacent to the tennis courts located
on the Town Hall complex from May 1 to September 15 daily from 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m. This regulation shall not apply to special events approved by the
Board of Aldermen or activities approved by the Town Manager or Director of
Planning and Parks.



      (6)   In all other locations designated as parking meter
zones, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, from March 1 through
October 31 daily between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.



   (B)   Metered parking shall not be in effect on that portion of
South Lumina Avenue and Waynick Boulevard bounded on the north by Arrindale
Street and on the south by Taylor Street on Sunday until 12:00 noon and on
Saturday after 5:00 p.m.



   (C)   Metered parking shall not be in effect on the east side of
North Lumina Avenue in the area bounded on the north by West Oxford Street
and on the south by West Fayetteville on Sunday until 12:00 noon.



(Ord. 1081, passed 7-14-88; Am. Ord. 1085, passed 9-8-88; Am. Ord. 1366,
passed 7-13-00; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 5-10-01; Am. Ord. 1385, passed 6-14-01;
Am. Ord. 1458, passed 3-25-04; Am. Ord. 1625, passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. 1757,
passed 2-11-16; Am. Ord. 1763, passed 2-9-17)



§ 74.38.1  LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF VEHICLES PER PARKING SPACE.



   (A)   No more than one motor vehicle or vehicle as defined in §
70.01 may park in any marked parking space within the town limits of the Town
of Wrightsville Beach with the following exceptions:



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this code, up to four
motorcycles as defined in § 70.01 may legally park in a single marked
parking space. From March 1 until October 31 and between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m., up to four motorcycles as defined in § 70.01 may legally
park in a single marked parking space provided the appropriate meter has been
activated or one such vehicle displays appropriate receipts indicating that
the required fee has been paid for parking through the appropriate pay
station. This exception shall not apply to any marked parking space that
would normally require a motor vehicle to park parallel to the flow of
traffic or parallel to the curb of a sidewalk.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this code, motor
vehicles with attached trailers requiring more than one marked parking space
to accommodate their length during the period March 1 through October 31 and
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., may park in any parking space
where parking is regulated through the use of parking meters, pay stations,
pay by telephone or any other electronic or mechanical means provided the
required payment is made for each marked parking space occupied by the
vehicle and the attached trailer. No such vehicle may park in any fashion
that will block or partially block the normal flow of traffic.



      (3)   Recreational vehicles requiring more than one marked
parking space to accommodate their length during the period March 1 through
October 31 and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., may park in
parking meter spaces or on streets where parking is controlled through the
use of pay stations provided that the required payment is made for each
marked parking space occupied by the vehicle. Such vehicles may not park in
any fashion that will block or partially block the normal flow of traffic.



   (B)   Additional provisions.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this code, during the
period March 1 through October 31 and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m., if more than one motor vehicle is parked in a parking meter space and
the meter controlling such parking meter space is registering as having paid
time, the motor vehicle closest to the meter shall be considered the vehicle
legally occupying such space. Any other motor vehicle occupying such space
shall be issued an appropriate civil citation for violation of the provisions
of this section.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this code, during the
period March 1 through October 31 and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m., if more than one motor vehicle as defined herein is parked in a marked
parking space regulated through theuse of a pay station, the motor vehicles
parked in such marked parking space not displaying an appropriate receipt
indicating that the required fee has been paid for parking through the
appropriate pay station shall be issued a civil citation for violation of the
provisions of this section.



      (3)   During the period March 1 through October 31 and between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., motor vehicles with attached trailers
and recreational vehicle requiring more than one marked parking space because
of length shall be issued civil citations for each unpaid marked parking
space where parking is controlled by parking meters or pay stations.



(Ord. 1551, passed 9-27-07; Am. Ord. 1572, passed 3-13-08; Am. Ord. 1723,
passed 3-25-14; Am. Ord. 1745, passed 5-28-15)



§ 74.39  DESIGNATION OF PARKING METER ZONES.



   The following parking meter zones are hereby established on those
streets within the town as specified below:



   (A)   South Lumina Avenue, east and west side, Stone Street to
Snyder Street.



   (B)   North Lumina Avenue, west side, Columbia Street to Sweeney
Street.



   (C)   Jack Parker Boulevard, south side, all.



   (D)   South Lumina Avenue, east and west sides, Iula Street to
Sunset Street.



   (E)   Stone Street, south side, all.



   (F)   East Salisbury Street, north and south sides, all spaces.



   (G)   West Salisbury Street, north and south sides.



   (H)   Town parking lots as follows:  South Lumina at 624 S. Lumina
Avenue at access #36; Wynn Plaza; Moore’s Inlet at 1800 N. Lumina Avenue
and north of Holiday Inn at access #8; Shell Island at 2398 N. Lumina Avenue
- the L-shaped lot at access #4; Shell Island at 2498 N. Lumina Avenue at
access #3; Shell Island at 2698 N. Lumina Avenue and south of Shell Island
Resort at access #2.



   (I)   North Lumina Avenue, west side, from Parmele Boulevard to West
Salisbury Street.



   (J)   North Lumina Ave., east side, East Salisbury Street to Mallard
Street.



   (K)   Waynick Boulevard, west side, all.



   (L)   South Lumina Ave., west side, Sunset Boulevard to Jack Parker
Boulevard.



   (M)   North Lumina Ave., east side, Parmele Boulevard to South Ridge
Road.



   (N)   Circle Drive, south side.



   (O)   North and south sides of East and West Columbia Street.



   (P)   North and south sides of East and West Atlanta Street.



   (Q)   North and south sides of East Charlotte Street.



   (R)   North and south sides of East Augusta Street.



   (S)   North and south sides of East and West Asheville Street.



   (T)   North and south sides of East and West Fayetteville Street.



   (U)   North and south sides of East and West Oxford Street.



   (V)   North and south sides of East and West Greensboro Street.



   (W)   North and south sides of Seagull Street.



   (X)   North and south sides of Shearwater Street.



   (Y)   North and south sides of Heron Street.



   (Z)   North and south sides of Sandpiper Street.



   (AA)   North and south sides of Mallard Street.



   (BB)   East and west sides of North Lumina Avenue from Oceanic
Street to Salisbury Street.



   (CC)   300 block of South Lumina Avenue.



   (DD)   400 block of South Lumina Avenue.



   (EE)   500/600 block of South Lumina Avenue to Iula Street.



   (FF)   North and south sides of Nathan Street.



   (GG)   North and south sides of East and West Henderson Street.



   (HH)   Old Causeway Drive.



   (II)   East and west sides of Keel Street from Old Causeway Drive to
the northern line of Seacrest Drive.



   (JJ)   East side of Marina Street from Old Causeway Drive to the
northern line of Short Street.



   (KK)   North and south sides of Gene Floyd Drive located south of
the Town Hall complex.



   (LL)   All of the public parking lot located adjacent to the tennis
courts on the Town Hall complex.



   (MM)   W. Columbia Street from North Lumina Avenue to its western
terminus at Banks Channel.



(Ord. 1081, passed 7-14-88; Am. Ord. 1320, passed 10-8-98; Am. Ord. 1373-A,
passed 2-28-01; Am. Ord. 1405, passed 2-28-02; Am. Ord. 1442,passed 4-24-03;
Am. Ord. 1496, passed 2-22-06; Am. Ord. 1614, passed 10-29-09; Am. Ord. 1620,
passed 2-11-10; Am. Ord. 1651, passed 3-10-11; Am. Ord. 1708, passed 5-9-13;
Am. Ord. 1745, passed 5-28-15; Am. Ord. 1757, passed 2-11-16)



§ 74.40  PARKING WITHOUT PAYING THE REQUIRED FEE.



   Any person parking a vehicle registered in his or her name or which
vehicle is under his or her control in a parking meter space located in a
designated parking meter zone shall pay the required fee. It shall be
unlawful for any person to park as described in the preceding sentence
without paying the required fee. For the purposes of this chapter and the
attached schedules, a reference to parking in a “metered space”,
“parking meter space” or “meter space” shall include parking in a
parking meter space or any other space for which payment of a fee is required.



(Ord. 1081, passed 7-14-88; Am. Ord. 1571, passed 2-25-08; Am. Ord. 1757,
passed 2-11-16)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.41  RATES.



   (A)   For any vehicle to be deemed legally parked in any parking
space for which a fee is charged: (i) there shall have been deposited in the
meter controlling such space, at the initial time of parking of such vehicle,
a coin or coins in the denomination or denominations as indicated on the
meter as set forth hereinafter; or (ii) such vehicle shall display evidence
of payment of the appropriate fee at an automated pay station; or (iii) the
vehicle shall display a daily or weekly parking pass as described in division
(C) below; or (iv) the vehicle shall display a current residential parking
permit, commercial parking permit or contractor parking permit as described
in §§ 74.42 and 74.43.



   (B)   The fee to be paid for parking in a marked parking space shall
be as established from time to time by the Board of Aldermen.



   (C)   The Town Manager is authorized to implement a program for the
issuance of daily and weekly parking passes, the fee for which shall be as
established from time to time by the Board of Aldermen.



(Ord. 1081, passed 7-14-88; Am. Ord. 1309, passed 5-28-98; Am. Ord. 1316-B,
passed 6-25-98; Am. Ord. 1366, passed 7-13-00; Am. Ord. 1405, passed 2-28-02;
Am. Ord. 1442, passed 4-24-03; Am. Ord. 1496, passed 2-22-06; Am. Ord. 1535,
passed 5-10-07; Am. Ord. 1571, passed 2-25-08; Am. Ord. 1619, passed 2-11-10;
Am. Ord. 1723, passed 3-25-14)



§ 74.42  RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMITS.



   The Town Manager is authorized to implement a program for the issuance
of parking permits for residents of the town when authorized by the Board of
Aldermen. Such program shall include the following:



   (A)   The owner(s) of each residential unit located within the town
shall be entitled to purchase two parking permits.  For purposes of this
section, a residential unit shall not include a hotel or motel room or a
vacant lot.  Residential structures containing multiple residential units
owned by the same entity (i.e. an apartment building) shall be entitled to
purchase only two permits for the entire residential structure.



   (B)   The fee to be paid for such permit shall be $35 per year per
permit.



   (C)   A vehicle properly displaying a current authorized permit
shall be permitted to remain in a parking meter space without paying the
required fee.  Provided that the provisions of this division (C) shall not
apply to:



      (1)   Off-street parking lots or on- street parking meter
spaces providing a maximum metered parking time (without the payment of an
additional fee) of one hour or less;



      (2)   Any parking meter space located on the north and south
side of East Salisbury Street to include the area extending from the eastern
end of Salisbury Street at Johnnie Mercer’s Pier westward to the
intersection of East Salisbury Street with the eastern line of North Lumina
Avenue; and



      (3)   Any parking meter space located on east and west sides
of South Lumina Avenue extending from its intersection with the southern line
of Sunset Avenue northwardly to its intersection with the norther line of
Iula Street. Provided, that vehicles properly displaying a current authorized
permit shall be permitted to remain in the following designated parking
spaces without paying the required fee: the four parallel parking spaces
located on the western side of South Lumina Avenue immediately south of the
intersection of Iula Street and South Lumina Avenue and the six angled
parking spaces located on the eastern side of South Lumina Avenue immediately
south of the intersection of Iula Street and South Lumina Avenue.



   (D)   The property owner to whom such permit is issued is authorized
to permit such permit to be used by a resident of or visitor to such
residential unit.  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for
any person to permit use of such permit by any person other than one residing
in or visiting such residential unit and for any person to sell such permit
or to accept anything of value in return for the use of such permit (other
than payment of rent by a tenant in such residential unit).



   (E)   Lost permits may be replaced upon payment of a fee of $100 and
receipt of a sworn statement from the property owner that such permit has
been lost and not transferred or otherwise used in a manner not permitted by
this section.  If a lost permit is replaced in one calendar year, then the
cost of replacing a lost permit in the succeeding calendar year shall be
$250. No permit may be replaced more than once in any calendar year.



   (F)   A vehicle properly displaying a current authorized permit
shall not park in the same parking meter space without being moved for a
period of more than 7 consecutive 24-hour periods. At the end of such 7
consecutive 24-hour periods, such vehicle must be moved to another parking
meter space that is at least 500 yards distance from the parking meter space
in which the vehicle was previously parked.



   (G)   A violation of the provisions of division (C) above shall be
deemed a violation of the provisions of § 74.40 of this code and shall
subject the offender to a penalty as set forth in § 74.99 of this code. A
violation of the provisions of division (D) of this section shall subject the
offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $500. A violation of the
provisions of division (F) of this section shall subject the offender to a
civil penalty in the amount of $150. Such civil penalties may be recovered by
the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay
the penalty within 10 days after having been cited for violation of the
section. Each day’s continuing violation of any provisions of this section
shall be a separate and distinct offense.



(Ord. 1375-A, passed 2-28-01; Am. Ord. 1462, passed 6-10-04; Am. Ord. 1675,
passed 3-8-12; Am. Ord. 1757, passed 2-11-16; Am. Ord. 1763, passed 2-9-17)



§ 74.43 COMMERCIAL I AND II AND CONTRACTOR PARKING PERMITS.



   (A)   The Town Manager is authorized to implement a program for the
issuance of commercial parking permits for businesses operating within the
town.  Such program shall be subject to the following restrictions:



      (1)   Commercial parking passes shall only be issued to
employees of businesses located in an existing building that is surrounded in
part by paid parking spaces.



      (2)   The owner or operator of each such business shall be
entitled to purchase commercial parking permits.



      (3)   No more than ten commercial I parking permits shall be
issued for one business location. The number of commercial I permits
available for such business location (up to a maximum of ten) shall be
determined by the Town Manager or his or her designee.



      (4)   The number of commercial II parking permits shall be
determined by the Town Manager or his or her designee. Parking for holders of
commercial II parking permits shall be restricted to the assigned parking
area at the Town Hall complex in the vicinity of the office of the NC Coastal
Federation located on Salisbury Street.



      (5)   The combined number of commercial I and commercial II
parking permits issued to a business location shall not exceed the total
number of commercial parking permits issued to that business location in 2013.



      (6)   The fee to be paid for such permits shall be as
established from time to time by the Board of Aldermen. Permits shall be
effective for that portion of the calendar year that parking is regulated by
meters.



      (7)   A vehicle properly displaying a current authorized
commercial I permit shall be permitted to remain in a marked parking space
without activating the meter or pay station. Provided that holders of
commercial I parking permits may not park in off-street parking lots or in
on-street parking spaces providing a maximum meter time of one hour or less.
Provided further that holders of commercial II parking permits may only park
in the area designated in division (A)(4) above.



   (B)   The Town Manager is authorized to implement a program for the
issuance of parking permits to contractors doing business within the town.
Such program shall be subject to the following restrictions:



      (1)   A contractor or subcontractor working on property
located within the town limits of the Town of Wrightsville Beach shall be
entitled to purchase contractor parking permits.



      (2)   Contractor parking permits are intended to allow
contractors, subcontractors and their employees to only park for the duration
of the work that they are performing within the town limits of the Town of
Wrightsville Beach.



      (3)   The number of permits issued for any one construction
location and the duration of such permits shall be determined by the Town
Manager or his or her designee.



      (4)   The fee to be paid for such permit shall be as
established from time to time by the Board of Aldermen. Permits shall be
effective for that portion of the calendar year that parking is regulated by
meters.



      (5)   A vehicle properly displaying a current authorized
permit shall be permitted to remain in a marked parking space without
activating the meter or pay station. Provided that holders of contractor
parking permits may not park in off-street parking lots or in on-street
parking spaces providing a maximum meter time of one hour or less.



   (C)   Additional restrictions applicable to commercial and
contractor permits.



      (1)   The business owner or operator or contractor or
subcontractor to whom such permit is issued is authorized to permit such
permit to be used by employees of such business. It shall be unlawful and a
violation of this section for any person to permit use of such permit by any
person other than an employee of the business and for any person to sell such
permit or to accept anything of value in return for the use of such permit.



      (2)   Lost permits may be replaced upon payment of a fee of
$600 and receipt of a sworn statement from the business owner or operator or
contractor or subcontractor that such permit has been lost and not
transferred or otherwise used in a manner not permitted by this section. No
permit may be replaced more than once in any 12-month period.



      (3)   A violation of the provisions of this section (with the
exception of division (C)(1)) above shall be deemed a violation of the
provisions of § 74.40 of this code and shall subject the offender to a
penalty as set forth in § 74.99 of this code. A violation of the provisions
of division (C)(1) above shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the
amount of $500. Such penalty may be recovered by the town in a civil action
in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within ten
days after having been cited for violation of the section. Each day’s
continuing violation of any provisions of this section shall be a separate
and distinct offense.



(Ord. 1384, passed 6-14-01; Am. Ord. 1637, passed 8-12-10; Am. Ord. 1723,
passed 3-25-14; Am. Ord. 1745, passed 5-28-15)



§ 74.44  FRAUDULENT USE OF PARKING PERMIT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Engage in parking permit forgery;



      (2)   Engage in parking permit fraud; or



      (3)   Possess a forged parking permit.



   (B)   A person is guilty of parking permit forgery when:



      (1)   With intent to defraud the town, a person falsely makes
a purported parking permit; or



      (2)   With intent to defraud the town, a person alters or
duplicates an existing parking permit.



   (C)   A person falsely makes a parking permit when he or she makes
or draws, in whole or in part, a device or instrument which purports to be a
parking permit issued by the town which is not such a parking permit because
the town did not authorize the making or drawing, or alters a parking permit
which was validly issued.



   (D)   A person is guilty of parking permit fraud when, with intent
to defraud the town, a person uses a parking permit obtained or retained in
violation of this section or which he or she knows is forged, altered or
revoked, for the purpose of parking without depositing any required payment
into a parking meter.



   (E)   A person is guilty of possessing a forged parking permit when
he possesses, with knowledge of its character, a parking permit made, altered
or duplicated in violation of the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 1424, passed 8-22-02)



§ 74.45  CREATION OF HARBOR ISLAND RESIDENTIAL PARKING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   It is in the best interest of the Town of Wrightsville
Beach to reduce vehicular congestion on residential streets located on Harbor
Island and to facilitate the efficient movement of traffic on such streets by
providing for residential parking preference during certain hours of the day
and months of the year.



      (2)   Creation of a residential parking district on Harbor
Island is necessary to promote the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Town of Wrightsville Beach by providing adequate parking
spaces for residents adjacent to or close by their place of residence.



      (3)   It is in the public interest to reduce hazardous traffic
conditions resulting from the use of streets located within congested
residential areas for the parking of vehicles by persons using such
residential areas to gain access to other places; to protect those areas from
unreasonable burdens in gaining access to their residences; to preserve the
character of those areas as residential districts; to promote efficiency in
the maintenance of those streets in a clean and safe condition; to preserve
the value of the property in those areas; to preserve the safety of children
and other pedestrians and to promote traffic safety, clean air and the
comfort, health, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the town.



   (B)   Designation of area. A Residential Parking District is hereby
established on those streets located on Harbor Island and described below
which will limit on-street parking to those vehicles displaying a residential
parking pass during the period specified in § 74.46. The following streets
on Harbor Island are located within the Residential Parking District:



      (1)   Auditorium Circle;



      (2)   Coral Drive;



      (3)   Cypress Avenue;



      (4)   Fifth Avenue;



      (5)   First Avenue;



      (6)   Fourth Avenue;



      (7)   Island Drive;



      (8)   Jasmine Court;



      (9)   Jasmine Place;



      (10)   Lindy Lane;



      (11)   Live Oak Drive;



      (12)   Myrtle Court;



      (13)   North Channel Drive;



      (14)   Point Place;



      (15)   Second Avenue;



      (16)   Shore Drive;



      (17)   Sixth Avenue;



      (18)   South Channel Drive;



      (19)   Third Avenue;



      (20)   Trent Court;



      (21)   Pelican Drive.



(Ord. 1678, passed 5-10-12; Ord. 1745, passed 5-28-15)



§ 74.46  PARKING RESTRICTIONS IN THE HARBOR ISLAND RESIDENTIAL PARKING
DISTRICT.



   (A)   During the period May 1 through September 15 between the hours
of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. daily, except as provided in § 74.47 below, no
person shall park any vehicle on the streets designated in § 74.45 unless
the vehicle displays a current residential parking pass issued in accordance
with the provisions of § 74.42 of this code or a decal issued in accordance
with the provisions of § 70.36 of this code.



   (B)   During the period May 1 through September 15, no trailers of
any kind, whether attached or unattached, may be parked on Pelican Drive.



   (C)   During the period September 16 through April 30, no unattached
trailers of any kind may be parked at any time on Pelican Drive. During this
same period, it shall be lawful to park attached trailers at any time on
Pelican Drive.



(Ord. 1678, passed 5-10-12; Am. Ord. 1702, passed 2-14-13; Am. Ord. 1703,
passed 3-14-13; Am. Ord. 1745, passed 5-28-15; Am. Ord. 1763, passed 2-9-17)



§ 74.47  EXCEPTIONS.



   The following exceptions to the restrictions set forth in § 74.46
shall apply:



   (A)   Such restrictions shall not be in effect until 1:00 p.m. on
Sundays.



   (B)   Such restrictions shall not be in effect during special events
authorized by the Board of Aldermen.



   (C)   Such restrictions shall not apply to vehicles engaged in
maintenance or construction activities approved by the Town Manager or his or
her designee.



   (D)   Such restrictions shall not apply to vehicles owed by the
town, county, state or public utility companies or their designated agents
during periods of maintenance, inspection, repair or construction activities
conducted by such entities.



(Ord. 1678, passed 5-10-12)



§ 74.48  OLD CAUSEWAY DRIVE, KEEL STREET AND MARINA STREET.



   (A)   Old Causeway Drive.



      (1)   During the period May 1 through September 15 between the
hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., no person shall cause or permit any
vehicle registered in his or her name or which vehicle is under his or her
control to be or remain parked in any marked parking space located on the
northern side of Old Causeway Drive for any period of time for which the
required parking fee has not been paid.



      (2)   No trailers of any kind, whether attached or unattached,
may be parked at any time on Old Causeway Drive.



      (3)   A vehicle properly displaying a current authorized
permit issued pursuant to the provisions of § 74.42 of this code shall be
permitted to remain in a marked parking space subject to the provisions of
division (A)(1) above without paying the required parking fee.



   (B)   Keel and Marina Streets. No trailer of any kind, whether
attached or unattached, may be parked at any time on Marina Street or on Keel
Street from its intersection with Seacrest Drive to its intersection with Old
Causeway Drive.



(Ord. 1745, passed 5-28-15)



§ 74.49  PARKING RESTRICTIONS FOR GENE FLOYD DRIVE AND THE PUBLIC PARKING
LOT ADJACENT TO TENNIS COURTS LOCATED ON THE TOWN HALL COMPLEX.



   (A)   The first two hours of parking in parking meter spaces located
on Gene Floyd Drive and in the public parking lot adjacent to the tennis
courts in the Town Hall complex shall be free. Fees for parking beyond the
first two hours shall be the normal hourly rate then in effect.



   (B)   The Town Manager is authorized to erect signs limiting parking
on Gene Floyd Drive, within the public parking lot located adjacent to the
tennis courts in the Town Hall complex and at any other parking location on
the Town Hall complex to Town Hall employees or town business parking only.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in spaces so marked
unless such person is an authorized Town Hall employee or utilizing such
parking space for legitimate business purposes in the Town Hall complex.



   (C)   A vehicle properly displaying a current authorized residential
parking permit issued in accordance with § 74.42 shall be permitted to
remain in a parking meter space located on Gene Floyd Drive or in the public
parking lot located adjacent to the tennis courts in the Town Hall complex
without paying the required fee.



(Ord. 1757, passed 2-11-16)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 74.50  NOTICE TO VIOLATOR.



   Whenever a member of the Police Department of the town or other person
charged by the Town Manager to enforce the provisions of the parking
ordinances shall find that any of the provisions of the parking ordinances
are being, or have been, violated by the owner or operator of any vehicle,
such officer or person shall notify the owner or operator of the vehicle of
the violation by conspicuously attaching to the vehicle a parking violation
notice in such form as the Town Manager may direct.



(Ord. 1011, passed 4-24-86)



§ 74.51  CONTENTS OF NOTICE.



   Such parking violation notice stated in § 74.50 shall among other
things, state upon its face the amount of the penalty for the specific
violation and indicate the graduated penalties which are imposed for failure
to pay within the times established in this subchapter; notify the offender
that a failure to pay the penalty within the last prescribed time established
by this subchapter shall subject the offender to a civil action in the nature
of debt for the applicable penalty together with the cost of the action to be
taxed by the court; state that the offender may answer the town parking
citation by mailing this citation and the stated penalty to Post Office Box
626, Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina 28480 or may pay the amount at the
Wrightsville Beach Town Hall, Causeway Drive, Wrightsville Beach, and that
upon payment, the case or claim and right of action by the town will be
deemed compromised and settled.



(Ord. 1011, passed 4-24-86; Am. Ord. 1723, passed 3-25-14)



§ 74.52  SETTLEMENT OF CLAIM.



   The Town Manager or his designated agent is authorized to accept
payments in full and final settlement of claim or claims, right or rights of
action which the town may have to enforce such penalty by civil action in the
nature of debt.  Acceptance of a penalty shall be deemed a full and final
release of any and all claims or right of action arising out of contended
violations.  The Town Manager or his designated agent may also settle any
parking violation notice if he determines that the notice was received as a
result of mistake, inadvertence, or excusable neglect.



(Ord. 1011, passed 4-24-86)



§ 74.53  OTHER REMEDIES.



   Nothing in this subchapter is intended nor shall be construed to
provide that a vehicle parked in violation of any ordinance regulating the
parking of vehicles on public streets or parking areas, may not be towed away
in accordance with applicable statutes and ordinances.



(Ord. 1081, passed 7-14-88)



§ 74.54  FINES TO BE PAID TO GENERAL FUND.



   All penalties paid to the town or as maybe recovered in a civil action
in the nature of debt as provided in this subchapter shall be paid to the
General Fund of the town.



(Ord. 1081, passed 7-14-88)



§ 74.55  IMMOBILIZATION OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   The Town Manager or his or her designee may immobilize by the
use of wheel locks and tow any vehicle which is illegally parked in violation
of this chapter and for which there are three or more outstanding, unpaid and
overdue parking tickets for a period of more than 72 hours. For the purpose
of determining whether an illegally parked vehicle has had issued against it
three or more outstanding, unpaid and overdue parking tickets for a period of
more than 72 hours, it shall be sufficient if the license plate number of the
illegally parked vehicle and the license plate number of the vehicle having
received the tickets are the same.



   (B)   If a wheel lock is attached to a vehicle, a notice shall be
affixed to the windshield or other part of the vehicle so as to be readily
visible. The notice shall warn that the vehicle has been immobilized and that
any attempt to move the vehicle may result in damage to the vehicle. The city
shall not be responsible for any damage to an immobilized illegally parked
vehicle resulting from unauthorized attempts to free or move the vehicle. An
immobilization fee of $50 shall be charged for the removal of the wheel lock.
The notice shall also state the total amount of civil penalties due for
parking tickets which are overdue and unpaid and attributable to such
vehicle, and the immobilization fee to be charged. The civil penalties and
the immobilization fee shall be paid to have the wheel lock removed. The
address and telephone number to be contacted to pay such charges to have the
wheel lock removed shall also be listed on the notice.



   (C)   If civil penalties due and the immobilization fee as herein
provided are not paid, or satisfactory arrangements in lieu of payment are
not made, within 24 hours of the attachment of the wheel lock, such vehicle
may be towed to any public or private impoundment lot consistent with
existing town policies. If a private contractor tows and stores the vehicle
he may impose against the vehicle his customary fees and charges for such
services. Once a vehicle has been towed, the Town Manager or his or her
designee, shall mail or cause to have mailed, a notice of towing to the
registered owner and lienholders, if any are known, at the address or
addresses reported to the town by the North Carolina Department of Motor
Vehicles.



   (D)   Upon payment of all civil penalties and overdue and unpaid
parking tickets issued for the vehicle and of all other charges authorized by
this section, including immobilization, towing, and storage fees, the vehicle
shall be released to the owner or any other person legally entitled to claim
possession of the vehicle.



   (E)   All towing and storage charges incurred in connection with
impounded vehicles shall constitute a lien upon such vehicles as provided in
G.S. § 44A-2.



   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
remove from a vehicle a wheel lock placed thereon pursuant to this section or
to remove from impoundment any vehicle placed therein pursuant to this
section without all civil penalties, immobilization fees and other applicable
charges having first been paid or an approved payment plan having been made.



   (G)   The Town Manager is authorized to establish guidelines to
adjust the amount of civil penalties imposed pursuant to promote the
resolution of any claim against persons with ten or more outstanding
delinquent parking tickets.



(Ord. 1414, passed 5-9-02; Am. Ord. 1442, passed 4-24-03; Am. Ord. 1618,
passed 2-11-10)



§ 74.56  APPEAL OF PARKING VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Any person charged with a violation of the town's parking
ordinances shall have the right to appeal such violation by filing written
notice of appeal within 72 hours after issuance of the citation giving notice
of such violation. Notice of appeal must be hand delivered or mailed so as to
arrive within the 72-hour time specified herein at the office of the Manager
of the Wrightsville Beach parking program located at 321 Causeway Drive, 
Wrightsville Beach, N.C. 28480.



   (B)   The manager of the Wrightsville Beach parking program (the
“Parking Manager”) or the Appeal Coordinator designated under the
provisions of the Wrightsville Beach parking program shall render a decision
on such appeal within five business days of the date of filing of the appeal.
Written notice of the decision of the Parking Manager or Appeal Coordinator
shall be mailed to the appealing party.



   (C)   If the appealing party is dissatisfied with the decision of
the Parking Manager or Appeal Coordinator, the appealing party may request an
administrative hearing to be conducted by an independent hearing officer. A
request for an administrative hearing must be filed in writing with the
Parking Manager within 15 days of receipt of the denial of the appeal as
described in division (B). The written request for an administrative hearing
must be hand delivered or mailed so as to arrive within the 15-day period
specified herein at the office of the Manager of the Wrightsville Beach
parking program located at 321 Causeway Drive, P.0. Box 626, Wrightsville
Beach, N.C. 28480. A request for an administrative hearing shall be
accompanied by payment of the amount of the outstanding citation plus an
amount equal to the fee to be paid to the independent hearing officer. If the
decision to impose the parking citation is reversed, the amount of the
citation and the fee for the independent hearing officer will be refunded to
the appealing party. If the decision to impose the parking citation is
upheld, such payments shall be retained by the town. Any request for an
administrative hearing which is not accompanied by payment of the amount of
the outstanding citation plus the fee to be paid to the independent hearing
officer shall be deemed untimely filed and the request for such hearing shall
be denied.



   (D)   The decision of the independent hearing officer as described
in division (B) above shall be final.



   (E)   As a matter of policy, the town will not accept the following
as legitimate grounds for dismissal of parking violations:



      (1)   Lack of knowledge of the town's parking regulations;



      (2)   Conflicts or tardiness going to or returning from
appointments;



      (3)   Inability to find a valid parking space; and



      (4)   Failure to have appropriate or sufficient money to
deposit in meters or pay stations.



(Ord. 1591, passed 2-12-09; Am. Ord. 1650, passed 3-10-11)



§ 74.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall subject the
offender to a civil penalty as hereinafter enumerated.  These ordinances
shall be referred to as parking ordinances.  Civil penalties may be
recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender
does not pay the penalty within the prescribed period of time after he has
been cited for violation of the ordinance.  In accordance with G.S. §
160A-175(b), a violation of the parking ordinances shall not be subject to
the penalty provision of G.S. § 14-4 and shall not be considered a breach of
the penal laws of the state.



   (B)   Penalties for overtime parking in a metered space and for all
other violations of the parking ordinances shall be as set forth in Schedule
IV of Chapter 76: Parking Schedules



   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of § 74.44 shall be
subject to the following penalties:



      (1)  A violation of the provisions of this chapter is a
misdemeanor punishable in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 14-4. The
fine for such violation shall not exceed $500;



      (2)  A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall subject
the offender to a civil penalty of $500 (recommended);



      (3)  The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by an
appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction;



      (4)  Each day's continuing violation of any provisions of this
chapter shall be separate and distinct offense;



      (5)   Any person found guilty of a violation of § 74.44 shall
lose their right to have issued a residential or commercial parking permit
for a period of two years from the date of conviction. Providing, that within
30 days of such conviction, such person may request a hearing before the Town
Manager at which time they will be given the opportunity to demonstrate to
the Town Manager that their parking permit privileges should not be revoked
for such period of time. The decision of the Town Manager in such matter
shall be final.



   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of § 74.15(I) shall be
subject to those penalties set forth in § 10.99.



(Ord. 1011, passed 4-24-86; Am. Ord. 1081, passed 7-14-88; Am. Ord. 1131,
passed 1-10-91; Am. Ord. 1154, passed 8-22-91; Am. Ord. 1215, passed 7-8-93;
Am. Ord. 1228, passed 4-28-94; Am. Ord. 1424, passed 8-22-02; Am. Ord. 1633,
passed 7-15-10)



Statutory reference:



   State penalty, see G.S. § 20-176



CHAPTER 75:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Speed limits



   II.   Trucks prohibited on certain streets



   III   Establishment of one-way streets



SCHEDULE I.  SPEED LIMITS.



   The speed limit set forth in this schedule shall be applicable to the
streets named herein and the Town Manager shall install appropriate
traffic-control devices to indicate the established speed limit:



   (A)   Fifteen miles per hour.  On any portion of the following
streets on Harbor Island located south of Causeway Drive (U.S. 76):



 



LOCATION
 
ORD. NO.
 
DATE


Albright Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Arrindale Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Auditorium Circle
 
1075
 
5-26-88


Augusta Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Bahama Drive
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Bay Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Bellamy Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Bermuda Drive
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Birmingham Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Bob Sawyer Drive
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Bridgers Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Chadbourn Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Channel Avenue
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Charlotte Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Circle Drive
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Coburn Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Corbett Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Cypress Drive
 
1075
 
5-26-88


E & W Asheville Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


E & W Atlanta Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


E & W Columbia Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


E & W Fayetteville Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


E & W Greensboro Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


E & W Henderson Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


E & W Oxford Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


E Augusta Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


E Charlotte Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


E Raleigh Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


E Salisbury Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Fourth Avenue
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Gene Floyd Drive
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Heron Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Island Drive 
 
 
10755-26-88


Iula Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Jack Parker Boulevard
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Jasmine Drive 
 
 
10755-26-88


Lagoon Drive
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Latimer Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Lindy Lane
 
1075
 
5-26-88


Live Oak Drive
 
1075
 
5-26-88


Mallard Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Meier Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Moores Inlet Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Nathan Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


North Channel Drive
 
1075
 
5-26-88


Northridge Road
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Northrop Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Oceanic Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Palmetto Drive
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Point Place
 
1075
 
5-26-88


Russ Drive
 
1378
 
4-12-01


S Lumina from Stone Street to Sunset Avenue
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Salisbury Street East
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Sandpiper Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Schloss Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Seagull Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Seashore Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Second Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Shearwater Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Shore Drive
 
1075
 
5-26-88


Short Street (Harbor Island)
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Short Street (Wrightsville Island)
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Snyder Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


South Channel Drive
 
1075
 
5-26-88


Southridge Road
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Sprunt Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Stone Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Sweeney Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Taylor Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Trent Court
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Water Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01


Wright Street
 
1378
 
4-12-01




 



   (B)   Twenty-five miles per hour:



 


LOCATION

 

ORD. NO.

 

DATE





Coral Drive from its intersection with Causeway Drive (U.S. 74) to its
northern terminus
 

1176

 

4-30-92



Keel Drive
 

1378

 

4-12-01



Marina Street
 

1378

 

4-12-01



North Lumina Avenue from its intersection with Causeway Drive to its northern
terminus
 

1075

 

5-26-88



Old Causeway Drive
 

1378

 

4-12-01



Parmele Boulevard
 

1378

 

4-12-01



Pelican Drive (all)
 

1075

 

5-26-88



Seacrest Drive
 

1378

 

4-12-01



Seawater Lane
 

1378

 

4-12-01



South Lumina Avenue (U.S. 76) from Sunset Street South to and including Jack
Parker Boulevard
 

1075

 

5-26-88



Sunset Avenue
 

1378

 

4-12-01





 



   (C)   Thirty-five miles per hour:



 


LOCATION

 

ORD. NO.

 

DATE



Causeway Drive eatward  its intersection with Seacrest Drive to its
intersection with Waynick Boulevard
 

1378

 

4-12-01



Waynick Boulevard
 

1378

 

4-12-01




 



   (D)   Forty-five miles per hour:



 


LOCATION

 

ORD. NO.

 

DATE



Causeway Drive (U.S. 76) from the town limits eastward to its intersection
with Seacrest Drive
 

1075

 

5-26-88



West Salisbury Street (U.S. 74) from Look Out Drive westward to the town
limits
 

1075

 

5-26-88



 


 





 



SCHEDULE II.  TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.



   No person may drive any truck over the following street:



 


Location

 

Ord. No.

 

Passage Date



Latimer Street from its intersection with South Lumina Avenue to its
intersection with Waynick Boulevard.
 

1287

 

7-10-97




 



SCHEDULE III.  ESTABLISHMENT OF ONE-WAY STREETS.



   Whenever a street is designated one-way and traffic control devices are
installed in accordance with this schedule, no person may drive a vehicle on
such street except in the direction indicated by the traffic control
devices.  The following streets are hereby designated one-way streets and
the Town Manager shall install appropriate traffic control devices on such
streets to indicate the direction of lawful traffic movement.



 




STREET

 
Ord. No.
 
Passage Date


Bellamy Street
 
1401
 
1-24-02


Bridgers Street
 
1401
 
1-24-02


Channel Avenue from West Columbia to Sweeney Street
 
1401
 
1-24-02


Iula Street
 
1401
 
1-24-02


Lagoon Drive
 
1401
 
1-24-02


Latimer Street
 
1401
 
1-24-02


North Channel Drive from Causeway to 4th Avenue
 
1401
 
1-24-02


Seashore Street Second Avenue
 
1401
 
1-24-02


Snyder Street
 
1401
 
1-24-02


South Lumina Avenue from Stone Street south to Taylor Street
 
1401
 
1-24-02


South Lumina Avenue from Bellamy street south to Iula Street
 
1401
 
1-24-02


South Lumina Avenue from Sunset Street north to Iula Street
 
1401
 
1-24-02


Sprunt Street
 
1401
 
1-24-02


Taylor Street
 
1401
 
1-24-02




 



CHAPTER 76:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



     I.   Parking limited to certain times



   II.   Diagonal parking



   III.   Prohibited parking



   IV.   Penalties for overtime parking in a metered space and other
violations of the parking ordinances



SCHEDULE I.  PARKING LIMITED TO CERTAIN TIMES.



   (A)   Parking is prohibited on the east side of North Lumina Avenue
from its intersection with the northern line of Salisbury Street to its
intersection with the southern line of Mallard Street; and on the west side
of North Lumina Avenue from its intersection with the northern line of Stone
Street to its intersection with the southern line of Salisbury Street from
6:00 p.m. Friday until 6:00 p.m. Sunday and at any time on the legal holidays
of Memorial Day, Independence Day and Labor Day as established by G.S. §
103-4.



   (B)   Parking shall be limited to one hour in metered parking spaces
on the east and west sides of North Lumina Avenue from Oceanic Street to
Columbia Street except during the times when parking is prohibited on the
west side of North Lumina Avenue as provided in division (A) above.



   (C)   Parking shall be limited to one hour in metered parking spaces
on the west side of South Lumina Avenue from Stone Street to Latimer Street.



   (D)   Reserved.



   (E)   Reserved.



   (F)   (1)   The area extending 69 feet southwardly from the
intersection of the eastern line of South Lumina Avenue with the southern
line of Stone Street is hereby designated a vehicle loading and unloading
zone during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m in accordance with the
provisions of § 74.19.



      (2)   The area extending 78 feet northwardly from the
intersection of the eastern line of North Lumina Avenue with the northern
line of Birmingham Street is hereby designated a vehicle loading and
unloading zone during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. in accordance with
the provisions of § 74.19.



   (G)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle except a taxicab in
the taxi stand established in accordance with Chapter 114 of the Town Code on
the eastern side of South Lumina Avenue beginning at the intersection of the
eastern line of South Lumina Avenue with the southern line of Stone Street
and extending 124 feet southwardly except as follows: the northernmost 69
feet of said taxi stand shall be used exclusively as a vehicle loading and
unloading zone during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and shall be used
exclusively as a taxi stand during the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. The
southernmost portion of said taxi stand consisting of three metered parking
spaces shall be used exclusively for metered vehicle parking during the hours
of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., and shall be used exclusively  as a taxi stand
during the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.



   (H)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle except a taxicab in
the taxi stand established in accordance with Chapter 114 of the Town Code on
the eastern side of North Lumina beginning at the intersection of the eastern
line of North Lumina Avenue with the northern line of Birmingham Street and
extending northwardly to the intersection of the eastern line of North Lumina
Avenue with the southern line of East Columbia Street except as follow: The
southernmost 78 feet of said taxi stand shall be used exclusively as a
vehicle loading and unloading zone during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
and shall be used exclusively as a tax stand during the hours of 6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m. The northernmost portion of said taxi stand consisting of two
metered parking spaces shall be used exclusively for metered parking during
the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and shall be used exclusively as a taxi
stand during the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.



   (I)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle except a taxicab in
the taxi stand established in accordance with Chapter 114 of the Town Code on
the western side of North Lumina Avenue beginning at the intersection of the
western line of North Lumina Avenue with the southern line of West Columbia
Street and extending southwardly for a distance of 164 feet. This designated
taxi stand consists of seven marked and metered parking spaces. These seven
spaces shall be used exclusively as general/metered parking for the public
during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. except from 6:00 p.m. Friday until
6:00 p.m. Sunday and at any time on the legal holidays of Memorial Day,
Independence Day and Labor Day when these spaces shall be used exclusively as
a fire safety lane. During the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., these seven
spaces may be used as a taxi stand on the condition that during the time that
such spaces are used as a fire safety lane, drivers of taxi cabs must remain
in their cabs at all times and shall immediately vacate the fire safety lane
for emergency vehicles.



   (J)   On-street parking within the Harbor Island Residential Parking
District is restricted as follows: during the period May 1 through September
15 between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. daily, except as provided in
§ 74.47, no person shall park any vehicle on the streets designated in §
74.45 unless the vehicle displays a current residential parking pass issued
in accordance with the provisions of § 74.42 of this code or a decal issued
in accordance with the provisions of § 70.36 of this code.



   (K)   The parking area located at the Town Hall Complex designated
for holders of commercial II parking permits shall be open seven days per
week from 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight. Parking in this area shall be
restricted to vehicles displaying a current commercial II parking permit.




(Ord. 1443, passed 4-24-03; Am. Ord. 1458, passed 3-25-04; Am. Ord. 1545,
passed 8-9-07; Am. Ord. 1623, passed 3-11-10; Am. Ord. 1638, passed 8-12-10;
Am. Ord. 1647, passed 2-10-11; Am. Ord. 1652, passed 4-14-11; Am. Ord. 1665,
passed 11-16-11; Am. Ord. 1679, passed 5-10-12; Am. Ord. 1693, passed
8-16-12; Am. Ord. 1723, passed 3-25-14; Am. Ord. 1729, passed 4-10-14; Am.
Ord. 1757, passed 2-11-16; Am. Ord. 1763, passed 2-9-17)




SCHEDULE II.  DIAGONAL PARKING.



    Double diagonal parking, at an angle of approximately 45 degrees, shall
be permitted in the following locations:



 

Street
 
Between
 
Side
 
'72 Code Section


Center of Salisbury Street
 
North Lumina Street and east end of Salisbury Street
 
East
 
11-29



 



Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE III.  PROHIBITED PARKING.



    (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, except the operator of an
authorized emergency vehicle as described in § 70.06 of this code, to park
or permit to be parked any vehicle in the following locations:



 


Location

 

Ord. No.

 

Passage Date





In the parking area reserved for the bridgetender employed by the NCDOT and
located at the intersection of the western end of Old Causeway Drive and the
southern end of the unpaved street running under the drawbridge crossing the
Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway; or on any portion of the two streets
identified herein or the immediately adjacent properties in such a way as to
block or prevent access to the parking area reserved for the bridgetender.
 

1220

 

9-9-93



Oceanic Street from its intersection with the eastern line of North Lumina
Avenue to the eastern end of Oceanic Street.
 

1230

 

4-28-94



Crane Street from its intersection with the eastern line of North Lumina
Avenue to the eastern end of Crane Street.
 

1230

 

4-28-94



On the north side of Pelican Drive extending from the intersection of Pelican
Drive with the entrance to the North Carolina Wildlife Commission's public
boat ramp to the driveway entrance for the Channel Walk/Shoreline Condominium
Complex.
 

1288

 

7-10-97



The median bounded on the north by Pelican Drive, on the south by U.S.
Highway 74, on the west by the entrance to the North Carolina Wildlife
Commission's public boat ramp, and on the east by a distance of 500 feet
easterly from the Channel Walk driveway.
 

1288; 1483

 

7-10-97; 10-13-05



Raleigh Street from its intersection with the eastern line of North Lumina
Avenue to the eastern end of Raleigh Street.
 

1310

 

5-28-98



On the west side of North Lumina Avenue from its intersection with the north
limits of Circle Drive to the most northern end of North Lumina Avenue.
 

1332

 

4-8-99





 



 


Location

 

Ord. No.

 

Passage Date





Iula Street from its intersection with the western line of South Lumina
Avenue to the eastern line of South Waynick Boulevard.
 

1332

 

4-8-99



On the east side of South Lumina Avenue from the intersection of its eastern
line with the southern line of Sunset Avenue south to the intersection of
South Lumina Avenue and the southern line of Jack Parker Boulevard.
 

1332

 

4-8-99



On the north side of Jack Parker Boulevard from its intersection with the
western line of South Lumina Avenue to the western most end of Jack Parker
Boulevard and throughout the turn circle.
 

1332

 

4-8-99



On the southern side of Jack Parker Boulevard from the most eastern marked
parking space to the east line of South Lumina Avenue.
 

1332

 

4-8-99



All of Birmingham Street from its intersection with the eastern line of North
Lumina Avenue to the eastern line of Birmingham Street.
 

1332

 

4-8-99



In the travel lanes adjacent to the recycle bins on Seawater Lane.
 

1332

 

4-8-99



All of Parmele Boulevard from its intersection with the western limits of
North Lumina Avenue to its western terminus at the entrance to the
Wrightsville Beach Public Works facility, to include the turnaround area
adjacent to the entrance to the Public Works facility.
 

1332

 

4-8-99



On the north or south side of Albright Street to the westernmost end or in
the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the north or south side of Arrindale Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the east or west side of Bahama Drive to the most northern end or in the
roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



The westernmost end of Bay Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the north or south side of Bellamy Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the north or south side of Bermuda Drive to the westernmost end or in the
roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



Birmingham Street from its intersection with the eastern line of North Lumina
Avenue to the eastern end of Birmingham Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the east or west side of Bob Sawyer or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the north or south side of Bridgers Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the north side of Causeway Drive, in the roadway or on the south side
except as provided by marked spaces.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the north side of Chadbourn Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the east or west side of Channel Avenue or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the north side of Circle Drive or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the east side of Coburn Street to the most southern end or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the north or south side of Corbett Street to the westernmost end or in the
roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the east side of Crane Street, in the roadway or at the most eastern end.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



At the easternmost end of E. Asheville Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



Beyond the paved asphalt at the easternmost end of E. Atlanta Street or in
the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



At the easternmost end of E. Augusta Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



At the easternmost end of E. Charlotte Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the south side of E. Columbia Street to the easternmost end or in the
roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



At the easternmost end of E. Fayetteville Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



At the easternmost end of E. Greensboro Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



At the easternmost end of E. Henderson Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99




At the easternmost end of E. Oxford Street or in the roadway.

 

1337

 

6-24-99




At the easternmost end of E. Raleigh Street or in the roadway.

 

1337

 

6-24-99



Easternmost end of E. Salisbury Street other than the designated Handicap
parking area or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the north or south side of Gene Floyd or in the roadway except as provided
by marked spaces.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



At the most eastern end of Heron Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



In the roadway or on the north or south side of Highway 74 east to and
including the 74 bridge.
 

1337

 

6-24-99




Iula Street from its intersection with the western line of South Lumina
Avenue to the eastern line of Waynick Boulevard or in the roadway.

 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the north side of Jack Parker Boulevard from its intersection with the
west side of South Lumina to the westernmost end of Jack Parker Boulevard and
throughout the turn circle or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



In the roadway or on the east or west side of Keel Street, except as provided
for by marked spaces.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



In the lane of travel or on either side of Lagoon except as provided for by
marked spaces.
 

1337

 

6-24-99




On the north or south side of Latimer Street or in the roadway.

 

1337

 

6-24-99



Beyond the paved portion of Mallard Street at the east end.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the east or west side of Marina Street and throughout the turn circle or
in the roadway except as provided for by marked spaces on the east side of
the street.
 

1337

 

6-24-99




On the north or south side of Meier Street or in the roadway.

 

1337

 

6-24-99




At the easternmost end of Moores Inlet or in the roadway.

 

1337

 

6-24-99




In the roadway or on the west side of North Lumina Avenue from its
intersection with the north side of Circle Drive to the most northern end and
throughout the turn circle or on the east side except as provided by marked
spaces.

 

1337

 

6-24-99




On the north or south side of Nathan Street or in the roadway except as
designated by marked spaces on the south side.

 

1337

 

6-24-99



On either side of North Ridge and throughout the turn circle or in the
roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99




On the north or south side of Northrop Street to the westernmost end or in
the roadway.

 

1337

 

6-24-99




On the north or south side of Oceanic Street to the easternmost end or in the
roadway.

 

1337

 

6-24-99




On the north or south side of Old Causeway Drive to the most eastern end or
in the roadway, except as provided for by marked spaces.

 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the east or west side of Palmetto Drive to the most northern end or in the
roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the north or south side of Pelican Drive from the intersection of
Driftwood Court to the most western end of Pelican Drive or in the roadway. 
Also, at the most eastern end of Pelican Drive or on the north side of the
intersection with Driftwood Court as indicated by posted signs or in the
roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99




Raleigh Street from its intersection with the eastern line of North Lumina
Avenue to the eastern end of Raleigh Street.

 

1337

 

6-24-99




In the roadway on Russ Drive.

 

1337

 

6-24-99



In the roadway or on the east and west side of South Lumina Avenue at Iula
south to Sunset Avenue except as provided for by marked spaces.
 

1337

 

6-24-99




On the east side of 0-200 block of South Lumina, in the roadway or on the
west side except as provided for by marked spaces.

 

1337

 

6-24-99




On the east side of the 300 block of South Lumina, in the roadway or on the
west side except as provided for by marked spaces.

 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the east side of the 400 block of South Lumina, in the roadway or on the
west side except as provided for by marked spaces.
 

1337

 

6-24-99




On the east side of the 500-600 block of South Lumina, in the roadway or on
the west side except as provided for by marked spaces.

 

1337

 

6-24-99




At the most eastern end of Sandpiper Street or in the roadway.

 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the east or west side of the 700 block of Schloss Street to the most
northern and southern ends or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99




On the east or west side of the 800 block of Schloss Street to the most
northern and southern ends or in the roadway.

 

1337

 

6-24-99




On the east or west side of the 900 block of Schloss Street to the
southernmost ends or in the roadway.

 

1337

 

6-24-99



In the roadway of Sea Oats Lane and throughout either turn circle.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On either side of Seacrest Drive or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



At the most eastern end of Seagull Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the east or west side of Seapath and throughout either turn circle at the
southernmost ends or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the north or south side of Seashore Street or in the roadway except as
designated by marked spaces on the north side.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On either side of Seawater Lane, in the roadway or adjacent to the recycle
bins.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



At the most eastern end of Shearwater Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



In the roadway or on the north side of Water Street from its intersection
with Keel Street west to the intersection of Marina Street, except as
provided by marked spaces.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the north or south side of Short Street from its intersection with Schloss
Street west to the intersection of Water Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the east or west side or any portion of Smith Alley.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the north or south side of Snyder Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On either side of South Ridge and throughout the turn circle or in the
roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the north or south side of Sprunt Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the north side of Stone Street from the junction at North Lumina to the
easternmost end throughout the turn circle or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the north or south side of Sunset Avenue or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the north or south side of Sweeney Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the north or south side of Taylor Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



At the westernmost end of W. Asheville Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



At the westernmost end of W. Columbia Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



At the westernmost end of W. Fayetteville Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



At the westernmost end of W. Greensboro Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



At the westernmost end of W. Henderson Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



At the westernmost end of W. Oxford Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



In the roadway or on the north or south side of W. Salisbury Street, east of
the Highway 74 Bridge, as designated by yellow curbing or markings.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the east or west side of the 0-100 block of Water Street to the
northernmost paved end or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the east or west side of the 200 block of Water Street to the paved
section at the northernmost end or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the east or west side of the 300 block of Water Street or in the roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the east side of Waynick Boulevard in the roadway or on the west side
except as provided by marked spaces.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the north or south side of Wright Street to the westernmost end or in the
roadway.
 

1337

 

6-24-99



On the south side of Causeway Drive from the easternmost entrance to The
Moorings extending westwardly for a distance of 153 feet
 

1410

 

3-28-02



Along US 74 (West Salisbury Street) between the east end of the bridge over
the Intracoastal Waterway eastward to the west end of the bridge over Banks
Channel, a distance of 0.971 mile.
 

1521

 

9-14-06



On the grass median located between Highway 74-76 and West Salisbury Street.
 

1612

 

9-10-09



On the grass median located between West Salisbury Street and Highway 74.
 

1612

 

9-10-09



On the grass median located between Highway 74-76 and Old Causeway Drive.
 

1612

 

9-10-09



On the grass median located at the point where Highways 74 and 76 diverge.
 

1612

 

9-10-09



On the grass median located at the point where Old Causeway Drive intersects
Highway 76 which grass median also serves to divide the east bound and west
bound traffic on Highway 76.
 

1612

 

9-10-09



On any town property that is not clearly designated for parking purposes.
Designation for parking purposes shall be accomplished by the use of signs
indicating that the property is available for parking purposes. Provided,
that the provisions of this schedule shall not apply to town property on
which parking is authorized by ordinance, to parking in connection with
special events sponsored or approved by the town, to parking by town owned
vehicles and to parking authorized by a permit issued by the Town Manager or
his or her designee.
 

1633

 

7-15-10



 


 






 



   (B)   Penalty.  Violation of the provisions of this Schedule III
shall subject the offender to those penalties set forth in § 74.99 of this
code.



(Ord., passed 5-26-83; Am. Ord. 1136, passed 2-14-91; Am. Ord. 1177, passed
4-30-92; Am. Ord. 1230, passed 4-28-94; Am. Ord. 1288,passed 7-10-97; Am.
Ord. 1332, passed 4-8-99; Am. Ord. 1337, passed 6-24-99; Am. Ord. 1409,
passed 3-28-02; Am. Ord. 1410, passed 3-28-02; Am. Ord. 1521, passed 9-14-06;
Am. Ord. 1612, passed 9-10-09; Am. Ord. 1627, passed 5-13-10; Am. Ord. 1633,
passed 7-15-10; Am. Ord. 1679, passed 5-10-12)



SCHEDULE IV.  PENALTIES FOR OVERTIME PARKING IN A METERED SPACE AND OTHER
VIOLATIONS OF THE PARKING ORDINANCES.



 


Violation

 

If paid within 72 hours commencing with issuance of ticket

 

If paid after 72 hours but within 10-day period commencing with issuance of
ticket

 

If paid after 10 days following issuance of ticket






Parking overtime in a metered space or time limited area

 

$35.00

 

$45.00

 

$65.00




All other violations of the parking ordinances or parking schedules in
Chapter 76 except as otherwise provided in this Schedule IV or elsewhere in
the Town Code

 

$35.00

 

$45.00

 

$65.00




Violation of § 74.23, HANDICAPPED PARKING

 

$250.00

 

$250.00

 

$250.00




Violation of § 74.37(B), OPERATION OF METERS

 

$100.00

 

$100.00

 

$100.00




Violation of § 74.25, DESIGNATED LIFEGUARD PARKING

 

$250.00

 

$250.00

 

$250.00




Violation of §§ 74.45 - 74.47, HARBOR ISLAND RESIDENTIAL PARKING DISTRICT

 

$35.00

 

$45.00

 

$65.00




Violation of §§ 74.46 (B) and (C), 74.48 (A)(2) and (B), parking trailers
on Pelican Drive, Old Causeway Drive, Keel Street and Marina Street

 

$100.00

 

$100.00

 

$100.00




Parking in violation of the provisions of subsection (L) of Chapter 76,
Schedule I

 

$150.00

 

$150.00

 

$150.00











(Ord. 1228, passed 4-28-94; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-26-94; Am. Ord. 1333,
passed 4-8-99; Am. Ord. 1366, passed 7-13-00; Am. Ord. 1462, passed 6-10-04;
Am. Ord. 1598, passed 5-14-09; Am. Ord. 1621, passed 2-11-10; Am. Ord. 1656,
passed 5-12-11; Am. Ord. 1679, passed 5-10-12; Am. Ord. 1726, passed 3-25-14;
Am. Ord. 1729, passed 4-10-14; Am. Ord. 1745, passed 5-28-15)




TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



Chapter



   90.   ABANDONED VEHICLES



   91.   ANIMALS



   92.   BEACH AND SHORE REGULATIONS; WATER RECREATION



   93.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES



   94.   FIRE PREVENTION



   95.   GARBAGE, TRASH, AND WEEDS



   96.   HEALTH AND SANITATION



   97.   NOISE AND PUBLIC NUISANCES



   98.   SPECIAL EVENTS, PARADES, DEMONSTRATIONS, PICKETING, PUBLIC
BEACH



   99.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



   100.   ALARM SYSTEMS



CHAPTER 90:  ABANDONED VEHILCES



Section



   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Removal of abandoned or junked motor vehicles



   90.03   Abandoned, junked, and health or safety hazard vehicles



   90.04   Exemptions



   90.05   Notice when vehicle removed; hearing



   90.06   Towing; storage



 



   90.99   Penalty



§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE."  A motor vehicle as defined in G.S. §
160A-303 that has been left upon a street or highway in violation of a law or
ordinance prohibiting parking; is left on property owned or operated by the
town for longer than 24 hours; is left on private property without the
consent of the owner, occupant or lessee thereof for longer than two hours;
or is left on any public street or highway for longer than seven days.



   "HEALTH OR SAFETY HAZARD VEHICLE."  A motor vehicle as described in
G.S. § 160A-303 that has, for a period of more than 48 hours, been in a
state of disrepair and is incapable of being moved under its own power and is
found to be a breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes or other insects,
snails, rats, or vermin of any kind; a point of heavy growth of weeds or
grass over eight inches in height; a point of accumulation of stagnant water;
a point of concentration of gasoline, oil, or other flammable or explosive
materials; is so located that there is danger of the vehicle falling or
turning over; a source of danger for children through entrapment in areas of
confinement that cannot be opened from the inside or from exposed surfaces of
metal, glass or other rigid material; or in any other condition detrimental
to the public health or safety.



   "JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE."  An abandoned motor vehicle as described
hereinabove that also is partially dismantled or wrecked; cannot be
self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it was originally intended to
move; is more than five years old and worth less than $100; or does not
display a current license plate.



§ 90.02  REMOVAL OF ABANDONED OR JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   Subject to division (B) below, whenever it is made to appear
to appropriate town officials that abandoned or junked motor vehicles as
defined in §90.01 exist within the town limits, the town may have the
vehicles removed to a storage yard or area and thereafter may dispose of them
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   No motor vehicle may be removed from private property without
the written request of the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises unless
the Board of Aldermen or a duly authorized town official or employee has
declared it to be a health or safety hazard.



   (C)   The town may require any person requesting the removal of a
junked or abandoned motor vehicle from private property to indemnify the town
against any loss, expense, or liability incurred because of the removal,
storage, or sale thereof.



   (D)   No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal
action to any owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of any
abandoned, lost, or stolen motor vehicle for disposing of the vehicle as
provided in this chapter.



Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.03  ABANDONED, JUNKED, AND HEALTH OR SAFETY HAZARD VEHICLES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to possession of a motor vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to
be abandoned or to become a junked motor vehicle as described in this chapter.




   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to possession of a vehicle or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of
the real property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow to
remain on property in the town any motor vehicle which is a health or safety
hazard vehicle as defined in this chapter.



Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any motor vehicle in
an enclosed building or any vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise
being operated in a lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to
the operation of the enterprise, or to any vehicle in an appropriate storage
place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the town.



§ 90.05  NOTICE WHEN VEHICLE REMOVED; HEARING.



   Since the town operates in such a way that the person who tows motor
vehicles found to be in violation of this chapter is responsible for
collecting towing fees, the provisions of G.S. Chapter 20, Article 7A (G.S.
§ 20-219.9 et seq.) concerning notice, hearing, and other procedures shall
be applicable when vehicles are towed pursuant to this chapter.



§ 90.06  TOWING; STORAGE.



   All towing and storage charges incurred in connection with impounded
vehicles shall constitute a lien upon such vehicle as provided in G.S. §
44A-2, and no stored vehicle shall be released until all such charges have
been paid to the owner of the garage where the impounded vehicle is stored or
the lien has been extinguished as provided in G.S. § 20-222.



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute
an infraction punishable by a penalty of not more than $50.



   (B)   A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
also subject the offender to a civil penalty of $25. If any offender fails to
pay the civil penalty within 20 days after being cited for a violation and
notified of the penalty, the town may seek to collect it in a civil action in
the nature of debt.



   (C)   The town may seek to enforce the provisions of this chapter
through any appropriate equitable action.



   (D)   Each day that a violation continues after the offender has
been notified of a violation shall constitute a separate offense.



   (E)   The town may seek to enforce the provisions of this chapter by
using any one or any combination of the foregoing remedies.



CHAPTER 91:  ANIMALS



Section



General Provisions



   91.01   Purpose



   91.02   Definitions



Restrictions



   91.08   Restrictions



Control of Dogs and other Animals



   91.10   Bird sanctuary



   91.11   Dogs running at large prohibited



   91.12   Dogs and other animals prohibited on beach and other public
property at certain times, places



   91.13   Confinement of female dogs in heat



Administration and Enforcement



   91.20   Animal Control Officer



   91.21   Annual animal license tax



   91.22   Animal as public nuisance



   91.22.1   Non-resident owner responsibility



   91.23   Impoundment



   91.24   Notice to owner of impounded animal



   91.25   Permissible periods of impoundment



   91.26   Claiming impounded animal



   91.27   Disposition of unclaimed animals



   91.28   Enforcement of chapter



   91.29   Person responsible for designating a potentially dangerous
dog



   91.30   Board responsible for appeals from a decision regarding a
potentially dangerous dog



 



   91.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Noisy pets, see § 97.04



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   Some but not all of the purposes of this chapter are to
regulate, restrict, or prohibit the keeping, running, or going at large of
any domestic animals, including dogs and cats; to establish a bird sanctuary
within the town limits; and to levy an annual license tax on the privilege of
keeping dogs within the town.



   (B)  It is expressly recognized that the owners of animals are
responsible for the acts of their animals and it is the intent of this
chapter to require animal owners to comply with the law, not merely to have
the town operate an impoundment program.  Police officers and animal control
officers shall place primary emphasis upon apprehending and initiating
prosecution of violators of this chapter.



(Ord., passed 9-28-78)



Statutory reference:



   Regulation of domestic animals, see G.S. § 160A-186



   Violation of ordinances, see G.S. § 14-4



§ 91.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "ANIMAL AT LARGE" or "STRAY."  Any animal off the premises of his
owner and not on a leash, or any animal within the town wandering lost which
does not have an owner.



   "ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER."  Any person designated to perform the duties
described by this chapter.



   "ANIMAL SHELTER."  Any facility designated by the Board of Aldermen
for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals under authority of this
chapter.



   "MEANS TO PROPERLY REMOVE AND DISPOSE OF FECES."  An owner or
custodian of a dog will have on or near their person a device such as a
plastic bag, or other suitable plastic or paper container, that can be used
to fully clean-up and contain dog waste until it can be disposed of in an
appropriate container.  Such a device must be produced and shown, upon
request, to anyone authorized to enforce these ordinances.



   "PUBLIC NUISANCE."  Any domesticated animal or group of animals which:



      (1)   Is found at large;



      (2)   Damages the property of anyone other than its owner,
including but not limited to, turning over garbage containers or damaging
gardens, flowers, or vegetables;



      (3)   Is a vicious animal;



      (4)   Causes fouling of the air by odors;



      (5)    Causes unsanitary conditions of enclosures or
surroundings;



      (6)   By virtue of number of type, is offensive or dangerous
to the public health, safety, or welfare;



      (7)   Barks, whines, or howls in an excessive, continuous, or
untimely fashion;



      (8)   Is diseased and dangerous to the public health;



      (9)   Habitually or repeatedly chases, snaps at, attacks, or
barks at pedestrians, bicyclists, or vehicles; or



      (10)   Appears on the public beaches of the Atlantic Ocean
within the town at any place east of the established building line on the
beach and an extension northward and southward of the building line to the
northern and southern boundary lines of the town, whether on a leash or not,
at any time between the dates of April l and September 30 of each year.



      (11)   Is a dog and which dog deposits feces on public
property or on private property without the consent of the owner or person in
lawful possession of the private property, and the person owning, possessing,
harboring or having the care, charge, control or custody of the dog fails to
remove the feces so deposited.  Provided, however, that a dog accompanying a
blind person and used for the assistance of the blind person shall not be
included within this definition.



   "VICIOUS ANIMAL."  Any animal which constitutes a physical threat to
human beings or other animals by virtue of attacks of a number and severity
as to cause property damage or physical injury.



(Ord., passed 9-28-78; Am. Ord., passed 5-28-81; Am. Ord. 1172, passed
4-16-92; Am. Ord. 1407, passed 3-28-02)



RESTRICTIONS



§ 91.08 RESTRICTIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following restrictions shall apply:



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog to
take it off its own property limits without the means to properly remove and
dispose of their dog's feces from any public or private property.



   (B)   It is the responsibility of a dog's owner or custodian to
clean up their dog's feces from any public or private property outside of
their own property limits.  These properties are to include, but not be
limited to, beaches, rights-of-way, paths and public access areas.



(Ord. 1407, passed 3-28-02)  Penalty, see § 91.99



CONTROL OF DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS



§ 91.10  BIRD SANCTUARY.



   (A)   The area embraced within the town limits and all land owned or
leased by the town outside the corporate limits is designated as a bird
sanctuary.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to intentionally trap, hunt, shoot, or
otherwise kill, any bird within the sanctuary established by division (A);
provided, that this section does not prohibit such actions by the town or its
authorized agents in dealing with any bird or animal found to be a public
nuisance as defined herein so long as such activity undertaken by the town or
its authorized agents does not violate applicable state and federal statutes,
rules and regulations.



   (C)   The civic clubs of the town are granted permission to erect
artistic signs, giving notice of the regulations herein provided, at those
places and of a design as may be approved by the Board of Aldermen.



(Ord., passed 9-28-78; Am. Ord. 1448, passed 8-14-03)  Penalty, see § 91.99



Statutory reference:



   Bird sanctuaries, see G.S. § 160A-188



§ 91.11  DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to allow the animal to be
off the premises of his owner and not on a leash in the town.



(Ord., passed 9-28-78)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.12  DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS PROHIBITED ON BEACH AND OTHER PUBLIC
PROPERTY AT CERTAIN TIMES, PLACES.



   (A)   Except as otherwise permitted herein, no animals (to include
horses) shall be permitted at any time on the public beach of the Atlantic
Ocean within the town.  For purposes of this chapter, the "public beach of
the Atlantic Ocean within the town" shall mean all of that property zoned
Conservation Zone (P-1) under the Town Code and located within the town
limits and lying east of Lumina Avenue and south of Jack Parker Boulevard.



   (B)   Between the dates of April 1 and September 30 of each year, no
person shall allow a dog on the public beach of the Atlantic Ocean.



   (C)   Between the dates of October 1 and March 31 of each year, dogs
shall be allowed on the public beach of the Atlantic Ocean only if leashed
and such leashed dog is under the control of the person in possession of such
dog.



   (D)   No person shall possess or allow a snake on the public beach
of the Atlantic Ocean or on any property owned by the town or on a public
street or sidewalk.



   (E)   Service animals registered under the provisions of G.S.
Chapter 168 shall be allowed on the public beach of the Atlantic Ocean at all
times.



   (F)   The Board of Aldermen shall have the authority to prohibit
dogs and other animals on any public property within the town in connection
with group activities approved by the Board of Aldermen or at other times
where such prohibition is deemed necessary by the Board of Aldermen for the
health and safety of the general public. The general public shall be given
notice of such prohibition by publication of a notice giving the dates, times
and place of such prohibition at least five calendar days prior to the
activity and by posting signs at the time and place of the activity giving
notice of such prohibition.



   (G)   Dogs are prohibited at all times from the Greensboro Street
Mini-Park located between Greensboro and Salisbury Streets.



(Ord., passed 9-28-78; Am. Ord., passed



5-28-81; Am. Ord. 1201, passed 10-22-92; Am. Ord. 1348, passed 11-18-99; Am.
Ord. 1389, passed 7-12-01; Am. Ord. 1408, passed 3-28-02; Am. Ord. 1676,
passed 3-8-12) Penalty, see § 91.99



Cross-reference:



   Beach regulations, see Ch. 92



§ 91.13  CONFINEMENT OF FEMALE DOGS IN HEAT.



   Every female dog, while in heat, shall be confined in a building or
secure enclosure in a manner that she will not be in contact with another
dog, nor create a nuisance by attracting other animals.  This section shall
not be construed to prohibit the intentional breeding of animals within an
enclosed area on the  premises of the owner of an animal being bred.



(Ord., passed 9-28-78)  Penalty, see § 91.99



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 91.20  ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.



   (A)  In order to abate the aforementioned problems and enforce the
regulations hereinafter set forth, primary responsibility is delegated to the
Animal Control Officer.  The Officer, in the performance of his duties,
shall have all the powers, authorities, and immunities granted under this
chapter and by the general laws of this state to enforce the provisions of
this chapter and the state law which relate to the care, treatment, or
impounding of animals, but shall not have the power of arrest.



   (B)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder, or
molest any animal control officer, police officer, or other duly appointed
agent while in the performance of any duty authorized by this chapter, or to
seek to release any animal in the custody of these agents except in the
manner herein provided.



(Ord., passed 9-28-78)  Penalty, see § 91.99



Cross-reference:



   Power to appoint, see Charter Sec. 4.6



Statutory reference:



   Animal regulations, see G.S. § 160A-186



§ 91.21  ANNUAL ANIMAL LICENSE TAX.



   (A)   All dog and cat owners residing in the town for over 15 days
shall register their dogs and cats with the Town Office annually, and provide
pertinent information as may be requested including the size, age, breed,
color, sex, legal residence of the animal, and the name and address of the
owner.



   (B)   A license tax, to be established by the Board of Aldermen,
shall be paid to the Town Office who, in return, will provide the owner with
a suitable dog or cat license tax tag.  The animal license tax levied by
this section shall be for the privilege of keeping, harboring, and
maintaining a dog or cat within the town, and the animal license shall expire
at the end of the ensuing tax listing period.



   (C)   The license period shall be from January 1 to December 31 of
every calendar year.  Grace period for annual registration will extend
through January 31.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any dog owner to permit any dog over
four months old to appear or be on any street, park, or public way of the
town or in any public place therein unless the dog is wearing a collar or
harness to which is attached a current rabies vaccination tag and a current
town animal license tax tag (when the license tax tag is required under this
chapter) which have been issued for that dog.



   (E)  The annual animal license tax required hereunder shall be $10 for
altered and unaltered dogs and cats.



(Ord., passed 9-28-78; Am. Ord., passed 11-2-78; Am. Ord. 1413, passed
3-28-02; Am. Ord. 1606, passed 6-25-09)  Penalty, see § 91.99



Statutory reference:



   Animal taxes, see G.S. § 160A-212



§ 91.22  ANIMAL AS PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to maintain a public nuisance as
defined in § 91.02 of this chapter.



   (B)   In addition to other methods of enforcement, upon receipt of a
complaint being made to the Police Department or Animal Control Officer by
any resident or residents that any person is maintaining a public nuisance as
defined in § 91.02 of this chapter, the Animal Control Officer, Chief of
Police, or his designated representative, shall investigate the matter and
may notify the owner of the animal or animals in question that a complaint
has been received.



   (C)   If the findings of the investigating officer indicate that the
complaint is justified, then the Animal Control Officer, Chief of Police, or
his designated representative shall proceed to take action as is deemed
necessary to enforce this chapter.



(Ord., passed 9-28-78)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.22.1  NON-RESIDENT OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   A non-resident owner of any premises subject to this chapter
shall be responsible and liable for any actions by the tenants or occupants
of the premises that constitute second or subsequent violations of § 91.22
of this chapter.



   (B)   No non-resident owner shall be liable unless notified of first
violations of this chapter by the tenants or occupants. Provided further that
the first violation shall have occurred within the previous 24-month period.
Notice of such first violation shall be effected by mailing a copy of the
citation to the non-resident owner by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested.



   (C)   No non-resident owner may be subjected to criminal liability
by the application of this section, but shall be subject to civil penalties
or equitable relief as provided hereinafter. This section shall in no way
relieve any tenant or occupant from responsibility for violations of this
chapter.



   (D)   The owner or occupant of any premises shall be liable for any
actions of guests or invitees on the premises that violate this chapter. The
owner’s liability shall be determined as set forth in division (A) above.
In order to be liable for such actions, the occupant must have been actually
or constructively present at the premises at the time of the violation by the
guest or invitee.



(Ord. 1710, passed 5-9-13)



§ 91.23  IMPOUNDMENT.



   Domesticated animals, including dogs, may be impounded when found at
large or when constituting a public nuisance.



(Ord., passed 9-28-78)



Cross-reference:



   Public nuisance, see § 91.22



§ 91.24  NOTICE TO OWNER OF IMPOUNDED ANIMAL.



   The Animal Control Officer shall make reasonable efforts to notify the
owner of any impounded animal.



(Ord., passed 9-28-78)



§ 91.25  PERMISSIBLE PERIODS OF IMPOUNDMENT.



   Domesticated animals shall be impounded for no less than three days
unless claimed by its owner in accordance with this chapter.  The animals
shall be impounded in a humane manner in any animal shelter designated by the
Board of Aldermen.



(Ord., passed 9-28-78)



§ 91.26  CLAIMING IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.



   (A)   The owner of an impounded animal shall be entitled to claim
the animal, except as provided in this section, upon compliance with the
license provisions of this chapter, the payment of all designated fees and
penalties, and upon furnishing proof of ownership.



   (B)   Reclaiming fees as provided in this section shall be $3 per
day for each animal plus a $10 penalty, except in the case of dogs without a
current license in which case the penalty will be $20.  This fee and penalty
does not include applicable charges for any license or rabies inoculation
that may be required by this chapter or other applicable law.  If the animal
claimed is not properly licensed or inoculated, the owner shall secure the
necessary license and have the animal inoculated.



   (C)   For each animal that is impounded more than one time within a
12-month period, the penalty for taking up and impounding the animal shall be
$20 in all cases.



(Ord., passed 9-28-78)



Cross-reference:



   License tax, see § 91.21



§ 91.27  DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED ANIMALS.



   (A)   If an animal is not claimed by the owner within four days
after impoundment, the animal may be disposed of in one of the following ways:



      (1)   Release for adoption by a new owner who shows evidence
of ability and intention to provide the animal with an appropriate home and
care.



      (2)   Turning the animal over to the New Hanover County Animal
Control Center.



   (B)   For animals turned over to the New Hanover County Animal
Control Center as provided above, it shall be unlawful for the owner or
keeper of the animal to take animal from the center without first complying
with all reclaiming requirements of this chapter.



(Ord., passed 9-28-78)  Penalty, see § 91.99



Statutory reference:



   Animal shelters, see § G.S. 160A-493



§ 91.28  ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.



   The provisions of the chapter shall be enforced by the Animal Control
Officer, police officers, and other officers as may be authorized by the
Board of Aldermen, under the operational supervision of the Police Department
pursuant to policies established by the Board of Aldermen.



(Ord., passed 9-28-78)



§ 91.29  PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR DESIGNATING A POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG.



   The Chief of Police is hereby designated as the person responsible for
determining when a dog is a "potentially dangerous dog" in accordance with
the provisions of G.S. § 67-4.1(c).



(Ord. 1124, passed 11-15-90)



§ 91.30  BOARD RESPONSIBLE FOR APPEALS FROM A DECISION REGARDING A
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG.



   The Board of Aldermen of the town is hereby designated as the board
responsible for hearing appeals from a decision of the Chief of Police
determining that a dog is a "potentially dangerous dog" as provided in G.S.
§ 67-4.1(c).



(Ord. 1124, passed 11-15-90)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A violation of §§ 91.08, 91.11, 91.12, and 91.13 shall
subject the offender to a civil penalty of $250. Civil penalties may be
recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender
does not pay the penalty within 14 days after being cited for violation of
the section. In accordance with G.S. § 160A-175(b), a violation of the
sections enumerated in this division (A) shall not be subject to the penalty
provisions of G.S. § 14-4 and shall not be considered a breach of the penal
laws of the state.



   (B)   A violation of any remaining provisions of this chapter not
specified in division (A) above is a misdemeanor punishable in accordance
with the provisions of G.S. § 14-4. The fine for such violations shall not
exceed $500.



   (C)   A violation of any remaining provisions of this chapter not
specified in division (A) above shall subject the offender to a civil penalty
of $250. Civil penalties may be recovered by the town in a civil action in
the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within 14 days
after being cited for violation of the provision.



   (D)   Enforcement of this chapter may be by appropriate equitable
remedy, injunction, or an order of abatement issuing from a court of
competent jurisdiction pursuant to G.S. § 160A-175(d)and(e).



   (E)   The violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced
by one, all of a combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed in
G.S. § 160A-175; provided, that in no event shall a violation of the
subsections enumerated in division (A) above be subject to the penalty
provisions of G.S. § 14-4 nor shall they be considered a breach of the penal
laws of the state.



   (F)   Any person issued a civil citation under the provisions of
this section may appeal the issuance of such citation to the Wrightsville
Beach Chief of Police (“Chief of Police”). An appeal shall be perfected
in accordance with the following:



      (1)   An appeal shall be taken by giving written notice of
appeal to the Chief of Police within 14 calendar days of the date of issuance
of the civil citation. In determining the 14 calendar days within which such
appeal may be taken, the date of the civil citation shall not be counted.



      (2)   Such written notice must be received by the Chief of
Police no later than 5:00 p.m. on the fourteenth day of the appeal period. If
the fourteenth day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday recognized by the
town, the time for filing such appeal shall be extended to 5:00 p.m. on the
next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or holiday.



      (3)   A copy of the citation issued to the appealing party
shall be attached to such written notice of appeal.



      (4)   The written notice of appeal shall set forth the grounds
for the appeal, include other information that the appealing party believes
supports its position and must include the name, email address, mailing
address and telephone number of the appealing party.



      (5)   Within 15 calendar days of receipt of the written notice
of appeal, the Chief of Police shall issue a written decision. The Chief of
Police may uphold the citation, dismiss the citation or reduce the citation
to some lesser offense. Provided, that the Chief of Police may not impose any
penalty greater than that set forth in the citation from which appeal was
taken. The written decision of the Chief of Police will be emailed or mailed
by first class mail to the appealing party within five days of issuance to
the email address or mailing address of the appealing party shown on the
written notice of appeal.



      (6)   The decision of the Chief of Police shall be final.



      (7)   If the Chief of Police upholds the citation or takes
other action that requires the appealing party to make payment to the town,
such payment must be made within 30 days of the date of the written decision
of the Chief of Police. If the appealing party fails to make payment within
that time, the town shall undertake enforcement action as appropriate.



(Ord., passed 9-28-78; Am. Ord. 1069, passed 1-28-88; Am. Ord. 1413, passed
3-28-02; Am. Ord. 1534, passed 3-28-07; Am. Ord. 1596, passed 4-9-09; Am.
Ord. 1684, passed 7-12-12; Am. Ord. 1688, passed 8-16-12)



CHAPTER 92:  BEACH AND SHORE REGULATIONS; WATER RECREATION



Section



   92.01   Definitions



   92.02   Littering beaches prohibited



   92.03   Containers for food and drink



   92.04   Devices for cooking food prohibited



   92.05   Use of motor vehicle by handicapped persons to enter ocean



   92.06   Authority to declare ocean unsafe



   92.07   Swimming in ocean prohibited when unsafe



   92.08   Transportation, storage and launching of vessels on the
beach adjoining the Atlantic Ocean



   92.09   Tents, umbrellas and canopies on beach strand



   92.10   Operating boat near beach



   92.11   Diving from fishing pier



   92.12   Use of surfboard or ski-board restricted



   92.13   Motorboat mufflers



   92.14   Baiting or attracting sharks prohibited



   92.15   Vegetation, sea oats; not to be removed



   92.16   Fishing from bridges



   92.17   Filling holes and trenches created on beach strand



   92.18   Use of vehicles on beach prohibited



   92.19   Anchoring of vessels within the zoning jurisdiction of the
town



   92.20   Mooring buoys prohibited within the zoning jurisdiction of
the town



   92.21   Prohibition on docking vessels at Wynn Plaza



   92.21.1   Diving from Wynn Plaza



   92.22   Abandoned vessel unlawful; removal authorized



   92.23   (Reserved)



   92.24   Notice when vessel removed; hearing



   92.25   Authorized towing services



   92.26   Operation of personal watercraft



   92.27   Mooring of boats and construction of piers



   92.28   Sale or rental of merchandise, equipment or personal
services prohibited on beach front



   92.29   Business activities permitted on beach front



   92.30   Prohibition on passenger pick up or delivery



   92.31   Unlawful to release balloon on town property, beach front
and waters surrounding the town



   92.32   Diving from bridges



   92.33   Protection of dunes



 



   92.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Dogs on beaches, see § 91.21



§ 92.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “ABANDONED VESSEL.”  A vessel that:



      (1)   Is moored, anchored, or otherwise located for more than
30 consecutive days in any 180-consecutive-day period in any waters or
marshes (a) waterward of the pierhead line as established by the town and (b)
within the zoning jurisdiction of the town as established pursuant to the
provisions G.S. § 160A-360.



      (2)   If designed to float, is in danger of sinking, has sunk,
is resting on the bottom, or is located such that it is a hazard to
navigation or is an immediate danger to other vessels.  Shipwrecks, vessels,
cargoes, tackle, and other underwater archeological remains that have been in
place for more than ten years shall not be considered abandoned vessels and
shall not be removed under the provisions of this section without the
approval of the Department of Cultural Resources, which is the legal
custodian of these properties pursuant to G.S. § 121-22 and G.S. § 121-23.



   “ANY ONE LOCATION.”  All the waters within the limits of the town.



   “AUTHORIZED TOWN OFFICIAL.” A police officer, code enforcement
officer or other own employee designated by the Town Manager to carry out the
duties described in this chapter.



   “BEACH FRONT.” All of that property zoned conservation zone (P-1)
under the Town Code and located within the town limits and lying east of
Lumina Avenue and south of Jack Parker Boulevard.



   “BOAT OR VESSEL.” A vessel or watercraft of any type or size
specifically designed to be self-propelled, whether by engine, sail, oar,
paddle, or other means, which is used to travel from place to place by water.
A “BOAT OR VESSEL” shall also include any machine designed or intended to
travel over water by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled
vessel.



   “FLOATING STRUCTURE.”  Any structure not a boat, supported by
means of floatation, designed to be used without a permanent foundation,
which is used or intended for human habitation or commerce.  A structure
will be considered a “FLOATING STRUCTURE” when it is inhabited or used
for commercial purposes for more than 30 days in any one location.  A boat
may be deemed a “FLOATING STRUCTURE” when its means of propulsion have
been removed or rendered inoperative and it contains at least 200 square feet
of living space area.



(Ord., passed 7-28-78)



   “KITE  BUGGY.”  Any  wheeled  vehicle propelled by wind through
the use of a kite,  sail or similar device.



   “OCEAN-RELATED BUSINESS ACTIVITIES.” A business activity limited
solely to teaching participants to surf or kite board and the rental of
chairs and umbrellas by hotels located immediately adjacent to the beach
front.



   “SURFBOARD” or “SKI-BOARD.”  Any planing hull (planing hulls
designed primarily for sailing or other boating are neither contemplated nor
included in this section), constructed of any material, which is or may be
used to ride on by any person in any manner in, on, above, or through the
water, with the exception of:



      (1)   Any closed-cell foam object less than five feet in
length, without a hard fiber-glass, plastic, or like cover, enclosure, or
surface.



      (2)   Any inflatable object less than 15 lbs. p.s.i. pressure
and less than five feet in length.



('72 Code, § 14-3) (Ord., passed l0-26-78; Am. Ord. 1428, passed 10-10-02;
Am. Ord. 1593, passed 3-12-09; Am. Ord. 1626, passed 4-22-10; Am. Ord. 1663,
passed 8-11-11)



§ 92.02  LITTERING BEACHES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall throw, deposit, cause, or permit to be thrown or
deposited, any glass, bottles, glassware, cans, garbage, waste, or refuse of
any kind on the public beaches and quasi-public beaches along the Atlantic
Ocean, Masonboro Inlet, Banks Channel, and other waters and waterways in the
town or in the water adjacent to the beaches and shores thereof.



('72 Code, § 13-l)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.03  CONTAINERS FOR FOOD AND DRINK.



   No person shall take, carry, or cause to be carried upon the public
beaches, quasi-public beaches, or water adjacent thereto within the town any
glass containers that could be used for the purpose of transporting food or
beverage.  This section shall not be deemed to include thermos bottles or
thermos jugs.



('72 Code, § 13-2) (Ord. 1123, passed



9-13-90) Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.04  DEVICES FOR COOKING FOOD.



   No person shall carry or cause to be carried upon the public beaches or
quasi-public beaches of the town any device that could be used for the
purpose of cooking any food.



('72 Code, § 13-3)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.05  USE OF MOTOR VEHICLE BY HANDICAPPED PERSONS TO ENTER OCEAN.



   The Board of Aldermen or Town Manager may grant authorization to a
handicapped person to use a motor vehicle for the purpose of ingress and
egress to the Atlantic Ocean. The vehicle must be approved by the Board of
Aldermen or the Town Manager.  A permit, issued by the Wrightsville Beach
Police Department, must accompany vehicles accessing the beach stand.  The
permit will specify the date and location where the vehicle will be operated.



('72 Code, § 13-4)  (Am. Ord. 1531, passed 3-15-07)



§ 92.06  AUTHORITY TO DECLARE OCEAN UNSAFE.



   The Chief of Police may declare the ocean to be unsafe, dangerous, and
injurious when in his or her opinion and discretion, after considering and
weighing all factors, he or she deems it for the best interest and safety of
all concerned.  The public shall be notified of the action by the most
practical and expedient means.



('72 Code, § 13-5)



§ 92.07  SWIMMING IN OCEAN PROHIBITED WHEN UNSAFE.



   (A)   When conditions exist which make it unsafe for persons to swim
in the waters of the Atlantic Ocean adjoining the town boundaries or other
waters within or adjoining the boundaries of the town, the Town Manager is
authorized to declare designated portions of the Atlantic Ocean or other
waters within or adjoining the boundaries of the town to be unsafe for
swimming. Such declaration shall be in writing, shall be signed by the Town
Manager and shall specifically describe the geographic area so determined to
be unsafe.



   (B)   Upon execution of such a declaration by the Town Manager, it
shall be unlawful for any person to swim in the areas declared to be unsafe
by the Town Manager.



   (C)   Any declaration issued by the Town Manager under the
provisions of this section shall be valid for a period of 14 days excluding
the day on which the declaration is signed. Upon the expiration of such
14-day period, the Town Manager's declaration shall expire; upon such
expiration it shall no longer be unlawful to swim in the areas described in
the declaration; provided, that nothing shall prevent the Board of Aldermen
from continuing such prohibition of swimming for such additional period and
within such areas as it deems appropriate by ordinance adopted either before
or after expiration of the Town Manager's declaration.



   (D)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to permit the Town
Manager, acting pursuant to this authority, or the Board of Aldermen to
prohibit swimming altogether within the waters of the Atlantic Ocean adjacent
to the boundaries of the town or within other waters within or adjacent to
the boundaries of the town.



('72 Code, § 13-6)  (Am. Ord. 1239, passed 8-25-94) Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.08  TRANSPORTATION, STORAGE AND LAUNCHING OF VESSELS ON THE BEACH
ADJOINING THE ATLANTIC OCEAN.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to moor, store or place
any vessel, to include sailboats of any type, on any portion of the beach
adjoining the Atlantic Ocean and described in division (E) below except as
follows:



      (1)   Vessels owned and/or operated by employees and agents of
the town, county, state or the U.S. government while engaged in official
duties.



      (2)   In an emergency situation.



      (3)   Vessels registered with a race or regatta pursuant to a
group activity request approved by the town in accordance with applicable
town ordinances.  Provided, that in no event shall such boats be placed more
than 50 feet west of the high water mark or on any portion of the beach on
which vegetation exists.



      (4)   Vessels not in excess of 25 feet in length and powered
by sail, oar or paddle provided that in no event shall such boats be placed
more than 50 feet west of the high water mark or on any portion of the beach
on which vegetation exists and provided further that no such vessel shall be
permitted on the beach between sunset and sunrise.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to launch, land or transport other than
by portage any vessel, to include sailboats of any type, on any portion of
the beach adjoining the Atlantic Ocean and described in division (E) below
except as follows:



      (1)   Vessels owned and/or operated by employees and agents of
the town, county, state or the U.S. government while engaged in official
duties.



      (2)   In an emergency situation.



      (3)   Vessels registered with a race or regatta pursuant to a
group activity request approved by the town in accordance with applicable
town ordinances. Provided, that in no event shall such boats be placed more
than 50 feet west of the high water mark or on any portion of the beach on
which vegetation exists.



      (4)   Vessels not exceeding 25 feet in length and powered
solely by sail, paddle or oar may be transported by portage across the beach
area described hereinabove.



   (C)   From April 1 through September 30, it shall be unlawful to
launch or land any vessel within 200 feet of either side of an established
lifeguard stand located on any portion of the beach adjoining the Atlantic
Ocean and described in division (E) below except as follows:



      (1)   Vessels owned and/or operated by employees and agents of
the town, county, state or the U.S. government while engaged in official
duties.



      (2)   In an emergency situation.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful at any time to launch or land any vessel
within 750 feet of a fishing pier located on any portion of the beach
adjoining the Atlantic Ocean and described in division (E) below except as
follows:



      (1)   Vessels owned and/or operated by employees and agents of
the town, county, state or the U.S. government while engaged in official
duties.



      (2)   In an emergency situation.



   (E)   The provisions of this section shall apply to that portion of
the beach lying within the boundaries of the town adjacent to the waters of
the Atlantic Ocean and described as follows:



   Seaward of the property line of the town of Wrightsville Beach as
established by Chapter 246 of the Public Laws of 1939, as amended, and as
shown on the map(s) of said property line maintained by the Department of
Public Works of the Town of Wrightsville Beach extending to the northern
terminus of said property line and then seaward of the western boundary of
property of the Town of Wrightsville Beach adjoining the Atlantic Ocean as
extended northwardly from said terminus; to the northern boundary of tract 7
as shown on that map entitled "North Shell Island Subdivision" and recorded
in Map Book 25 at Page 20, New Hanover County Registry.



(Ord. 1356, passed 3-9-00)



§ 92.09  TENTS, UMBRELLAS AND CANOPIES ON BEACH STRAND.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave tents, canopies or
umbrellas on the beach strand adjacent to the waters of the Atlantic Ocean
overnight without prior approval of the Town Manager or his or her authorized
designee.



(Ord. 1548, passed 9-13-07)



§ 92.10  OPERATING BOAT NEAR BEACH.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a boat powered by a
gasoline or diesel fueled engine or by internal combustion engine inside the
area 100 yards eastward from the mean high water mark of the Atlantic Ocean
in a manner as to create a hazard to others.



(Ord., passed 6-25-81; Am. Ord. 1258, passed 9-14-95)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.11  DIVING FROM FISHING PIER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to jump, dive, leap, or any way
propel his or her body from any commercial fishing pier within the town at
any time.



('72 Code, § 15-22)  (Ord., passed 5-26-83) Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.12  USE OF SURFBOARD OR SKI-BOARD RESTRICTED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or have in their
possession, in the Atlantic Ocean within the town's regulatory jurisdiction
as set forth in Chapter 539 of the 1973 Session Laws, any surfboard or ski-
board, as follows:



      (1)   At any time within 100 feet north of the Masonboro Inlet
jetty, within 350 feet north and south of the commercial fishing pier known
as “Johnny Mercer’s,” and within 350 feet north and south of the
Crystal Pier adjacent to the current Oceanic Restaurant.



      (2)   In a designated area as follows:



         (a)   In front of each lifeguard stand during the period
of the Saturday before Memorial Day through Labor Day whenever a lifeguard is
on duty in the lifeguard stand. The designated area shall be no longer than
750 feet and no shorter than 600 feet, and shall extend 300 feet (100 yards)
seaward from the mean high water mark of the Atlantic Ocean.



         (b)   In other areas designated by the Ocean Rescue
Director or his designee due to weather, crowd conditions, special events or
other factors.



         (c)   At any time when surfing is prohibited in such a
designated area, a flag shall be raised at each end of the subject area so as
to be readily visible to all persons within said area.



         (d)   Surfing shall be permitted in all areas during
times when the Ocean Rescue Director or his or her designee has posted red
warning flags indicating dangerous swimming conditions.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to hold any surfing contests at any time
within the corporate limits or within areas subject to the regulatory
jurisdiction of the town without first obtaining written approval from the
Board of Aldermen pursuant to the group activity permit process.  The group
activity permit may allow such contests in areas and at times otherwise
prohibited by ordinance.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to use a surfboard in the waters of the
Atlantic Ocean within the town's regulatory jurisdiction without having an
ankle strap or shock cord securely attached to the user at one end and the
surfboard at the other.  In addition, it shall be unlawful for any person to
possess or have under his or her control on the beach strand adjacent to the
waters of the Atlantic Ocean within the town’s regulatory jurisdiction a
surfboard without an ankle strap affixed to the board.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to swim in the Atlantic
Ocean within 100 feet of the Masonboro Inlet jetty.  This prohibition will
not apply to persons engaged in snorkeling or scuba diving within 100 feet of
the Masonboro Inlet jetty.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to swim in the Atlantic
Ocean within 200 feet of the commercial fishing pier known as “Johnny
Mercer’s;” and within 200 feet of the Crystal Pier adjacent to the
current Oceanic Restaurant. This prohibition will apply to persons engaged in
snorkeling or scuba diving.



('72 Code, § 14-14)  (Ord. passed 10-26-78; Am. Ord. passed 7-24-80; Am.
Ord. passed 5-28-81; Am. Ord. passed 7-22-82; Am. Ord. 1048, passed 4-9-87;
Am. Ord. 1474, passed 4-14-05; Am. Ord. 1490, passed 1-26-06; Am. Ord. 1533,
passed 4-12-07; Am. Ord. 1575, passed 5-8-08; Am. Ord. 1697, passed 10-11-12;
Am. Ord. 1707, passed 5-9-13)  Penalty, see §  92.99



§ 92.13  MOTORBOAT MUFFLERS.



   No boat equipped or driven by a gasoline motor or by other internal
combustion engine, including those driven by outboard motors, shall be driven
or plied in the waters of the Banks Channel between the northern edge of
Masonboro Inlet and the southern edge of Wrightsville or Moore's Inlet,
unless the motor or engine is equipped with suitable mufflers of some
standard or approved type.



('72 Code, § 14-7)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.14  BAITING OR ATTRACTING SHARKS PROHIBITED.



   No person fishing from a pier or the shore within the town limits shall
bait or cause to be used any bait which attracts sharks of any type to the
shores or piers. This section shall not prevent regular and normal fishing
now done on piers and shores of the town, except to the extent it affects the
baiting and luring of sharks to the waters of the town.



('72 Code, § 14-12)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.15  VEGETATION, SEA OATS; NOT TO BE REMOVED.



   No persons shall remove from any property owned by the town any sea
oats or other native vegetation which is useful and helpful in the
preservation of such land against wind, water, or tidal erosion.



('72 Code, § 14-17)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.16  FISHING FROM BRIDGES.



   (A)  There shall be no fishing, crabbing, or taking of marine life of
any kind or by any means, from any public bridge within the corporate limits
of the town except as provided herein.



   (B)   Fishing shall be permitted on the north side of the Highway 74
bridge crossing Banks Channel from October 1 through March 31 provide that
during such time, no fishing, crabbing, or taking of marine life of any kind
or by any means shall be permitted on such bridge above those areas
designated as travel ways for vessels passing underneath such bridge.



('72 Code, § 15-8)  (Ord., passed 5-28-8l; Am. Ord. 1068, passed 12-17-87;
Am. Ord. 1149, passed 7-11-91; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 2-10-00; Am. Ord. 1456,
passed 2-12-04)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.17  FILLING HOLES AND TRENCHES CREATED ON BEACH STRAND.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig holes, trenches or other
depressions on the beach strand adjacent to the waters of the Atlantic Ocean
and depart the beach strand without having first completely filled such hole,
trench, or other depression.



(Ord. 1549, passed 9-13-07)



§ 92.18  USE OF VEHICLES ON BEACH PROHIBITED.



   No vehicle as defined in Chapter 70 of the town code shall be permitted
on the foreshore, breach strand or barrier dune system within the town limits
of the town except as follows:



   (A)   Vehicles owned and/or operated by employees and agents of the
town, county, the state, and the U.S. Government while engaged in official
duties shall not be subject to the provisions of this section.



   (B)   The Board of Aldermen or Town Manager may approve the
operation of vehicles on the areas described hereinabove pursuant to the
provisions of an activity or event approved by the Board of Aldermen or Town
Manager. A permit, issued by the Wrightsville Beach Police Department, must
accompany vehicles accessing the beach strand. The permit will specify the
date and location where the vehicle will be operated.



   (C)   Handicapped persons shall be permitted to use vehicles on the
areas described above in accordance with the provisions of § 92.05
hereinabove.



(Ord. 1105, passed 10-21-89; Am. Ord. 1531, passed 3-15-07; Am. Ord. 1626,
passed 4-22-10)



§ 92.19  ANCHORING OF VESSELS WITHIN THE ZONING JURISDICTION OF THE TOWN.



   No person shall allow a boat owned by him, registered in his or her
name, or under his or her control to be moored or anchored in any waters
seaward of the pierhead line as established by the town and which are within
the zoning jurisdiction of the town as established pursuant to the provisions
of G.S. § 160A-360 for more than 30 days in any 180 consecutive day
period.  Boats moored at a dock or pier are not subject to this prohibition
provided the dock or pier does not extend beyond the pierhead line. Boats
moored or anchored for any portion of a day shall be considered to be moored
or anchored for that day.



(Ord. 1105, passed 10-21-89; Am. Ord. 1267, passed 1-11-96; Am. Ord. 1663,
passed 8-11-11)



§ 92.20  MOORING BUOYS PROHIBITED WITHIN THE ZONING JURISDICTION OF THE
TOWN.



   (A)   No person shall anchor or otherwise install a mooring buoy in
any waters located within the zoning jurisdiction of the town as established
pursuant to the provisions of G.S. Ch. 160A.  Provided, that this section
shall not apply to any mooring buoy located between a pierhead line
established in accordance with the town code and the mainland.



   (B)   (1)   Any mooring buoy located within the town limits on
the date of original adoption of this section shall be removed within 180
days of the date of the original adoption.  The town is authorized to remove
any of the buoys remaining upon expiration of the 180-day period described
above on the condition that the town notify the person owning or controlling
the buoy at the person's last known address 30 days prior to the date of
removal of the mooring buoy.  If the town is unable to determine what person
owns or controls the buoy or an address, it may give the notice by placing
the notice on the buoy.



      (2)   Any mooring buoy located within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the town established in accordance with the provisions of
G.S. §160A-360 at the time of initial adoption of this section shall be
permitted to remain in the location.  It shall be the responsibility of the
person or organization controlling the buoy to provide the town sufficient
evidence to establish that the buoy was so located on the date of adoption
and the geographic coordinates of the buoy.  If the information is not
provided within 60 days of a request from the town, the town shall remove the
buoy in question.  The buoy may be maintained but under no circumstances
shall any such buoys be enlarged, expanded or relocated in any manner. 
Provided, that if at any time such buoy presents a hazard to the health,
safety and welfare of town residents, the town may direct the permanent
removal of the buoy only after notifying the person owning or controlling the
buoy and providing the person an opportunity for a hearing on the issue of
removal before the Board of Aldermen.  Notice of the hearing before the
Board of Aldermen shall be given at least ten days’ prior to the hearing by
mailing a notice to the person’s last known address, or if the town is
unable to determine what person owns or controls the buoy or an address, it
may give the notice by placing the notice on the buoy in question. 
Provided, however, that in the event the buoy presents an immediate hazard to
the health, safety and welfare of town residents, the buoy may be removed
immediately without the requirement for notice and a hearing.  In such
event, the town, if requested by the owner, shall schedule a hearing as
described hereinabove within 30 days of the date of the removal of the buoy
to consider any evidence that might justify replacement of the buoy.



(Ord. 1144, passed 5-23-91; Am. Ord. 1161, passed 11-21-91)



§ 92.21  PROHIBITION ON DOCKING VESSELS AT WYNN PLAZA.



   No person shall moor, dock or otherwise affix a vessel of any kind to
any pier, piling or other portion of the docking system located at Wynn Plaza
during the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.  Provided, that this section
shall not apply to any person mooring a vessel at Wynn Plaza pursuant to a
written agreement with the town.



(Ord. 1219, passed 9-9-93; Am. Ord. 1552, passed 9-27-07; Am. Ord. 1578,
passed 7-17-08)



§ 92.21.1  DIVING FROM WYNN PLAZA.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to jump, dive, leap or in any way
propel his or her body from any dock or piling comprising a portion of the
dock and associated pilings owned by the town and located at Wynn Plaza.



(Ord. 1543, passed 8-9-07)



§ 92.22  ABANDONED VESSEL UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to possession of a vessel to cause or allow such vessel to be
abandoned as the term is defined herein.



   (B)   Upon investigation, the authorized town official may determine
that a vessel is an abandoned vessel and order the vessel removed.



(Ord. 1428, passed 10-10-02; Am. Ord. 1663, passed 8-11-11)



§ 92.23  (RESERVED).



§ 92.24  NOTICE WHEN VESSEL REMOVED; HEARING.



   Because businesses qualified in accordance with § 92.25 to tow vessels
at the request of the authorized town official are responsible for collecting
towing fees, the provisions of G.S. Article 7A of Chapter 20 (§§ 20-219.9
et seq.) concerning notice, hearing and other procedures shall be applicable
when vessels are towed pursuant to this chapter.  All notices required by
provisions of G.S. Article 7A of Chapter 20 shall be given by the Police
Department.



(Ord. 1428, passed 10-10-02; Am. Ord. 1663, passed 8-11-11)



§ 92.25  AUTHORIZED TOWING SERVICES.



   (A)   The Chief of Police shall prepare and maintain an eligible
list of the persons, firms or corporations who apply and qualify to tow and
store vessels pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The Board of Aldermen may, if in its opinion the public
interest would be served thereby, enter into an exclusive contract with one
or more persons engaged in the towing and storage of vessels, to remove the
vessels in the manner described in this article and on such terms and
conditions as may be mutually agreed upon.



   (C)   No person, firm or corporation providing vessel towing
services shall charge the owner of any vessel towed without the consent of
the owner an amount for towing and storage fees in excess of those fees
approved by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 1428, passed 10-10-02)



§ 92.26  OPERATION OF PERSONAL WATERCRAFT.



   (A)   No person shall operate a personal watercraft within the
waters of Kenan’s Creek at greater than no-wake speed. For purposes of this
chapter, the “WATERS OF KENAN’S CREEK” shall include the waters and
marshes located within that area bounded on the north by U.S. Highway 74, on
the west by the Town Hall complex, on the south by Causeway Drive and on the
east by Harbor island and the extension of the westernmost line of Harbor
Island northwardly to its intersection with U.S. Highway 74.



   (B)   No person shall operate a personal watercraft within 25 feet
of any marsh or shore within the following areas:



      (1)   Within those areas located within the town’s
boundaries and the town’s extraterritorial jurisdiction lying within the
following area: Bounded by the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway to the west,
the northern line of Motts Channel to the north, the eastern line of Banks
Channel to the east and the northern line of Shinn Creek to the south.



      (2)   Within those areas located within the town’s
boundaries and the town’s extraterritorial jurisdiction lying within the
following area: Bounded by the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway to the west,
the southern line of the channel leading from the Atlantic Intracoastal
Waterway to Mason’s Inlet extended eastwardly to the point of intersection
with Highway 74 to the north, the western line of Highway 74 to the east and
the southern line of Lee’s Cut and the Highway 74 bridge extending across
the waters of Banks Channel to the south.



   (C)   No person shall operate a personal watercraft at greater than
no-wake speed or at a speed that causes the personal watercraft to generate a
plume of spray known as a rooster tail under either of the two bridges
crossing the waters of Banks Channel (the Causeway Drive bridge and the
Salisbury Street bridge) and within an area extending 100 feet to the north
and 100 feet to the south of each bridge.



   (D)   For purposes of this chapter, a “PERSONAL WATERCRAFT”
shall mean a personal watercraft as that term is defined in G.S. § 75A-13.3
or any successor statute.



(Ord. 1544, passed 8-9-07; Am. Ord. 1691, passed 8-16-12; Am. Ord. 1746,
passed 6-11-15)



§ 92.27  MOORING OF BOATS AND CONSTRUCTION OF PIERS.



   (A)   No person shall moor, anchor, secure, or leave abandoned any
boat, raft, float, barge, or other similar device within the boundaries as
herein described:



      (1)   Within that area bounded on the north by the southern
line of Lot 107 of Shore Acres as shown on that map entitled “Map of Shore
Acres Opposite Wrightsville Beach, N.C.” recorded in Book 3 at Page 66,
Office of the Register of Deeds, New Hanover County, extended westwardly to
the pierhead line, on the west by the pierhead line as established by the
Town of Wrightsville Beach, on the south by the northern line of Lot 45 of
Shore Acres as shown on that map entitled “Map of Shore Acres Opposite
Wrightsville Beach, N.C.” recorded in Book 3 at Page 66, Office of the
Register of Deeds, New Hanover County, extended westwardly to the pierhead
line and on the east by the western line of Island Drive. The area described
herein is adjacent to and includes the park located on the west side of South
Harbor Island adjacent to Island Drive.



      (2)   Within that area bounded on the north by the northern
line of Jasmine Place where Jasmine Place intersects Channel Drive (South) as
shown on that map entitled “Map of Shore Acres Opposite Wrightsville Beach,
N.C.” recorded in Book 3 at Page 66, Office of the Register of Deeds, New
Hanover County, extended eastwardly to the pierhead line, on the east by the
pierhead line as established by the Town of Wrightsville Beach, on the south
by the southern line of Lot 5 of Shore Acres as shown on that map entitled
“Map of Shore Acres Opposite Wrightsville Beach, N.C.” recorded in Book 3
at Page 66, Office of the Register of Deeds, New Hanover County, extended
eastwardly to the pierhead line and on the west by the eastern line of
Channel Drive (South) as shown on said map. The area described herein is
adjacent to and includes the park located on the east side of South Harbor
Island adjacent to Channel Drive (South).



   (B)   No person shall build, place, erect, or cause to be built,
placed, or erected any piling, post, pier, stake, pipe, mooring buoy or
similar implement or device whatsoever within the boundaries set out in this
section.



(Ord. 1565, passed 1-10-08; Am. Ord. 1629, passed 5-13-10)



§ 92.28  SALE OR RENTAL OF MERCHANDISE, EQUIPMENT OR PERSONAL SERVICES
PROHIBITED ON BEACH FRONT.



   No merchandise, equipment or personal services shall be sold, marketed
or rented on the beach front except as permitted in this section or elsewhere
in the Town Code.



(Ord. 1593, passed 3-12-09)



§ 92.29  BUSINESS ACTIVITIES PERMITTED ON BEACH FRONT.



   A business engaged in ocean-related business activities may operate on
the beach front subject to the following terms and conditions:



   (A)   Such business shall only operate pursuant to an annual permit
issued by the town. Such permit shall expire on December 31 of each year. A
fee established by the Board of Aldermen shall be charged for such permit.



   (B)   Each business to which an annual permit is issued shall be
required to maintain a general liability insurance policy with the town named
as an additional insured and worker’s compensation insurance as required by
the State of North Carolina. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the business
must provide the town with evidence that such insurance is in force.



   (C)   Hours of operation of such business shall be limited to 7:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Businesses engaged in teaching surfing and kite boarding
shall not operate between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on Memorial
Day, 4th of July and Labor Day.



   (D)   The geographical area of operation of such businesses shall be
the “designated surfing areas” as established under the provisions of §
92.12 of the Town Code. Provided that this limitation shall not apply to the
rental of chairs and umbrellas by hotels located immediately adjacent to the
beach front.



   (E)   Any representative of such business when operating on the
beach front shall have a copy of the permit required under division (A) above
immediately available at all times that such business operations are taking
place.



   (F)   No sale or rental of merchandise or equipment shall be
conducted in connection with the operation of such business on the beach
front. No payment of any fees shall be accepted by such business on the beach
front. Any rental or sales of merchandise or equipment or payment for such
items and for personal services must be carried out at the primary business
location of such business.



(Ord. 1593, passed 3-12-09; Am. Ord. 1733, passed 7-10-14)



§ 92.30  PROHIBITION ON PASSENGER PICK UP OR DELIVERY.



   No vessel carrying passengers for a fee may pick up or discharge
passengers on the beach front.



(Ord. 1593, passed 3-12-09)



§ 92.31  UNLAWFUL TO RELEASE BALLOONS ON TOWN PROPERTY, BEACH FRONT AND
WATERS SURROUNDING THE TOWN.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to litter by releasing inflated
balloons in or on or by discarding balloons in or on any property owned by
the town, any waters within the zoning jurisdiction of the town as
established pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 160A-360 or the beach front
as defined in this chapter of the Town Code. Any person violating the
provisions of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount
of $250 to be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt
if the offender does not pay the penalty within ten days after having been
cited for violation of the ordinance. In accordance with G.S. § 160A-175(b),
any person violating the provisions of this section shall not be subject to
the penalty provisions of G.S.  § 14-4 and such action shall not be
considered a breach of the penal laws of the state.



(Ord. 1642, passed 11-18-10)



§ 92.32  DIVING FROM BRIDGES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to jump, dive, leap or in any way
propel his or her body from any bridge located within the town.



(Ord. 1687, passed 7-12-12)



§ 92.33  PROTECTION OF DUNES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or animals (except dogs as
permitted herein) to cross any portion of a dune, the dune ridge or a frontal
dune as such terms are defined in Chapter 155 of this Code (herein
collectively the “dunes”) except for official town business or for
emergency access purposes unless such crossing is (a) for the purpose of
going to the ocean from private property immediately west of the dunes or to
the private property immediately west of the dunes from the ocean or (b) over
an existing pathway or a permitted wooden walkway, ramp, or stairs. Examples
of prohibited activities include, but are not limited to, crossing the dunes
for a purpose other than going to or from the ocean, playing on the dunes,
climbing on the dunes, removing dune vegetation, allowing animals to cross
the dunes (except dogs on a leash when permitted and only in the manner
permitted herein), and other activities that reduce the stability of the
dunes and potentially decrease the dunes’ storm protection value, wildlife
habitat value, and aesthetic value.



(Ord. 1704, passed 4-11-13)



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Any person violating the provisions of § 92.02 shall
be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $250 to be recovered by the
town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the
penalty within ten days after having been cited for violation of the
ordinance. In accordance with G.S. § 160A-175(b), a violation of the section
enumerated herein shall not be subject to the penalty provisions of G.S. §
14-4 and shall not be considered a breach of the penal laws of the state.



      (2)   Any person violating the provisions of § 92.03 shall be
subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $100 to be recovered by the town
in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within ten
days after having been cited for violation of that section. In accordance
with G.S. § 160A-175(b), a violation of the section enumerated herein shall
not be subject to the penalty provisions of G.S. § 14-4 and shall not be
considered a breach of the penal laws of the state.



      (3)   Any person violating the provisions of § 92.19 shall be
subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $250 for the first offense and
$100 for each subsequent offense that occurs within 12 months of the first
offense to be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt
if the offender does not pay the penalty within ten days after having been
cited for violation of this section. In accordance with G.S. § 160A-175(b),
a violation of the section enumerated herein shall not be subject to the
penalty provisions of G.S. § 14-4 and shall not be considered a breach of
the penal laws of the state.



      (4)   Any person violating the provisions of § 92.21 shall be
subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $250 to be recovered by the town
in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within ten
days after having been cited for violation of that section. In accordance
with G.S. § 160A-175(b), a violation of the section enumerated herein shall
not be subject to the penalty provisions of G.S. § 14-4 and shall not be
considered a breach of the penal laws of the state.



      (5)   Any person violating the provisions of § 92.33 shall be
subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $250 to be recovered by the town
in the nature of a debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within ten
days after having been cited for the violation of that section. In accordance
with G.S. § 160A-175(b), a violation of the section enumerated herein shall
not be subject to the penalty provisions of G.S. § 14-4 and shall not be
considered a breach of the penal laws of the state.



   (B)   A violation of any remaining section of this chapter shall be
a misdemeanor or infraction as provided by G.S. § 14-4 and shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.  In addition, a violation of any
remaining section of this chapter shall subject the offender to a civil
penalty in the amount of $100 to be recovered by the town in a civil action
in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within ten
days after having been cited for violation of the ordinance.



   (C)   The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by an
appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (D)   Each day’s continuing violation of any provisions of this
chapter shall be a separate and distinct offense.



   (E)   Any person to whom a permit is issued in accordance with the
provisions of § 92.29 and who violates the provisions of § 92.28 or 92.29
shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $100 to be recovered by
the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay
the penalty within ten days after having been cited for violation of the
ordinance. A second violation of § 92.28 or 92.29 within 30 days of a prior
violation shall result in the revocation of that person’s permit issued
under the provisions of § 92.29.



   (F)   Any person issued a civil citation under the provisions of
this section may appeal the issuance of such citation to the Wrightsville
Beach Chief of Police (“Chief of Police”). An appeal shall be perfected
in accordance with the following:



      (1)   An appeal shall be taken by giving written notice of
appeal to the Chief of Police within 14 calendar days of the date of issuance
of the civil citation. In determining the 14 calendar days within which such
appeal may be taken, the date of the civil citation shall not be counted.



      (2)   Such written notice must be received by the Chief of
Police no later than 5:00 p.m. on the fourteenth day of the appeal period. If
the fourteenth day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday recognized by the
town, the time for filing such appeal shall be extended to 5:00 p.m. on the
next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or holiday.



      (3)   A copy of the citation issued to the appealing party
shall be attached to such written notice of appeal.



      (4)   The written notice of appeal shall set forth the grounds
for the appeal, include other information that the appealing party believes
supports its position and must include the name, email address, mailing
address and telephone number of the appealing party.



      (5)   Within 15 calendar days of receipt of the written notice
of appeal, the Chief of Police shall issue a written decision. The Chief of
Police may uphold the citation, dismiss the citation or reduce the citation
to some lesser offense. Provided, that the Chief of Police may not impose any
penalty greater than that set forth in the citation from which appeal was
taken. The written decision of the Chief of Police will be emailed or mailed
by first class mail to the appealing party within five days of issuance to
the email address or mailing address of the appealing party shown on the
written notice of appeal.



      (6)   The decision of the Chief of Police shall be final.



      (7)   If the Chief of Police upholds the citation or takes
other action that requires the appealing party to make payment to the town,
such payment must be made within 30 days of the date of the written decision
of the Chief of Police. If the appealing party fails to make payment within
that time, the town shall undertake enforcement action as appropriate.



(Ord. 1048, passed 4-9-87; Am. Ord. 1356, passed 3-9-00; Ord. 1364, passed
4-13-00; Am. Ord. 1474, passed 4-14-05; Am. Ord. 1578, passed 7-17-08; Am.
Ord. 1593, passed 3-12-09; Am. Ord. 1628, passed 5-13-10; Am. Ord. 1641,
passed 10-14-10; Am. Ord. 1685, passed 7-12-12; Am. Ord. 1692, passed
8-16-12; Am. Ord. 1704, passed 4-11-13; Am. Ord. 1707, passed 5-9-13)



CHAPTER 93:  CIVIL EMERGENCIES




Section




   93.01   Establishment of Emergency Management Agency



   93.02   Emergency Management Coordinator



   93.03   Deputy coordinators



   93.04   Emergency management personnel



   93.05   Emergency functions



   93.06   Existence of state of emergency



   93.07   Declaration of state of emergency



   93.08   Permitted prohibitions and restrictions



   93.09   [Reserved]



   93.10   Permitted exemptions



   93.11   Separate and superseding declarations



   93.12   End of state of emergency



   93.13   Absence or disability of Mayor



   93.14   Emergency plans and control centers



   93.15   Mutual aid agreements



   93.16   Assistance



   93.17   Appropriations



   93.18   Application of a state of emergency declared by New Hanover
County to the town



 



   93.99   Penalty



§ 93.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY.



   A town Emergency Management Agency is hereby established pursuant to
G.S. § 166A-19.15(c).



(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1734, passed 9-11-14)



§ 93.02  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR.



   There is hereby created the office of Emergency Management Coordinator
for the town (herein "Coordinator").  The Coordinator shall be the Town
Manager or his designee as dictated by the adopted order of succession.  The
Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, and operation of the Emergency Management Agency.



(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93)



§ 93.03  DEPUTY COORDINATORS.



   The Coordinator may appoint deputy coordinators for each of the various
emergency functions as may be established pursuant to § 93.05 of this
chapter.  In appointing deputy coordinators and in organizing the Emergency
Management Agency, the Coordinator shall employ town officials and employees
in such a manner that their knowledge and experience would be of the most
benefit in an emergency situation.



(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93)



§ 93.04  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PERSONNEL.



   (A)   Each person who is appointed to serve in the Emergency
Management Agency hereby established shall, before entering service, take a
written oath before a person authorized to administer an oath in the state,
as required for emergency management workers by G.S. § 166A-13, which oath
shall be substantially as follows:  "I,            , do solemnly swear
(or affirm) that I will support and defend the Constitution of the of the
United States and the Constitution of the State of North Carolina, against
all enemies, foreign and domestic; and that I will bear true faith and
allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely, without any
mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter.  And I do further swear
(or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I, nor have I ever knowingly been
a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow
of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence;
and that during such time as I am a member of the town Emergency Management
Agency, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this state by force or violence, so help me God."



   (B)   Volunteers may be called for and accepted as deemed necessary
by the Coordinator.  Provided, that volunteers shall be called for only in
case of emergency or for necessary training and preparation for
emergencies.  All volunteers shall serve without compensation, and shall be
subject to all rules and regulations established for other emergency
management personnel, and may be dismissed or removed by the Coordinator with
or without cause.



(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93)



§ 93.05  EMERGENCY FUNCTIONS.



   The Emergency Management Agency, under the supervision and control of
the Coordinator, shall prepare for and carry out all the emergency functions,
including, but not limited to, firefighting services, police services,
medical and health services, evacuation of persons and property from stricken
areas, emergency transportation, rescue, restoration and operation of
municipal public utility services, and other functions related to civilian
protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the
preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing function.



(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93)



§ 93.06  EXISTENCE OF STATE OF EMERGENCY.



   A state of emergency may be declared upon a determination that an
emergency exists. An emergency is defined as an occurrence or imminent threat
of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting
from any natural or man-made accidental, military, paramilitary,
weather-related, or riot-related cause.



(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1734, passed 9-11-14)



§ 93.07  DECLARATION OF STATE OF EMERGENCY.



   (A)   Upon a determination that an emergency as defined in G.S. §
166A-19.3 exists and in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 166A-19.22,
the Mayor is authorized and empowered to determine and declare the existence
of a state of emergency, and upon such determination and declaration to
impose those authorized prohibitions and restrictions as are set forth in
this chapter.



   (B)   In the absence or disability of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro
Tempore as designated by the Board of Aldermen shall be authorized to
proclaim a state of emergency.



   (C)   In the absence or disability of both the Mayor and the Mayor
Pro Tempore, a quorum of the Board of Aldermen shall be authorized to
determine and proclaim the existence of a state of emergency.



(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1734, passed 9-11-14)



§ 93.08  PERMITTED PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Upon determination and declaration of the existence of a state
of emergency in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the Mayor by
declaration may impose the following prohibitions and restrictions:



      (1)   Of movements of people in public places, including
imposing a curfew; directing and compelling the voluntary or mandatory
evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened
area within the town’s jurisdiction; prescribing routes, modes of
transportation, and destinations in connection with evacuation; and
controlling ingress and egress of an emergency area, and the movement of
persons within the area.



      (2)   Of the operation of offices, business establishments,
and other places to or from which people may travel or at which they may
congregate.



      (3)   Upon the possession, transportation, sale, purchase, and
consumption of alcoholic beverages.



      (4)   Upon the possession, transportation, sale, purchase,
storage, and use of gasoline, and dangerous weapons and substances, except
that this division (A)(4) does not authorize prohibitions or restrictions on
lawfully possessed firearms or ammunition. As used in this division (A)(4),
the term “dangerous weapons and substances” has the same meaning as it
does under G.S. § 14-288.1. As used in this division (A)(4), the term
“firearm” has the same meaning as it does under G.S. § 14-409.39(2).



      (5)   Upon other activities or conditions the control of which
may be reasonably necessary to maintain order and protect lives or property
during the state of emergency.



   (B)   The Mayor may impose as many of those specified prohibitions
and restrictions as found necessary, because of an emergency, to maintain an
acceptable level of public order and services, and to protect lives, safety
and property. The declaration shall be in writing. The Mayor shall take
reasonable steps to give notice of the terms of the declaration to those
affected by it and shall post a copy of it in Town Hall.



   (C)   The prohibitions and restrictions provided for herein shall
apply throughout the town limits or such part thereof as designated in the
declaration.



(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1734, passed 9-11-14)  Penalty, see §
93.99



§ 93.09  [RESERVED.]



§ 93.10  PERMITTED EXEMPTIONS.



   The Mayor may exempt from some or all of the prohibitions and
restrictions imposed in accordance with the provisions of § 93.08 above
classes of people whose exemption the Mayor finds necessary for the
preservation of the public health, safety and welfare.  The declaration
shall state the exempt classes and the restrictions from which each is
exempted.



(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1734, passed 9-11-14)



§ 93.11  SEPARATE AND SUPERSEDING DECLARATIONS.



   The Mayor may invoke the prohibitions and restrictions authorized by
this chapter in separate declarations and may amend any declaration by means
of a superseding declaration.



(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1734, passed 9-11-14)



§ 93.12  END OF STATE OF EMERGENCY.



   The Mayor shall declare the end of such state of emergency as soon as
circumstances warrant or when directed to do so by the Board of Aldermen.



(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1734, passed 9-11-14)



§ 93.13  ABSENCE OR DISABILITY OF MAYOR.



   In case of the absence or disability of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro
Tempore shall have and exercise all of the powers given the Mayor in this
chapter.  In the absence of both the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tempore, a
quorum of the Board of Aldermen shall have and exercise all of the powers
given to the Mayor in this chapter.



(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93)



§ 93.14  EMERGENCY PLANS AND CONTROL CENTERS.



   The Coordinator may establish a primary emergency control center and
one or more such secondary centers, and other disaster or emergency plans.



(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93)



§ 93.15  MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.



   The Coordinator may, in collaboration with other public and private
agencies in the state, develop mutual aid agreements, subject to approval of
such agreements by the Board of Aldermen, for reciprocal aid and assistance
in case of disaster too great to be dealt with unassisted.



(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93)



§ 93.16  ASSISTANCE.



   The Board of Aldermen may accept gifts, grants or loans from the
federal government or any agency or officer thereof or any person, firm or
corporation upon acceptance by the state as provided in G.S. § 166A-19.71;
and may make contracts, obtain and distribute equipment, materials and
supplies as provided in § 166A-19.71.  In addition, the Coordinator may
make available for emergency management purposes the equipment, supplies and
facilities of the town, and the services of any town employee or official.



(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1734, passed 9-11-14)



§ 93.17  APPROPRIATIONS.



   Pursuant to G.S. § 166A-19.15 and G.S. § 160A-209, the Board of
Aldermen may make appropriations in its annual budget, and expend funds for
emergency management purposes.



(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1734, passed 9-11-14)



§ 93.18  APPLICATION OF A STATE OF EMERGENCY DECLARED BY NEW HANOVER COUNTY
TO THE TOWN.



   In accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 166A-19.22(b)(2), the
Mayor may consent to or request that a state of emergency declared by New
Hanover County include the area within the corporate limits of the town. The
application of the county state of emergency to the town may be with respect
to one or more of the prohibitions and restrictions imposed by the county
pursuant to the authority granted in G.S. § 166A-19.31 and need not be with
respect to all prohibitions and restrictions authorized by that section or
imposed by the county.



(Ord. 1734, passed 9-11-14)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or a declaration
enacted or declared under the authority of this chapter is guilty of a Class
2 misdemeanor in accordance with G.S. § 14-288.20A.



(Ord. 1217, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1734, passed 9-11-14)



CHAPTER 94:  FIRE PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   94.01   Adoption of Fire Prevention Code



   94.02   Fire limits



   94.03   Obstructing fire exits



   94.04   Passageways, exits, to be kept open in public places



   94.05   Disconnected and unused wires to be removed



   94.06   Lots to be free from fire hazard



   94.07   Open burning prohibited



   94.08   Permissible open burning



   94.09   Storage and dispensing of gasoline



   94.10   Liquids for fuel, lighting, or heating



   94.11   Motor fuel dispensing and transporting



   94.12   Motor fuel dispensing devices; attendant required



   94.13   Motor fuel dispensing devices; fire extinguishers



   94.14   Enforcement of maximum occupancy



Activity at fires



   94.20   General regulations



   94.21   Following fire equipment



   94.22   Interfering with firefighters or fire apparatus



   94.23   Riding on fire apparatus



   94.24   Interfering with fire alarm apparatus



   94.25   Protection of fire hose



Fire Inspection



   94.30   Authority and responsibility of Fire Inspector



   94.31   Investigations



   94.32   Records of fires



   94.33   Enforcement



Handling of Liquified Petroleum Gas



   94.34   Name of LP-gas supplier



   94.35   Anchoring of LP-gas container



Sprinkler Requirements for New Construction, Renovations and Additions



   94.45   Sprinkler requirements for new multi-family residential
structures



   94.46   Sprinkler requirements for new non-residential structures



   94.47   Automatic sprinkler system not to be disabled



 



   94.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 94.01  ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE.



   The most current edition of the North Carolina State Building Code,
Fire Prevention, is hereby adopted as the Fire Prevention Code for the town
by reference as fully as though set forth herein.  Official copies of the
Fire Prevention Code shall be kept on file in the office of the Fire
Department.



('72 Code, § 8A-9)  (Ord., passed 8-23-79; Am. Ord. 1163, passed 12-19-91;
Am. Ord. 1406, passed 3-28-02)



§ 94.02  FIRE LIMITS.



   (A)   The fire limits of the town shall be described in the zoning
regulations and on the official map in the office of the Town Clerk.



('72 Code, § 8A-1)



   (B)   No frame, sheet iron, or wooden building shall be erected or
moved into the fire zone.  No exceptions shall be made except as provided in
the building code. Alterations and repairs to frame or wooden buildings shall
be in accordance with the fire zone regulations set out in the building
code.  ('72 Code, § 8A-2)



(Ord. passed 8-23-79)



Cross-reference:



   Zoning Code, see Ch. 155



Statutory reference:



   Establishments of fire limits, see G.S. § 160A-435



   Restrictions within fire limits, see G.S. § 160A-436



§ 94.03  OBSTRUCTING FIRE EXITS.



   No person shall at any time, place any encumbrance of any kind before
or upon any fire escape, balcony, or ladder intended as a means of escape
from fire.  Every member of the Police or Fire Department who discovers any
fire escape encumbered in any manner shall report the same through his
Department channels to the Fire Inspector, who shall immediately notify the
owner, his agents, or tenant to remove the encumbrance, and the encumbrance
shall thereupon be immediately removed.



('72 Code, § 8A-3)  (Ord., passed 8-23-79) Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.04  PASSAGEWAYS, EXITS, TO BE KEPT OPEN IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   (A)   All doors, aisles, and passageways within and leading into or
out of the theaters, churches, and all other places of public assemblage,
during the entire time when any show, performance, service, exhibition,
lecture, concern, ball, or other assemblage is held therein, shall be kept
adequately lighted and free from any article that might obstruct or delay the
exit of the audience, congregation, or assemblage.  The doors of such
buildings, while occupied, shall not be fastened so that they cannot easily
be opened by anyone from within.



   (B)   No person shall sit, stand, or remain seated or standing, nor
shall the owner or operator of such a place allow any person to remain in any
place of public assemblage in any aisle under any circumstances or in any
exit or passage required for the safe exit of the assemblage.



   (C)   Clear passage from all exits and on sidewalks outside of all
theaters and other places of public assemblage shall be maintained at all
times.



   (D)   No aisle, passageway, or stairway in any store shall be
obstructed with tables, show cases, or other obstructions during the hours
the store is open to the public.



('72 Code, § 8A-4)  (Ord., passed 8-23-79) Penalty, see § 94.99



Statutory reference:



   Ways of escape provided, see   G.S. § 69-12



§ 94.05  DISCONNECTED AND UNUSED WIRES TO BE REMOVED.



   No electric light, telegraph, or telephone company shall permit any of
its disconnected, dead, or unused wires to hang or remain on any pole, tree,
or house where the same has been formerly connected and in use.  All wires
shall be taken down and removed immediately, upon notice by the Fire
Inspector.



('72 Code, § 8A-5)  (Ord., passed 8-23-79) Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.06  LOTS TO BE FREE FROM FIRE HAZARD.



   No person shall permit rubbish, refuse, or other articles of
combustible or inflammable nature to accumulate or remain on any lot or
premises.



('72 Code, § 8A-6)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.07  OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit open burning of refuse
or other combustible material within the limits of the town or on property
owned by the town, except as may be allowed and permitted by § 94.08 or the
laws, rules, regulations, and orders of the State Environmental Management
Commission.



('72 Code, § 8A-7)  Penalty, see § 94.99



Statutory reference:



   Environmental Commission, see G.S. § 143B-282



§ 94.08  PERMISSIBLE OPEN BURNING.



   (A)  No bonfires or outdoor rubbish fires shall be allowed within the
town except as permitted by this section.



   (B)  No fires of any kind, to include, but not be limited to, outdoor
cooking fires, shall be allowed upon the beach strand of the Atlantic Ocean.



   (C)  Fires purposely set for the instruction and training of public
and industrial firefighting personnel shall be permitted if authorized in
writing by the Fire Chief.



   (D)  Fires used solely for human warmth shall be permitted at
construction sites during the months November through March if authorized in
writing by the Fire Chief.  The Fire Chief may specify the location of the
fire and the nature of any container in which the fire is built.  Other
reasonable conditions necessary to ensure safety of the fires may be imposed
by the Fire Chief.



   (E)  The Chief of the Fire Department shall order the extinguishing of
any fire and the Fire Department may extinguish any fire not in conformity
with the provisions of this section or any fire which shall endanger the
surrounding or nearby property.



('72 Code, § 8A-8; Am. Ord. 1163, passed 12-19-91)  Penalty, see § 94.99



Statutory reference:



   Environmental Commission, see G.S. § 143B-282



§ 94.09  STORAGE AND DISPENSING OF GASOLINE.



   No person shall establish, maintain, operate, or conduct any facility
for the storage or dispensing of any quantity of kerosene, oil, gasoline, or
other inflammable material for distribution to retailers or consumers, except
as provided in § 94.11(B).



('72 Code, § 8A-10)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.10  LIQUIDS FOR FUEL, LIGHTING, OR HEATING.



   All gases and other types of inflammable liquids used or intended for
use for fuel, lighting, or heating purposes shall comply with all provisions
of the building code.



('72 Code, § 8A-11)



Cross-reference:



   Building code, see Ch. 151



§ 94.11  MOTOR FUEL DISPENSING AND TRANSPORTING.



   Vehicles transporting any type of flammable and combustible liquid
shall not park within the town limits for any purpose except to load or
unload.



(Ord. 1163, passed 12-19-91)



Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.12  MOTOR FUEL DISPENSING DEVICES; ATTENDANT REQUIRED.



   (A)  All motor fuel dispensing devices for use by or on behalf of the
public, including but not limited to those which are preset, remote preset,
coin-operated, card-operated, or money-operated, shall have at least one
attendant on duty on the premises whereon the devices are located at all
times the devices are open to or available for use by or on behalf of the
public.



   (B)  It shall be the duty of the attendant to supervise, observe, and
control the dispensing of motor fuel by the device or devices.  However,
nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting a customer or user from
operating the device and serving himself so long as the attendant is on duty
on the premises to insure that the motor fuel is dispensed to eliminate to
the extent possible the risk of bodily injury and property damage which could
result from the improper handling or use of the dispensing service.



('72 Code, § 8A-15)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.13  MOTOR FUEL DISPENSING DEVICES; FIRE EXTINGUISHERS.



   There shall be present and available for use on the premises whereon is
located any motor fuel dispensing device, as referred to in § 94.12, at
least one fire extinguisher, in good working condition, suitable for and
effective against fires of flammable liquids, gases, and greases, which
extinguisher shall be capable of extinguishing a 25-square-foot of area of
flammable liquid fire, and shall be located within 100 feet of the motor fuel
dispensing device or devices.



('72 Code, § 8A-16)  (Ord., passed



4-13-72)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.14  ENFORCEMENT OF MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation within the
town to operate a place of business in violation of the maximum occupancy
rates established by the State Building Code.  All members of the town
Police Department shall have the authority to enforce those maximum occupancy
rates.



(Ord. passed 7-12-79)



ACTIVITY AT FIRES



§ 94.20  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)  The officer in command shall have the authority to summon aid and
no citizen so summoned may refuse to help in extinguishing the fire or in
protecting exposed property.



   (B)  During the continuance of a fire, the Fire Chief, his assistant,
or the Mayor shall have authority to call upon any citizen to render
assistance in pulling down or demolishing any building or in removing goods
or furniture from a building on fire or in danger of fire, but not without
the consent of the officer of the Fire Department or the Police Department
who may be in charge.



   (C)  It shall be unlawful to congregate on the streets or alleys near
a fire in a manner which would interfere with the activities of the Fire
Department.



   (D)  In the event of an alarm of fire, the apparatus of the Fire
Department responding to it, shall have the right-of-way in and upon all
streets, lanes, alleys, and other public ways.



   (E)  The drivers of vehicles, upon the approach of fire apparatus,
shall immediately bring their vehicle to a stop on the right-hand side of the
street in the direction in which they are facing and shall not move their
vehicle until the apparatus has passed.



Penalty, see § 94.99



Cross-reference:



   Traffic regulations, see Ch. 71



§ 94.21  FOLLOWING FIRE EQUIPMENT.



   It shall be unlawful to follow any fire apparatus which is responding
to a call, by automobile or any other vehicle, (unless the vehicle is used
for transporting firefighters to the scene of a fire), at a distance closer
than one city block, or to pass the apparatus or to park within the same
block in which a fire is in progress.



Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.22  INTERFERING WITH FIREFIGHTERS OR FIRE APPARATUS.



   No person shall interfere with a firefighter in the discharge of his
duty, or hinder him in the performance of his duty.  No person other than
members of the Fire Department shall loiter about any fire station, or
change, handle, or meddle in any manner with any fire engine or any other
fire apparatus.



Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.23  RIDING ON FIRE APPARATUS.



   No person other than a member of the Fire Department shall mount any
fire engine, wagon, or apparatus before it leaves the station or while on its
way to or from a fire, or at any other time, unless by permission of the
driver or officer in command of the engine, wagon, or other apparatus.



Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.24  INTERFERING WITH FIRE ALARM APPARATUS.



   No person shall interfere carelessly or willfully with the fire alarm
system or injure the poles, wires, boxes, or any other apparatus connected
therewith.



Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.25  PROTECTION OF FIRE HOSE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to drive
over, or in any way damage or mutilate any fire hose while in use at a fire
or otherwise.



Penalty, see § 94.99



FIRE INSPECTION



§ 94.30  AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY OF FIRE INSPECTOR.



   (A)   The Fire Chief of the town shall serve as the Fire Official as
that term is defined in the North Carolina State Building Code, Volume V,
Fire Prevention.  Provided, however, to the extent that the duties of the
Fire Official are delegated to representatives of New Hanover County by
virtue of an interlocal agreement between the town and New Hanover County,
the representatives of New Hanover County shall assume the responsibilities
of Fire Official.  The Fire Official, with the approval of the Town Manager,
may detail the members of the Fire Department as additional Fire Officials as
shall from time to time be necessary.



   (B)   Fire inspections shall be made in the manner prescribed by
that person acting as the Fire Official of the town.



('72 Code, § 8A-3)  (Ord., passed 8-23-79; Am. Ord. 1163, passed 12-19-91)



§ 94.31  INVESTIGATIONS.



   The Fire Official shall promptly investigate all complaints of fire
hazards existing within the town and report the results of the investigations
to the Fire Chief.



('72 Code, § 8-3)  (Ord., passed 8-23-79; Am. Ord. 1163, passed 12-19-91)



§ 94.32  RECORDS OF FIRES.



   The Fire Official or his designated representative shall keep a record
of the origin, location, name of the owner of the structure involved, extent
of damage done by the fire, and amount of insurance carried on the structure
involved, as furnished by the Fire Chief.



('72 Code, § 8-3)  (Ord., passed 8-23-79; Am. Ord. 1163, passed 12-19-91)



Statutory reference:



   Investigation of fires, see G.S. § 69-1



§ 94.33  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Fire Official shall cause the removal of fire hazards by serving an
order on the owner or his agent of the premises in question, the order to
state a reasonable time limit for correction of the hazardous condition.



('72 Code, § 8-3)  (Ord., passed 8-23-79; Am. Ord. 1163, passed 12-19-91)



HANDLING OF LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM GAS



§ 94.34  NAME OF LP-GAS SUPPLIER.



   The name and emergency service telephone number of the LP-Gas suppliers
shall be affixed and legibly maintained  in  a visible  location on  or 
near  all stationary LP-Gas containers with an aggregate capacity of less
than 4,000 gallons water capacity installed at consumer premises.  Lettering
shall be not less than two inches in height unless a smaller size is
permitted by other applicable federal, state or county regulations.



(Ord. 1286, passed 7-10-97)



§ 94.35  ANCHORING OF LP-GAS CONTAINER.



   At any location within the town where necessary to prevent flotation
due to possible high flood waters, LP-Gas containers shall be securely
anchored as follows:



   (A)   Containers shall be anchored as follows:



      (1)   Horizontal containers: each container shall be secured
with four mobile home type earth anchors  as  described in division (B) (2)
below.  Two anchors will be sunk at each end of the container.  Each anchor
will be connected so as to resist motion from buoyancy and to  prevent
floatation  and  rotation. Anchor connections will be over the top of the
container from anchor to anchor.  Anchors will be set such that their tops
will be flush with the ground at a point under the turn of the container not
greater than 12 inches from and in line at each end with the legs on either
end of the container.  Connecters to anchors will be torqued to not less
than 50 foot pounds.



      (2)   Underground containers: each container shall be secured
by using four mobile home type earth anchors.  Two anchors will be sunk at
each end of the container.  Each anchor will be connected so as to resist
motion from buoyancy and to prevent floatation and rotation.  Anchor
connections will be over the top of the container from anchor to anchor. 
Anchors will be set such that their tops will be flush with the  ground at 
a point  in  line and perpendicular with the turn of the tank and in line
at each end with the legs on either end of the container.  Connecters to
anchors will be torqued to not less than 50 pounds.



      (3)   Vertical  containers: each container shall be secured
with two mobile home type earth anchors.  Anchors will be connected to the
legs of the container through  the  bottom  assembly.  Each container in
any group shall be anchored individually.  Vertical containers may be
affixed to solid surfaces instead of using anchors as described hereinabove
provided such fastening will prevent floatation and not affect the vertical
stability of the container.  Connecting straps shall be fastened together
with not less than 50 foot pounds  of torque.  Anchors shall be augured
into the earth such that the tops are flush to the ground surface.  Anchors
shall be located opposite to each other.



   (B)   Materials for strapping and anchoring shall be as follows:



      (1)   Strapping:  materials shall consist of galvanized steel
strapping not less than 1.25 inches wide and not less than .031 inch
thickness, or stainless steel strapping not less than .75 inches wide and not
less than .031 inch thickness; or stainless steel cable not less than
three-eighths inches in diameter.  When galvanized strapping is used, vinyl,
rubber or plastic sheathing over the strap will be required in order to
separate the container surface from the strap  surface  and  prevent
galvanic action between these materials.  All strapping material shall have
a tensile breaking strength of not less than 4,000 pounds.



      (2)   Anchors: anchors shall consist of steel mobile home
earth type anchors.  The anchor shank shall not be less than 36 inches in
length and five-eighths inches in diameter.  Each anchor shall contain at
least two auger discs not less than four inches in diameter.  The anchor
assembly shall be capable of maintaining not less than 3,000 pounds holding
strength.  Anchors shall be capable of withstanding not less than 50 foot 
pounds of torque for connecting of straps or cable.



   (C)   The following requirements must be met for containers anchored
prior to adoption of this section;



      (1)   Galvanized strapping affixed prior to adoption of the
section must be protected from galvanic action by the use of plastic, rubber
or vinyl sheathing material.



      (2)   Preexisting strapping must connect anchors through the
legs of the container at its base to prevent floatation or movement with
cable or strapping material under a load of not less than 50 foot pounds of
applied torque.



   (D)   Containers may be secured to permanent vertical surfaces if
this can be accomplished in a fashion that will prevent the container from
being dislodged or floating.  Fastening shall be at the top portion of the
containers and at the bottom portion of the container with a connection to
the adjacent vertical surface with straps or cable under load of not less
than 50 foot pounds of torque.  Top and bottom fastenings will be fitted 90
degrees to the vertical plain of the container.  Such fastenings must
achieve 3,000 pound holding potential.  Other alternative fastening methods
may be utilized subject to the prior approval of the Fire Official as defined
in § 94.30.



(Ord. 1286, passed 7-10-97)



SPRINKLER REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION, RENOVATIONS AND ADDITIONS



§ 94.45  SPRINKLER REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.



   (A)   An automatic fire sprinkler system is required to be installed
in new multi-family construction, renovations and additions as follows:



      (1)   In all new multifamily residential structures of three
or more attached housing units.



      (2)   In any structural addition to a multi-family residential
structure of three or more attached housing units where the cost of the
addition is greater than 50% of the building's value, sprinklers are required
in the added area but not in the original part of the building.



      (3)   In the entirety of any multi-family residential
structure of three or more attached housing units which is renovated at a
cost greater than 50% of its value, or which has been damaged and is rebuilt
at a cost greater than 50% of its value.



   (B)   The required sprinkler system for three unit structures shall
meet the requirements of NFPA Standard #13R and NFPA Standard #13 for all
structures with more than three units.



   (C)   All connections shall be located on the street side of each
building, and activation of the sprinkler system shall activate both a local
building alarm and a supervisory alarm and a 24-hour certified and licensed
alarm monitoring service.



(Ord. 1328, passed 2-11-99)



§ 94.46  SPRINKLER REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW NON-RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.



   (A)   An automatic fire sprinkler system, meeting the requirements
of NFPA Standards #13, is required to be installed in non-residential
construction as follows:



      (1)   In new non-residential structures, if:



         (a)   The building has more than 2,000 square feet of
floor action; or



         (b)   20% or more of the total floor area is more than
200 feet of travel distance from the nearest access point for a fire truck; or



         (c)   The building exceeds two stories or 24 feet in
height from the average grade of the lot to the windows on the topmost
occupied floor.



      (2)   In any structural addition to a non-residential building
of more than 2,000 square feet, where the cost of the addition is greater
than 50% of the building's value, sprinklers are required in the added area
but not in the original part of the building.



      (3)   In a non-residential building of more than 2,000 square
feet which is either renovated at a cost greater than 50% of value or which
is damaged and rebuilt at a cost greater than 50% of value.



   (B)   All connections shall be located on the street side of each
building, and activation of the sprinkler system shall activate both a local
building alarm and supervisory alarm and a 24-hour certified and licensed
alarm monitoring service.



(Ord. 1328, passed 2-11-99)



§ 94.47  AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM NOT TO BE DISABLED.



   Upon the occupancy of any new, renovated or expanded structure subject
to the provisions of §§ 94.36 and 94.37, no person shall shut off or
disable such automatic fire sprinkler system and no owner or resident or such
building shall fail to prevent the shutting off or disabling of such a
system.  Provided, however, that a sprinkler system may be shut off in order
to perform maintenance work on the system during the time that qualified
maintenance personnel are on the premises performing necessary maintenance
work.  Such maintenance work shall only be conducted after notice to and
approval by the Town Fire Department.



(Ord. 1328, passed 2-11-99)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Failure to comply with this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and
any person convicted of a violation shall be punished as provided in G.S. §
14-4, to include a fine not to exceed $500.  Each day's violation of any
provision of this chapter is a separate offense.



   (B)   Each day's continuing violation shall be a separate and
distinct offense.



   (C)   The town may seek to enforce the provision of this chapter
through any appropriate equitable remedy issued from a court of competent
jurisdiction.



   (D)   The town may seek to enforce the provisions of this chapter
through any appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent
jurisdiction.



   (E)   The town may seek to enforce this chapter by using any one or
more combination of the foregoing remedies. The issuance of a civil citation
shall not preclude the issuance of a criminal summons or arrest warrant where
deemed appropriate.



(Am. Ord. 1247, passed 3-30-95; Am. Ord. 1277, passed 7-25-96)



CHAPTER 95:  GARBAGE, TRASH, AND WEEDS



Section



General Provisions



   95.01   Definitions



   95.02   Director of Public Works to administer regulations



Collection and Disposal



   95.10   Private garbage and trash collection, disposal prohibited



   95.11   Garbage to be promptly removed



   95.12   Residential roll-out carts



   95.13   Storage and collection practices



   95.14   Commercial sold waste



   95.15   Yard trash, mixed and miscellaneous collection



   95.16   Collection of household furniture and appliances



   95.17   Wet garbage



   95.18   Collection and disposal fees



   95.19   Waste pickup schedule



   95.20   Screening of solid waste containers (dumpsters)



   95.21   Collection of disaster related debris from private streets
and private property



Weeds



   95.25   Planting of Beach Vitex prohibited



 



   95.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 95.01 DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "BUILDING MATERIALS."  Any materials such as lumber, brick, plaster,
sheetrock, concrete, asphalt, shingles, wire mesh, gutters, or other items
accumulated as a result of repairs or additions to existing buildings,
construction of new buildings, demolition of existing structures or
landscaping.



   "COMMERCIAL REFUSE."  All refuse (other than ashes, dead animals,
leaves, tree trimmings, hazardous refuse, or animal litter), incidental to
the ordinary conduct of retail, wholesale, commercial or multi-family uses.



   "EXTRA PICKUP."  The unscheduled pickup of a customer's solid waste
container due to the customer's specific request or a return to the
customer's location due to the collection truck not being afforded access to
the solid waste container or the customer's failure to comply with the
provisions of this chapter.



   "GARBAGE."  All solid waste capable of being rapidly decomposed by
microorganisms, including, but not limited to, animal and vegetable waste
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food,
but excluding sewage, human waste, building materials and clean yard trash.



   "HAZARDOUS WASTE."  Materials such as cleaning fluids, crankcase oil,
cutting oils, paints, solvents, explosives, acids, caustic poisons, drugs,
chemical pesticides, radioactive products, infectious or infected materials,
offal fecal matter or any other material deemed to be “hazardous waste”
under state or federal law.



   "MIXED AND MISCELLANEOUS WASTE."  All refuse resulting from the use
and maintenance of property, regardless of the nature of the activity
thereon, except garbage, furniture, appliances and hazardous waste.



   "REFUSE."  Solid waste material consisting of garbage and mixed and
miscellaneous waste.



   "ROLL-OUT CART."  A 90-gallon container, having wheels with a hinged
lid, issued by the town for the disposal of refuse as defined herein.



   "SOLID WASTE CONTAINER."  A metal container of two cubic yards or
greater capacity capable of being emptied in the ordinary course of business
by town equipment.  Solid waste container shall include those containers
typically known as "dumpsters".



   "WET GARBAGE."  Refuse from which liquids have not been properly
separated, or drained, or refuse which has not been containerized to prevent
leakage.



   "YARD TRASH."  Leaves, grass trimmings, shrubs or shrub trimmings,
tree trimmings and other plant waste other than garbage.



(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99)



§ 95.02  DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS TO ADMINISTER REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Director of the Department of Public Works, with the
approval of the Board of Aldermen, shall be responsible for the general
supervision of the collection, removal, and disposition of all solid waste.



   (B)   The Director of the Department of Public Works, subject to the
approval of the Board of Aldermen, may prepare and publish rules for the
effective administration and enforcement of this chapter.  No person, firm,
corporation, or association shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the
rules and regulations.  Failure of the owner to pay refuse collection
charges within the time set forth on billing may result in discontinuation of
the service without prejudice to the town to recover for the service rendered
before discontinuance, and service shall not be restored until the account is
paid.



(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99)



COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL



§ 95.10  PRIVATE GARBAGE AND TRASH COLLECTION, DISPOSAL PROHIBITED.



   The town shall have the exclusive right and privilege of operating
garbage and trash collection and disposal service within the town.  No
individual, corporation, partnership, or any other entity shall be allowed to
engage in the business of collecting, hauling, transporting, and disposing of
garbage and trash in and from the town except as otherwise permitted by the
town. Provided that holders of permits from the North Carolina Alcoholic
Beverage Control Commission who are required to participate in recycling
programs mandated by G.S § 18B-1006.1 may contract directly with private
companies, entities or individuals to provide recycling services in
accordance with regulations promulgated by the North Carolina Alcoholic
Beverage Control Commission.



(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99; Am. Ord. 1561, passed 10-25-07)



§ 95.11  GARBAGE TO BE PROMPTLY REMOVED.



   No person, firm, corporation, or association maintaining a building,
lot, or other structure of whatever type shall allow refuse that is
unsightly, decayed or otherwise is a menace to health or cleanliness to
remain on any premises longer than is reasonably necessary to remove and
deposit the same in a standard receptacle.  Neither shall a person, firm,
corporation, or association allow the accumulation of trash, weeds, vines,
cans, rags, bottles, boxes, barrels, debris, garbage, or any other type of
waste material.  No material shall be left loose to blow onto public or
private property and neither shall any material be buried on any land.



(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99)



§ 95.12 RESIDENTIAL ROLL-OUT CARTS.



   (A)   All occupants of single-family and multi-family residences not
exceeding five units shall be issued roll-out carts and are required to
deposit all garbage and refuse in said roll-out carts.  In cases of
single-family and multi-family dwellings, the owner will be held responsible
for any damage to such roll-out cart; however, the occupant may be held
liable for failure to store the roll-out cart as provided in this chapter. 
No refuse shall be collected except that which is in the roll-out cart. 
Yard trash, mixed and miscellaneous waste, household furniture, and
appliances shall be picked up in accordance with §§ 95.15 and 95.16.



   (B)   Roll-out carts shall remain the property of the town. 
Roll-out carts that are damaged, destroyed, or stolen through abuse, neglect,
or improper use of the owner-users shall be replaced by the town at the
expense of the owner of the property.  Roll-out carts which are destroyed,
damaged, or stolen in the course of normal or reasonable usage or through no
abuse, neglect, or improper usage of the owner-users shall be repaired or
replaced by the town at no charge.  The roll-out carts shall not be damaged,
destroyed, defaced, or removed from the premises by any person.  Markings
and identification devices on the roll-out carts, except as placed or
specifically permitted by the town, are expressly prohibited and shall be
regarded as damage to the roll-out carts.



   (C)   Whenever there are six or more dwelling units in one building,
the building shall be required to have a solid waste container (dumpster) and
shall comply with normal commercial regulations.



(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99)



§ 95.13 STORAGE AND COLLECTION PRACTICES.



   (A)   Refuse may be stored pending collection by the town only in
roll-out carts provided by the town.  Refuse may be stored (between
scheduled collections only) in any appropriate and convenient fashion. 
Refuse may not be stored between scheduled pickups on the street side of the
building setback line of any lot adjacent to a street or alleyway.  Roll-out
carts shall be placed within three feet of the curbing, or the edge of those
streets having no curbing, by 6:00 a.m. on the day of collection and shall be
removed promptly after collection is made no later than the evening of the
day of collection.



   (B)   Hazardous waste, rocks, dirt, sod, vegetative yard waste,
paint, gasoline, oil, flammable liquids, solvents, propane tanks, hot coals
or ashes, building materials, fluorescent light bulbs, pallets, antifreeze
(ethylene glycol), aluminum cans, whole scrap tires, lead acid batteries,
motor oil filters, recyclable rigid plastic beverage containers, oyster
shells, discarded computer equipment and discarded televisions shall not be
placed in roll-out carts or dumpsters.



   (C)   Those persons not able to move the roll-out cart to the curb
as a result of physical disability may apply to the Public Works Director for
physical hardship status. The Public Works Director is authorized to
investigate and authorize exceptions for disabled or handicapped persons.



(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99; Am. Ord. 1632, passed 7-15-10; Am. Ord. 1645,
passed 12-9-10)



§ 95.14  COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE CONTAINERS.



   The Director of the Department of Public Works shall determine the
location, position, and means of access to all solid waste containers.  All
commercial establishments shall have a means of containing their solid
waste.  The containers shall be a solid waste container (dumpster) of
acceptable size and shall be serviced with the frequency necessary so as not
to exceed the capacity of the container, create an unsightly appearance, or
become a health hazard.  In unusual cases when the Director of the
Department of Public Works determines that roll-out carts may better serve
the needs of the commercial establishment and will not hamper the efficiency
of solid waste collection, a maximum of five regulation-size roll-out carts
may be allowed.  However, no roll-out cart shall be serviced more than two
times weekly.  Access to solid waste containers shall be free and clear. 
If access by town vehicles to such sold waste container is not afforded, then
no pickup will be made on that collection date, or the owner shall be charged
for an extra pickup.



(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99)



§ 95.15 YARD TRASH, MIXED AND MISCELLANEOUS COLLECTION.



   (A)   Any person desiring collection of yard trash shall arrange it
for easy handling as provided for in this section, and shall place it within
three feet of the curbing or the edge of those streets having no curbing. 
Grass, leaves and other loose items shall be placed in heavy refuse bags. 
Brush, shrubbery trimmings and limbs of less than four-foot lengths shall be
bundled or shall be placed in containers or heavy refuse bags.  Tree limbs
and other similar materials for collection shall be cut in four- to five-foot
lengths, with protruding branches trimmed and placed in an orderly, neat
manner near the curb.  In no instance shall an object be in excess of six
inches in diameter nor heavier than 75 pounds.  Objects in excess of six
inches in diameter or heavier than 75 pounds shall be treated as mixed and
miscellaneous waste.  Yard trash removal for large scale trimming of
shrubbery may be arranged by calling the Department of Public Works, and
paying the established fee.



   (B)   Corrugated board, kraft board, wooden crates, or other similar
rubbish shall be flattened and tied in bundles of a size that can be handled
by one man or placed in either plastic bags or refuse receptacles after being
flattened.



   (C)   Building materials which have accumulated from the
construction, improvement, repair, or demolition of any structure shall not
be collected by the town.  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy on new construction, or in any case all such material shall be
removed by the owner of the property or by the building contractor regularly
and no more than one cubic yard (three feet by three feet by three feet)
shall be allowed to accumulate on site at any one time.



   (D)   No collection will be made under this section except in strict
compliance with the terms of this section.



(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99)



§ 95.16  COLLECTION OF HOUSEHOLD FURNITURE AND APPLIANCES.



   (A)   Any person desiring the collection of normal household
discarded furniture and appliances which cannot otherwise be prepared for
collection pursuant to the other sections of this chapter shall request
collection by calling the Department of Public Works.



   (B)   Items for collection shall be placed at the curbside no
earlier than the day preceding the scheduled collection date as established
by the Department.  Furniture includes couches, chairs, tables, beds,
springs, mattresses, chests, and similar items.  Such items may be broken
down and bundled or neatly stacked.  Appliances include refrigerators,
stoves, washers, dryers, dishwashers, and similar items.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or have outside
any building or dwelling, any icebox, refrigerator, or any other container of
any kind which has an airtight snap lock or other device thereon, without
first removing the snap lock or other device or removing doors from the
icebox, refrigerator, or other container.



   (D)   A fee shall be charged for disposing of any and all of the
above items as prescribed by the Board of Aldermen.



(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99)



§ 95.17  WET GARBAGE.



   All garbage shall have the liquid drained off and shall be
containerized in waterproof plastic bags or other waterproof combustible
material before it is placed in the garbage receptacle.  The owners of
operations violating this section shall receive a surcharge in accordance
with the adopted fee schedule.



(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99)



§ 95.18  COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL FEES.



   For the service of collecting and disposing of solid waste, the owner
of each premises from which solid waste is collected by the town shall be
charged rates as established from time to time by the Board of Aldermen.
Adjustments to collection and disposal fees shall be applicable to the first
billing following the effective date of the modified fees. Collection and
disposal services are provided throughout the year. Therefore, a minimum
charge shall be made for all users of the system. Residential user's minimum
shall be the normal rate per roll-out container per dwelling unit. Commercial
user's minimum shall be as previously stated; but in no case less than the
one day charge for the size solid waste container used in the highest period.
The charges shall be considered to be a debt owing to the town from the owner
or occupant of the premises which uses the service. No owner or occupant of
premises within the town shall be exempt from the collection and disposal
service provided by the town. All owners or occupants of premises within the
town shall be subject to the service charges prescribed by the Board. Any
adjustment for the charges shall be made at the discretion of the Board on
the recommendation of the Town Manager.



(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99; Am. Ord. 1418, passed 7-11-02)



§ 95.19  WASTE PICKUP SCHEDULE.



   (A)   The town shall provide solid waste collection and disposal
service to each residential property within the town, subject to the
availability of funds, personnel, equipment, and materials.



   (B)   The Director of Public Works shall make all determinations
regarding the size and number of solid waste containers needed and the
frequency of collection necessary at each commercial property to provide
sanitary collection and disposal service in the most efficient and effective
manner.  Commercial properties may request service according to the approved
refuse rate schedule.  Owners of commercial properties, or their authorized
agents, may request changes in frequency of collection and disposal service
or changes in the number or size of solid waste containers at their location
bi-monthly on the even numbered months; and, if approved by the Director of
Public Works, such changes shall become effective within five days of the
date of the request.



(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99)



§ 95.20  SCREENING OF SOLID WASTE CONTAINERS (DUMPSTERS).



   (A)   All solid waste containers will be screened from public view
by a fence constructed in accordance with standards as specified herein on at
least three sides of the solid waste container and with a height of at least
five feet.



   (B)   All solid waste containers shall be located on the property
owner’s land and shall be placed on a minimum six-inch thick concrete pad a
minimum of 14 feet wide by 14 feet deep for each solid waste container. 
Screening shall not be placed so as to encroach upon the 14-foot x 14-foot
dumpster pad.



   (C)   No other containers, materials, tools, and the like shall be
placed on the 14-foot by 14-foot dumpster pad.  Articles found on the
dumpster pad will be considered trash or garbage and may be disposed of in
accordance with this code or required to be promptly removed.



   (D)   Required screens are not storage racks and shall be kept
clean, neat and orderly at all times. No trash is allowed outside the
screened enclosure.



   (E)   If gates are provided, there shall be two a minimum of six
feet wide on each side creating a minimum clear opening 12 feet wide.  Gates
shall be engineered without a central post and to carry all the gate
load/weight without the assistance of wheels or other supporting devices. 
Gates shall be diagonally braced and easily opened and closed.  If gates are
provided with locks, said locks shall remain unlocked between the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.



   (F)   Property owners presently using solid waste containers shall
have one year from the date of the adoption of this section to come into
compliance with the screening requirements set forth herein.



(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99)



§ 95.21  COLLECTION OF DISASTER RELATED DEBRIS FROM PRIVATE STREETS AND
PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   The town shall not be responsible for the collection or removal of
debris from private streets or private property resulting from a disaster
that causes the town to declare a state of emergency under the provisions of
Chapter 93 of the Town Code. Private property owners or homeowner
associations shall be responsible for such debris removal. Such debris shall
be removed either to the disposal location designated by the town or to the
nearest public right- of-way as designated by the town. The Town Manager or
his or her designee shall maintain a list of private streets affected by this
section.



(Ord. 1550, passed 9-27-07)



WEEDS



§ 95.25 PLANTING OF BEACH VITEX PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or cause to be planted
Beach Vitex (Vitex rotundifolia) on any property located within the town
limits.



(Ord. 1584, passed 9-25-08; Am. Ord. 1710, passed 5-9-13)



§ 95.99 PENALTY.



   (A)   A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute
a misdemeanor as provided by G.S. § 14-4 and shall be punishable by a fine
not to exceed $100.



   (B)   A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall subject
the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $50 to be recovered by the
town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the
penalty within 10 days after being cited for a violation of this chapter.



   (C)   A violation of this chapter may be enforced by an appropriate
equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (D)   Each day's continuing violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be a separate and distinct offense.



(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99)



CHAPTER 96:  HEALTH AND SANITATION



Section



   96.01   General provisions



   96.02   Food establishments



   96.03   Human wastes



   96.04   Stagnant water



   96.05   Temporary toilet facilities



 



   96.99   Penalty



§ 96.01  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   No person shall throw, place, or deposit any garbage or trash in any
street, public place or private property within the town limits, except in
garbage containers or garbage vehicles as provided in this chapter or Chapter
95.



('72 Code, § 9-11)  (Ord., passed 12-13-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.02  FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS.



   All persons selling food of any kind or serving prepared meals shall
comply with all requirements of the state Board of Health pertaining thereto.



('72 Code, § 9-11.1)  (Ord., passed 12-13-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.03  HUMAN WASTES.



   No person shall urinate or deposit any human waste of any kind on any
street, lot, or premises except in approved sanitary facilities.



('72 Code, § 9-11.2)  (Ord., passed 12-13-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.04  STAGNANT WATER.



   No person or occupant of any property shall allow stagnant water to
accumulate or remain in cellars or anywhere on his property.



('72 Code, § 9-11.3)  (Ord., passed 12-13-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.05  TEMPORARY TOILET FACILITIES.



   No temporary toilet facilities shall be permitted in the town except in
the case of public necessity as declared by the town, town approved special
events or permitted construction sites.



(Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99; Am. Ord. 1459, passed 5-27-04)



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of § 96.03 shall be
subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $100 to be recovered by the town
in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the
penalty within 15 days after having been cited for violation of the
ordinance. In accordance with G.S. § 160A-175(b), a violation of the section
enumerated herein shall not be subject to the penalty provisions of G.S. §
14-4 and shall not be considered a breach of the penal laws of the state.



   (B)   A violation of any remaining section of this chapter is a
misdemeanor punishable in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 14-4. The
fine for such violation shall not exceed $500.



   (C)   A violation of any remaining section of this chapter shall
subject the offender to a civil penalty of $100. If any person fails to pay a
civil penalty within 15 days after being cited for a violation, the town may
seek to recover the penalty in a civil action in the nature of debt.



   (D)   The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by an
appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (E)   Each day’s continuing violation of any provisions of this
chapter shall be a separate and distinct offense.



('72 Code, § 9-11.4)  (Ord., passed 12-13-79; Am. Ord. 1341, passed
7-29-99; Am. Ord. 1346, passed 8-26-99; Am. Ord. 1357, passed 4-13-00; Am.
Ord. 1423,passed 8-22-02; Am. Ord. 1711, passed 6-13-13)



CHAPTER 97:  NOISE AND PUBLIC NUISANCES




Section




   97.01   Loud, disturbing noises generally



   97.02   Noises declared unreasonably loud and disturbing



   97.03   [Reserved]



   97.04   Exceptions



   97.05   Non-resident owner and occupant responsibility



   97.06   Public nuisances enumerated



   97.07   Notice and order to abate nuisance



   97.08   Appeal



   97.09   Abatement of nuisance by town



   97.10   Charges for abatement by town; lien



   97.11   Definitions



   97.12   Placement of graffiti prohibited



 



   97.99   Penalty



§ 97.01  LOUD, DISTURBING NOISES GENERALLY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to create or
assist in creating any unreasonably loud, disturbing sound levels in the
town, taking into consideration volume, duration, frequency and other
characteristics of the sound.



('72 Code, § 12-1) (Ord. 1094, passed 5-11-89)



§ 97.02  NOISES DECLARED UNREASONABLY LOUD AND DISTURBING.



   The following activities, among others, are hereby declared to be
unreasonably loud, disturbing sound levels, but said enumeration shall not be
deemed to be exclusive:



   (A)   The playing of any musical instrument or electronic sound
amplification equipment in such manner or with such volume, particularly
during hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., such that a reasonably prudent
person would recognize as likely to unreasonably disturb persons in the
vicinity.



   (B)   The keeping of any animal or bird which makes frequent or long
continued sounds, such that a reasonably prudent person would recognize as
likely to unreasonably disturb persons in the vicinity.



   (C)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle, vehicle, boat, go-cart,
mini bike, all-terrain vehicle or other device powered by an internal
combustion engine so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner as to create
unreasonably loud, disturbing sounds.



   (D)   The operating of any garage or service station in any
residential area so as to cause unreasonably loud, disturbing sounds to be
emitted between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day.



   (E)   The creation of unreasonably loud, disturbing sound levels
adjacent to any school, educational facility, church or court during normal
operating hours, or within 150 feet of any hospital, which a reasonably
prudent person would recognize as likely to unreasonably interfere with the
working of such institutions, provided conspicuous signs are displayed
indicating that such area is a school, educational facility, church, court or
hospital area.



   (F)   The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration,
or repair of any building or structure of any kind in a residential area or
business district other than between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
Monday through Saturday, except in the case of emergency repairs to existing
structures not then under construction and in the case of urgent necessity in
the interest of public safety, and then only with the prior consent of the
Town Manager or his or her designee. Provided that such activities shall be
deemed unreasonably loud and disturbing noises for all of Memorial Day,
Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and New Year’s
Day when such days fall on a day other than Sunday.



   (G)   The use of any electronic sound amplification equipment for
advertising or solicitation purposes, except with an appropriate permit.



('72 Code, § 12-2) (Ord. 1094, passed 5-11-89; Am. Ord. 1495, passed 2-9-06;
Am. Ord. 1748, passed 8-13-15)



§ 97.03  [RESERVED].



§ 97.04  EXCEPTIONS.



   The following are excepted from the application of this chapter:



   (A)   Construction activity performed by an agency of government
provided that all equipment is operated in accordance with manufacturer's
specifications and is equipped with all noise-reducing equipment in proper
condition;



   (B)   Sound or noise of safety signals, warning devices, emergency
pressure relief valves and church bells;



   (C)   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when
responding to any emergency call or acting in time of emergency;



   (D)   Sound or noise emanating from properly equipped aircraft
operated in accordance with applicable federal rules and regulations;



   (E)   Sound or noise from lawful fireworks;



   (F)   Lawn mowers and agricultural equipment operated between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. when operated in accordance with
manufacturer's specifications and with all standard noise-reducing equipment
in place and proper condition;



   (G)   Musical accompaniment to parades or military ceremonies;



   (H)   Boats, ships, barges and other vessels engaged in interstate
commerce;



   (I)   Sounds emanating from regularly scheduled athletic events at
town parks or facilities and school athletic facilities.



('72 Code, § 12-4) (Ord. 1094, passed 5-11-89; Am. Ord. 1430, passed
10-24-02; Am. Ord. 1465, passed 8-12-04)



§ 97.05  NON-RESIDENT OWNER AND OCCUPANT RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   A non-resident owner of any premises subject to this chapter
shall be responsible and liable for any actions by the tenants or occupants
of the premises that constitute second or subsequent violations of this
chapter; provided that no non-resident owner shall be liable unless notified
of first or previous violations of the chapter; and further provided that the
first or previous violations shall have occurred within the previous 24-month
period. Notice of first or previous violations shall be effected by mailing a
copy of the citation to the non-resident owner by registered or certified
mail, return receipt requested.  No non-resident owner may be subjected to
criminal liability by the application of this section, but shall be subject
to civil penalties and equitable relief as provided hereinafter. This section
shall in no way relieve any tenant or occupant from responsibility for
violations of this chapter.



   (B)   The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible and
liable for any actions of guests or invitees on the premises that violate
this chapter; provided that the occupant shall have been actually or
constructively present at the time of the violation.



('72 Code, § 12-5) (Ord. 1094, passed 5-11-89)



§ 97.06  PUBLIC NUISANCES ENUMERATED.



   (A)   The existence of any of the following conditions on any vacant
lot or other parcel of land within the corporate limits whether on public or
private property is hereby declared to be dangerous and prejudicial to the
public health or safety and to constitute a public nuisance:



      (1)   The uncontrolled growth of weeds or grass to a height of
12 inches or more;



      (2)   Any accumulation of organic or inorganic matter that is
offensive by virtue of odors or vapors or which is inhabited by rats, mice,
snakes, or vermin of any kind which is or may be dangerous or prejudicial to
the public health;



      (3)   Any accumulation of trash, garbage or other waste not in
compliance with the provisions of Chapter 95;



      (4)   Any accumulation of hazardous refuse or concentration of
combustible items such as mattresses, boxes, paper, automobile tires, old
clothes, or any other combustible materials or objects of a like nature;



      (5)   Open wells;



      (6)   Any accumulation of stagnant water causing or
threatening to cause the inhabitation thereof by mosquitoes;



      (7)   The open storage of any item detrimental to the public
health or safety including, but not limited to, any furniture, appliance, ice
box, stove, glass, building material or building rubbish;



      (8)   Any condition detrimental to the public health which
violates the rules and regulations of the New Hanover County Health
Department;



      (9)   The presence of any debris from the demolition of any
structure on the property, including but not limited to, partially demolished
walls, foundations, basements, building materials and rubbish, after the
cessation of all active demolition activity on the property;



      (10)   Placing or allowing to be placed anything on property
owned or legally occupied by another without the express permission of the
owner or occupant of such property;



      (11)   Going upon property owned or legally occupied by
another after having been told not to do so by the owner or occupant of such
property; and



      (12)   The presence of Beach Vitex (Vitex rotundifolia) on any
vacant lot or other parcel of land within the town limits.



      (13)   The placement of graffiti upon the surface of any
public or private property.



   (B)   When any of the following conditions exist on a public
right-of-way between the property line and the curb or edge of the roadway
and threatens, limits, impairs or creates a hazard to the use of the
right-of-way by vehicles or pedestrians, such a condition is declared to be
dangerous and prejudicial to the public health or safety and to constitute a
severe nuisance:



      (1)   Any accumulation of animal or organic matter that is
offensive by virtue of odors or which is inhabited by rats, mice, snakes or
vermin which may be dangerous to the public health.



      (2)   Any accumulation of trash, garbage or other waste not in
compliance with the provisions of Chapter 95.



      (3)   Any accumulation of hazardous refuse or concentration of
combustible items such as mattresses, boxes, paper, housewares, tires,
clothes or furniture.



      (4)   Any accumulation of appliances, glass, building
materials, demolition materials or rubbish.



(Ord. 1710, passed 5-9-13; Am. Ord. 1766, passed 5-11-17)  Penalty, see §
97.99



§ 97.07  NOTICE AND ORDER TO ABATE NUISANCE.



   (A)   For purposes of this subchapter, the respondent is the person
in possession of the property where a public nuisance (as described in §
97.06) is located, as well as the owner of such property, if different from
the former.



   (B)   Upon determination by the Town Manager or his or her designee
(herein “Manager”) that there exists on any property conditions
constituting a public nuisance (as described in § 97.06), the Manager shall
notify the respondent in writing sent by certified mail return receipt
requested or by commercial delivery service such as FedEx of such conditions
and shall order the abatement thereof within 15 days of the date of such
notice. If after due diligence the respondent’s correct address cannot be
determined, then the required notice shall published once in a newspaper
qualified for legal advertising and circulated in New Hanover County and
shall be posted conspicuously on the offending property. The notice shall
order the abatement of the nuisance within 15 days of the publication of the
notice.



   (C)   Upon determination by the Manager that there exists on the
public right-of-way conditions constituting a severe nuisance, the Manager
shall notify the owner of the abutting property of such conditions and shall
order the abatement thereof within 24 hours of such notice. This notice
shall, if feasible, be given by telephone. Whether or not the owner is
reached by telephone, notice shall be mailed by first class mail to his or
her last known address unless he or she or his or her agent receives this
notice in person.



(Ord. 1710, passed 5-9-13) Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.08  APPEAL.



   (A)   At any time before the expiration of the 15 days’ abatement
period specified in § 97.07(B), the respondent may request a hearing before
the Town Manager to appeal the finding of the Manager’s designee that a
public nuisance as defined in § 97.06 exists on the premises. Upon
completion of the hearing, the Town Manager shall consider the evidence
before him or her and shall either revoke the initial order, issue a final
order which differs from the initial order, or reinstate the initial order as
a final abatement order.



   (B)   If the city has caused the abatement of a severe nuisance as
defined in § 97.07(C), at any time within 30 days of the property owner’s
receipt of a statement of charges from the city for the removal of the
conditions, the property owner may request a hearing before the Town Manager
to appeal the charges and the finding of the Manager’s designee that a
severe nuisance existed on the right-of-way. Upon completion of the hearing,
the Town Manager shall consider the evidence before him or her and shall
either uphold, modify or revoke the charges resulting from the abatement by
the town.



   (C)   Any request for a hearing pursuant to this section must be in
writing and must be filed in the office of the Town Manager. The Town Manager
shall fix a time for the hearing, and the initial abatement order or the
accrual of interest on the statement of charges shall be temporarily
suspended pending such hearing. The hearing must be held by the Town Manager
within 31 calendar days following receipt of the request for hearing by the
office of the Town Manager. At the hearing, the individual affected by the
order shall be given the opportunity to present evidence to refute the
findings which supported the abatement order or the removal of the nuisance
condition.



(Ord. 1710, passed 5-9-13)



§ 97.09  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY TOWN.



   Upon the occurrence of any of the following conditions:



   (A)   A hearing is requested and held under § 97.08 above resulting
in either a final order with modifications or the reinstatement of the
initial order as final order, and such order is not complied with within 15
days from adjournment of the hearing;



   (B)   No hearing is requested or held, and the respondent having
been ordered to abate such public nuisance fails, neglects or refuses to
abate or remove the condition constituting the nuisance within 15 days from
the date of said order; or



   (C)   The property owner fails to abate conditions constituting a
severe nuisance within ten days of notification of the owner of such
conditions; the Manager shall cause the condition to be removed or otherwise
remedied by having employees of the city go upon the premises and remove or
otherwise abate such nuisance.



(Ord. 1710, passed 5-9-13)



§ 97.10  CHARGES FOR ABATEMENT BY TOWN; LIEN.



   (A)   The actual cost incurred by the city in removing or otherwise
remedying a public nuisance pursuant to § 97.07 shall be charged to the
owner of the offending property and shall be a lien upon the land or premises
where the public nuisance existed and shall be collected as unpaid taxes, as
provided in G.S. § 160A-193.



   (B)   In the event charges for the removal or abatement of a public
nuisance are not paid within 30 days after the receipt of a statement of
charges from the town, such charges shall bear interest at the rate of 8% per
annum until paid.



(Ord. 1710, passed 5-9-13)



§ 97.11  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   "GRAFFITI." Graffiti means any inscription, word, writing, drawing,
figure, mark of paint, ink, chalk, dye or other similar substance, etching,
engraving or other defacement (collectively "defacement") by a graffiti
implement or chalk or by the application of any material, adhesive label,
paper, fabric or other matter (collectively "matter") with adhesive or other
substance which is intended to make the application of the matter permanent
or difficult to remove, on public or private property. Graffiti does not
include temporary, easily removable chalks or other water soluble markings
which are used in connection with traditional children's activities such as
drawings of bases for ball games, hopscotch and similar activities, nor does
it include temporary, easily removable markings used in connection with any
lawful business or public purpose or activity and markings used to denote the
location of underground utility infrastructure and those used in conjunction
with establishing survey control data and location points by survey crews.



   "OWNER." Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every
mortgagee of record.



(Ord. 1766, passed 5-11-17)



§ 97.12  PLACEMENT OF GRAFFITI PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place graffiti upon the surface
of any public or private property.



(Ord. 1766, passed 5-11-17)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor as provided by G.S.
§ 14-4 and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00.



   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided herein, a violation of
the provisions of this chapter shall subject the offender to the following
civil penalties:



         (a)   For the first violation, a civil penalty of
$100.00.



         (b)   For the second violation, a civil penalty of
$250.00.



         (c)   For the third and any subsequent violation, a
civil penalty of $500.00.



      (2)   If any person fails to pay a civil penalty within 15
days after being cited for a violation, the town may seek to recover the
penalty in a civil action in the nature of debt.



   (C)   The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by an
appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (D)   Each day's continuing violation of any provisions of this
chapter shall be a separate and distinct offense.



   (E)   A violation of § 97.12 shall subject the offender(s) to a
civil penalty in the amount of $250.00 for the first offense; $500 for the
second offense; $750.00 for the third offense; and $1,000.00 for the fourth
and each subsequent offense.



   (F)   In addition to or in lieu of civil penalties or other
remedies, a violation of § 97.12 shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person
convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined not less than $250.00
for a first offense and $500.00 for a second or subsequent offense. In
addition to any other remedy, the court shall order any person convicted of a
violation of § 97.12 to make restitution to the victim and/or to the Town of
Wrightsville Beach for the damage or loss suffered by the victim and/or to
the Town of Wrightsville Beach as a result of the offense. The court may
determine the amount, terms, and conditions of the restitution.



(Ord. 1710, passed 5-9-13; Am. Ord. 1766, passed 5-11-17)



CHAPTER 98:  SPECIAL EVENTS, PARADES, DEMONSTRATIONS, PICKETING, PUBLIC BEACH



Section



   98.01   Purpose; scope and intent



   98.02   Definitions



   98.03   Permit required



   98.04   Standards for all special events



   98.05   Alternate standards for expressive activities



   98.06   Notice to other officials



   98.07   Picketing regulations



   98.08   Parade regulations



   98.09   Public beach regulations



   98.10   Interference with demonstrations and the like prohibited



   98.11   Police protection



   98.12   Weapons



   98.13   Revocation of permit



   98.14   Exemptions



   98.15   Appeals



 



   98.99   Penalty



§ 98.01  PURPOSE; SCOPE AND INTENT.



   (A)   Recognizing that special events can enhance the quality of
life for residents and visitors alike, it is the purpose of the Board of
Aldermen to establish a structured process for permitting the use of public
facilities and the staging of outdoor special events conducted by the private
sector using public property, facilities or services, or to conduct events
that occupy, impact or consume public resources as a result of the
congregation of people. This chapter is intended to insure that the town and
its residents and visitors will have adequate advance notice of a proposed
special event and the cooperation of the organizers in order to properly plan
the municipal services, such as security, sanitation and traffic control that
are required for such an event.



   (B)   It is the intent of the Board of Aldermen to protect the
rights of its citizens to engage in protected free speech expressive
activities and yet allow for reasonable, time, place and manner regulation of
those activities within the overall context of rationally regulating special
events that have an impact upon public facilities and services.



(Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10)



§ 98.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “BLOCK.” That portion of any street or public beach lying between
its intersections with other streets. On Causeway Drive and the Salisbury
Street causeway a block shall be 300' segments identified by the Special
Events Coordinator.



   “EXPRESSIVE ACTIVITIES.” Conduct, the sole or principal object of
which is the expression, dissemination or communication by verbal, visual,
literary or auditory means of opinion, views or ideas and for which no fee or
donation is charged or required as a condition of participation in or
attendance at such activity. It includes public oratory, distribution of
literature, and picketing. “EXPRESSIVE ACTIVITIES” do not include
commercial activities set out in § 98.09(D).



   “GROUP DEMONSTRATION.” Any assembly together or concert of action
between or among two or more persons for the purpose of protesting any matter
or of making known any position or promotion of the persons, or of or on
behalf of any organization or class of persons, or for the purpose of
attracting attention of the assembly.



   “PARADE.” Any assemblage of two or more persons participating in or
operating any vehicle in any march, ceremony, show, exhibition, or procession
of any kind in or upon the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks, or other
public grounds or places.



   “PERSON.” Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership,
association, or other organization, whether formal or informal.



   “PICKET LINE.” Any two or more persons formed together for the
purpose of making known any position or promotion of the persons, or on
behalf of any organization or class of persons.



   “PICKETING.” The act of participating in or conducting a picket
line.



   “PUBLIC BEACH.” The ocean beach as defined in G.S. § 77-20(e) and
any additional area lying between the 1939 line, as defined in § 155.002,
and the Atlantic Ocean.



   “SMALL GROUPS.” Any formation, procession or assembly of three or
fewer persons for a common purpose.



   “SPECIAL EVENT.”



      (1)   A planned outdoor event which involves:



         (a)   The gathering of a group of persons for a common
purpose, design or goal upon public property or the public beach; or



         (b)   An expressive activity by an individual or a group
upon public property or the public beach.



      (2)   “SPECIAL EVENTS” shall include, but not be limited
to, parades, group demonstrations, and picketing.



   “SPECIAL EVENTS COORDINATOR.” The person designated by the Town
Manager to make decisions regarding special events that do not require
approval of the Board of Aldermen.



   “TEMPORARY STRUCTURE.” Any moveable shelter or enclosure, including
a tent, which is intended to provide protection from the elements for
persons, stored materials, vehicles, or other items and for which no building
permit is required.



   “WATER-BASED ACTIVITY.” Those activities that take place, in whole
or in significant part, in the water and that would be materially altered or
impaired without the ability to perform the activity in the water, for
example, boating, surfing, kite boarding, wake boarding, water-skiing, wind
surfing, kayaking, sailing, and triathlons.



(Am. Ord. 1430, passed 10-24-02; Am. Ord. 1454, passed 1-8-04; Am. Ord. 1465,
passed 8-12-04; Am. Ord. 1547, passed 8-23-07; Am. Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10;
Am. Ord. 1640, passed 8-12-10)



§ 98.03  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall have, hold, sponsor, or cause to be had, held,
or sponsored any special event of any nature or for any reason without having
first applied to the town and received a permit to hold the event except as
provided in § 98.14.



   (B)   Special event permits shall not be issued for “for-profit”
events except in connection with town sponsored events or the North Carolina
Holiday Flotilla. A non-profit sponsor may include up to five for-profit
vendors as part of a special event provided the vendor’s activities are
clearly incidental and subordinate to the special event being held by the
sponsor. The North Carolina Holiday Flotilla may include more than five
for-profit vendors to be determined at such time as a special event permit is
issued.



   (C)   No special event shall be conducted so as to:



      (1)   Substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic at or contiguous to its location or route;



      (2)   Constitute a substantial hazard to the public safety or
materially interfere with or endanger the public peace or rights of residents
to the quiet and peaceful enjoyment of their property or otherwise create a
nuisance; or



      (3)   Violate the noise ordinance found in Chapter 97 of this
code or the health and sanitation ordinance found in Chapter 96 of this code.



   (D)   All applications for a special event permit must be made
through the Special Events Coordinator on forms provided by the town. The
Special Events Coordinator may issue or deny permits as required by this
chapter when less than 200 persons shall be in attendance. All other permits
required by this chapter shall be issued or denied by the Board of Aldermen.
The required application must be completed in its entirety. No application
shall be considered submitted until all information required by the
application form has been provided. Such application forms shall include at a
minimum the following information:



      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the sponsor
for the event. If the sponsor is not an individual, the applicant shall
provide the name and address of the individual within the sponsoring
organization or corporation who will be responsible for the special event.
For special events governed by § 98.05, only the information required by §
98.05 is required.



      (2)   A narrative describing the special event in detail;



      (3)   The date, hours, and location requested. Special events
occurring on multiple successive days shall require a separate and complete
application for each day of the event;



      (4)   The number of persons estimated to be in attendance at
the special event including organizers, participants, and spectators;



      (5)   Information on requested street closings;



      (6)   Information on availability of parking at the proposed
location;



      (7)   Information on proposed temporary signs and banners,
provided such signs and banners comply with § 155.072(I) and (L). The
content of signs and banners for expressive activities shall not be required;



      (8)   Information on utility services including electrical
power, water, restroom facilities, and garbage collection and disposal;



      (9)   An agreement to save and keep the town free and harmless
from any and all loss or damages or claims for damages, including attorney's
fees and litigation costs, arising from or out of the special event;



      (10)   A sketch plan detailing the location of any temporary
structures and the location of the proposed activity. Such plan must identify
existing structures on the property;



      (11)   Information on the location and direction of noise
emanating devices along with proposed level, frequency, and duration;



      (12)   An agreement to comply with all municipal ordinances,
rules, regulations, and other applicable laws; and



      (13)   Information concerning donation solicitations or the
sales of any types of souvenirs, t-shirts, food, drinks or other products on
public property.



   (E)   The application for a special event permit shall include the
applicable permit fee as prescribed in the schedule of fees.



   (F)   (1)   Applications for special event permits requiring
approval by the Special Events Coordinator shall be submitted at least five
business days prior to the date of the planned event. The Town Manager shall
have the authority to reduce the five business day approval period provided
good cause is shown. Applications for special event permits requiring
approval by the Board of Aldermen shall be submitted at least 60 days in
advance of the scheduled event and shall be reviewed by the town and placed
on the Board of Aldermen meeting agenda.



      (2)   For application deadlines applicable to special events
conducted solely for the purpose of engaging in expressive activities, see §
98.05.



   (G)   For those applications requiring approval by the Board of
Aldermen, the Board of Aldermen shall approve, approve with modifications or
conditions, or deny such application in accordance with the applicable
standards set forth in this chapter.



   (H)   For those applications requiring approval by the Special
Events Coordinator, the Coordinator shall approve, approve with modifications
or conditions, or deny such application in accordance with the applicable
standards set forth in this chapter.



   (I)   Multiple events. Application can be made for repeated,
multiple or periodic special events not held on successive days under the
following procedure:



      (1)   Each day an event occurs shall be considered a separate
event.



      (2)   A special event permit can cover up to four
substantially identical special events held on different non-successive days
by the same permittee.



      (3)   A person holding a permit for a repeated, multiple or
periodic event or any person affiliated with such person may not apply for a
new permit for the same or similar special event more than 30 days prior to
the last day for which that permit has been issued; and



      (4)   The schedule of fees may establish a fee for multiple
events that is other than a separate fee for each event. In the absence of a
specific fee schedule for multiple events, the applicable fee shall be
charged for each event.



('72 Code, § l4-6) (Am. Ord. 1430, passed 10-24-02; Am. Ord. 1465, passed
8-12-04; Am. Ord. 1524, passed 10-12-06; Am. Ord. 1547, passed 8-23-07; Am.
Ord. 1583, passed 8-28-08; Am. Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10; Am. Ord. 1682,
passed 6-14-12; Am. Ord. 1744, passed 5-7-15)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.04  STANDARDS FOR ALL SPECIAL EVENTS.



   These standards apply to all special events requiring a permit, unless
expressly provided otherwise. The Special Events Coordinator or Board of
Aldermen shall issue a permit if it finds that:



   (A)   The special event occurs between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. except Easter sunrise services which shall be permitted before
8:00 a.m. If the Special Events Coordinator or Board of Aldermen finds that
the proposed event has the potential to create a situation that a reasonably
prudent person would recognize as likely to unreasonably disturb persons in
the vicinity, then the Board of Aldermen or Special Events Coordinator may
modify the permitted hours of operation for such special event. A decision of
the Board of Aldermen in such matter is final. A decision of the Special
Events Coordinator in such matter may be appealed in writing to the Board of
Aldermen in accordance with § 98.15.



   (B)   The special event will not be held at the same time and place
as another event for which a special event permit has previously been issued;



   (C)   The conduct of the special event will not substantially
interrupt the safe and orderly movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic at
or contiguous to its location;



   (D)   The conduct of the special event will not require the
diversion of so great a number of police officers of the town that adequate
police protection cannot be provided to the remainder of the town;



   (E)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at
assembly points for or at the location of the special event will not
substantially interfere with the town's ability to provide adequate fire,
police and emergency services;



   (F)   Special event permits shall not be issued for “for-profit”
events except in connection with town sponsored events or activities
associated with the North Carolina Holiday Flotilla;



   (G)   Merchandise sales or donation solicitations by a person or
group for the purpose of raising money for a charity or non-profit group may
only be conducted on public property with an approved special event permit.
Information concerning non-profit vending activities must be included in the
special event permit application;



   (H)   The special event will comply with the noise ordinance found
in Chapter 97 of this code;



   (I)   Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are
or will be made available in or adjacent to any public assembly areas;



   (J)   There are sufficient parking places to accommodate the number
of vehicles reasonably expected; and



   (K)   The location and duration of the display of signs may be
limited by permit condition to avoid sign congestion.



(Am. Ord. 1430, passed 10-24-02; Am. Ord. 1465, passed 8-12-04; Am. Ord.
1547, passed 8-23-07; Am. Ord. 1583, passed 8-28-08; Am. Ord. 1600, passed
5-28-09; Am. Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.05  ALTERNATE STANDARDS FOR EXPRESSIVE ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   Expressive activities for groups larger than 15 persons. For
all special events conducted for the sole purpose of engaging in expressive
activities by groups larger than 15 persons, to include church services, the
person in charge of the activity must apply for and receive a special events
permit unless expressly exempt under  § 98.09. The following alternate
requirements and standards are applicable to the permit application:



      (1)   A written application for a permit shall be filed not
less than 24 hours and not greater than 21 days in advance of the parade,
picket line, group demonstration, or other expressive activity;



      (2)   The application shall specify the time and place for the
commencement of any picket line and the time, place, route, and duration of
any parade, group demonstration, or other expressive activity;



      (3)   The application shall specify whether or not minors
below the age of 18 years will be permitted to participate;



      (4)   The application shall specify the number of persons
estimated to be in attendance including organizers, participants and
spectators;



      (5)   The application shall specify a person or persons (not
to exceed three) in charge of the activity. At least one of those persons
identified shall be required to accompany the parade, picket line, group
demonstration or other expressive activity at all times and shall carry the
permit with him or her at that time. The permit shall not be valid in the
possession of any other person. No other identifications are required; and



      (6)   No application or fee or permit fee shall be charged for
special events covered by this section.



   (B)   Special events covered by this division(A) shall comply with
the standards and regulations set forth in §§ 98.04 (A), (B), (C), (D),
(E), (H), (I), (J), and (K), 98.07, 98.08 and 98.09, and such standards and
regulations shall be specified on the permit or otherwise provided to the
person to whom the permit is issued. The Special Events Coordinator shall
issue a special events permit under this division (A) upon receipt of a
complete application and upon finding that the proposed special event meets
all applicable standards.



   (C)   Expressive activities for groups larger than three, but fewer
than 16, wishing to engage in a special event consisting of expressive
activities shall notify the Special Events Coordinator prior to engaging in
such activity. The person providing the notice shall designate the area and
time frame for engaging in a special event consisting of expressive
activities and the number of persons expected to engage in the activity. If
the Special Events Coordinator is not available, such individual or small
group shall notify the fire department. Any expressive activity on the public
beach shall be limited to an area meeting the requirements of § 98.09(B). A
group larger than three, but fewer than 16, shall not engage in any special
event in an area and at any time already authorized for another special
event. The person giving notice shall be issued a receipt indicating the
date,  time, area and number of participants.



(Am. Ord. 1430, passed 10-24-02; Am. Ord. 1547, passed 8-23-07; Am. Ord.
1616, passed 1-14-10; Am. Ord. 1640, passed 8-12-10)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.06  NOTICE TO OTHER OFFICIALS.



   Immediately upon the issuance of a parade, picket line or group
demonstration permit, the Special Events Coordinator shall send a copy
thereof to the following:



   (A)   The Town Manager;



   (B)   The Town Attorney;



   (C)   The Police Chief;



   (D)   The Fire Chief;



   (E)   The Director of the Department of Public Works; and



   (F)   The manager or responsible head of each public transportation
utility, the regular routes of whose vehicles will be affected by the route
of the proposed parade or public assembly.



(Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10)



§ 98.07  PICKETING REGULATIONS.



   To the extent not inconsistent with the provisions of this section, the
requirements and standards set forth elsewhere in this chapter also apply and
must be satisfied prior to the issuance of a special events permit for
picketing. Where the provisions of this section conflict with other
provisions in this chapter, the provisions of this section shall govern.
Picket lines and picketing shall be subject to the following additional
regulations:



   (A)   Picketing may be conducted only on the sidewalks or other
areas reserved for pedestrian movement, and may not be conducted on the
portion of a street used primarily for vehicular traffic;



   (B)   Not more than three pickets promoting the same objective shall
be permitted to use either of the two sidewalks within a single block at any
time. However, if pickets promoting different objectives desire to use
sidewalks in the same block for picketing and the use would result in the
presence of more than three pickets thereon, the Special Events Coordinator
shall allot time to each group of pickets for the use of the sidewalks on an
equitable basis, but each group shall be permitted to picket subject to the
provisions of this section at least one hour of every two hour period;



   (C)   Pickets may carry written or printed placards or signs not
exceeding two feet in width and two feet in length promoting the objective
for which the picketing is done; provided, the words used are not profane or
vulgar in nature, or would not tend to produce violence;



   (D)   Pickets must march in single file and not abreast and must not
march closer together than 15 feet, except in passing one another.



(Am. Ord. 1430, passed 10-24-02; Am. Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10)  Penalty,
see § 98.99



§ 98.08  PARADE REGULATIONS.



   To the extent not inconsistent with the provisions of this section, the
requirements and standards set forth elsewhere in this chapter also apply and
must be satisfied prior to the issuance of the requested permit. Where the
provisions of this section conflict with other provisions in this chapter,
the provisions of this section shall govern. Parades shall be subject to the
following additional regulations:



   (A)   No parade or part thereof may be conducted on the streets of
the town between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m., Monday through Friday;



   (B)   No more than one parade may be conducted within the town at
any one time;



   (C)   Every parade shall follow a route approved by the Town
Manager. The Town Manager shall approve no route which is incompatible with
the standards in § 98.04. The Town Manager’s disapproval of a proposed
route may be appealed to the Board of Aldermen; and



   (D)   No one participating in a parade or proceeding along the route
of a parade shall distribute therefrom any candy, cigarettes, prizes or
favors of any kind.



(Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.09  PUBLIC BEACH REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Board of Aldermen has made the following findings:



      (1)   That the public beach is a public area which is open and
accessible to all persons;



      (2)   That the public beach is maintained and subjected to
reasonable regulation by the town in order to promote the health, safety,
welfare and morals of all persons using the beach;



      (3)   That the public beach provides a unique area for all
persons to pursue peaceful relaxation and quiet enjoyment in a reasonable
manner;



      (4)   That the public beach has been and continues to be a
unique public recreation area, different in respect to all other public areas
within the municipality;



      (5)   That it is desirable and necessary to preserve the
unique nature of the public beaches and to protect all persons who utilize
the beaches from undue annoyance, disturbance and inconvenience.



   (B)   Special events regulated by this chapter and taking place in
areas defined as “public beaches” are limited to an area designated on
the permit no greater than 100 feet in width measured parallel to the
shoreline. The area is further limited to the unvegetated dry sand beach
except for water-based activities which may include the wet sand beach and
ocean waters. If the special event meeting the standards for permit issuance
is too large to be contained in a designated area, but is otherwise in accord
with the standards set forth in this chapter, the Board of Aldermen may
enlarge a designated area to accommodate the event.



   (C)   (Reserved).



   (D)   Certain activities on beaches are prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person, organization, society, association or corporation,
or any agent, member or representative thereof, directly or indirectly, (i)
to solicit property, business or financial assistance of any kind, (ii) to
distribute free product samples, admission passes, or entry tickets, (iii) to
conduct any sales or rental business, (iv) to sell or offer to sell any
service, article, good, publication, subscription or other thing of value in
the area previously defined in this chapter as the public beach, unless
specifically authorized in a special event permit issued by the Board of
Aldermen.



   (E)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, certain
activities subject to division (D) are allowed in accordance with § 92.28.



(Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10; Am. Ord. 1640, passed 8-12-10)  Penalty, see §
98.99



§ 98.10  INTERFERENCE WITH DEMONSTRATIONS AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.



   No person shall hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any special
event, parade, picket line, or group demonstration being conducted under
authority of a permit duly issued by the Board of Aldermen or Special Events
Coordinator.



(Am. Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.11  POLICE PROTECTION.



   (A)   The Chief of Police shall determine whether and to what extent
additional police protection is reasonably necessary for the special event
for traffic control and public safety. The Chief of Police shall base this
decision on the size, location, duration, time and date of the event, the
expected sale or service of alcoholic beverages, the number of streets and
intersections blocked, and the need to detour or preempt citizen travel and
use of the streets and sidewalks. The speech content of the event shall not
be a factor in determining the amount of police protection necessary. If
possible, without disruption of ordinary police services or compromise of
public safety, regularly scheduled on-duty personnel will police the event.
If additional police protection for the special event is deemed necessary by
the Chief of Police, he or she shall so inform the applicant for the permit.
The applicant then shall have the duty to secure the police protection deemed
necessary by the Chief of Police at the sole expense of the applicant.



   (B)   Persons engaging in special events conducted for the sole
purpose of engaging in expressive activities are not required to pay for any
police protection provided by the town.



(Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10)



§ 98.12  WEAPONS.



   (A)   No firearms or dangerous weapons of any kind, as defined by
state law, may be possessed contrary to G.S. § 14-277.2.



   (B)   Division (A) does not apply to the following persons while
acting lawfully and within the scope of their duties and authority:



      (1)   Law enforcement officers;



      (2)   Officers and soldiers of the armed forces, and National
Guard while acting lawfully and within the scope of their duties and
authority;



      (3)   Students of military science in an accredited program
acting in a ceremonial capacity in connection with the accredited program; and



      (4)   Park rangers, animal control officers.



(Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.13  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The Special Events Coordinator, Town Manager, or Board of
Aldermen have the authority to revoke a special event permit if the holder of
such permit fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any terms
and conditions of such permit.



   (B)   A permit revocation may be appealed to the Town Manager by
giving written notice of such appeal within ten days of the date such
revocation is effective. Any appeal shall be heard by the Town Manager within
five working days of the receipt of such written appeal.



(Am. Ord. 1430, passed 10-24-02; Am. Ord. 1547, passed 8-23-07; Am. Ord.
1616, passed 1-14-10)



§ 98.14  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   This chapter shall not apply to:



      (1)   Funeral processions;



      (2)   The Town of Wrightsville Beach;



      (3)   Any governmental agency acting within the scope of its
governmental functions;



      (4)   Students going to and from school classes or
participating in academic educational activities or classroom based field
trips, provided such special events activity is authorized by appropriate
school authorities and is under the immediate direction and supervision of
school authorities authorized to approve and supervise such special events
activity; or



      (5)   Activities involving less than 200 persons which are
subject to the reservation and use system administered by the town for use of
the facilities in the Municipal Complex.



   (B)   The requirement to apply for and obtain a permit under §§
98.03 or 98.05 of this chapter shall not apply to individuals or small groups
but individuals and small groups are subject to the standards or prohibitions
in §§ 98.07, 98.08, 98.09 and 98.12.



   (C)   Individuals and small groups wishing to engage in a special
event consisting of expressive activities on the public beach shall register
with the Special Events Coordinator prior to engaging in such activity. The
registrant must identify the location and time frame for engaging in a
special event consisting of expressive activity on the public beach and the
number of persons in the small group. The expressive activity shall be
limited to an area meeting the requirements of § 98.09(B). Registration
shall be limited to no more than five total participants per area. If the
Special Events Coordinator is not available, such individual or small group
shall register with the Fire Department. A person registering shall be issued
a registration receipt indicating the date, time, area and number of
participants and must carry that receipt on their person at all times during
the special event.



(Am. Ord. 1430, passed 10-24-02; Am. Ord. 1547, passed 8-23-07; Am. Ord.
1616, passed 1-14-10)



§ 98.15  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a
special event permit, the conditions of a special event permit, or the
revocation of a special event permit to the Board of Aldermen. The appealing
party shall make the appeal within five business days after receipt of the
decision by filing a written notice with the Special Events Coordinator and a
copy of the notice with the Town Clerk. The Board of Aldermen shall act upon
the appeal at the next scheduled meeting occurring four or more business days
following receipt of the notice of the appeal.



   (B)   The appeal shall be a quasi-judicial proceeding.



   (C)   In the event that the Board of Aldermen rejects an
applicant’s appeal, the applicant may file an immediate request for review
with a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 1616, passed 1-14-10)



§ 98.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Carry on a special event without a required permit or
registration receipt.



      (2)   Fail to terminate a special event upon revocation of a
permit;



      (3)   Conduct a special event in violation of the terms and
conditions of a permit issued for such event; or



      (4)   Undertake or engage in activity prohibited by this
chapter.



   (B)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall subject
the offender to a civil penalty of $500 for the first offense and $1,000 for
a second and subsequent offenses. If a person fails to pay the civil
penalties set forth herein within 20 days after being cited for a violation,
the town may seek to recover the penalty by filing a civil action in the
nature of debt.



   (C)   Each day’s continuing violation shall be a separate and
distinct offense.



   (D)   The town may seek to enforce the provisions of this chapter
through any appropriate equitable remedy issued from a court of competent
jurisdiction.



   (E)   The town may seek to enforce this chapter by using any one or
more combinations of the foregoing remedies.



   (F)   Any person who is found in violation of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor as provided in G.S. § 14-4 and shall be fined not
more than $500.



(Ord. 1430, passed 10-24-02; Am. Ord. 1547, passed 8-23-07; Am. Ord. 1616,
passed 1-14-10)



CHAPTER 99:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS




Section




   99.01   Assembling on sidewalks



   99.02   Display of goods



   99.03   Obstructing streets and sidewalks



   99.04   Construction near sidewalk



   99.05   Awnings, sheds, and posts



   99.06   Throwing or burning trash prohibited



   99.07   Depositing sand, tree trimmings on streets prohibited



   99.08   Snow and ice removal



   99.09   Playing ball on sidewalk; prohibited



   99.10   Excavation on streets; permit required



   99.11   Safety precautions



   99.12   Sidewalk construction; permit required



   99.13   Repair after excavation



   99.14   Injuring street with machines or tools; prohibited



   99.15   Injuring and obstructing bridges, culverts, and the like



   99.16   Injuring lights, signs, and the like



Statutory reference:



   Control over municipal streets, see G.S. § 160A-296



§ 99.01  ASSEMBLING ON SIDEWALKS.



   (A)  No person or group of persons shall assemble, gather, stand, or
cause, direct, invite, or in any way induce any person or group of persons to
assemble, gather, or stand so as to obstruct any public sidewalk to
pedestrian traffic or any public street or alley to vehicular traffic, or
pedestrian traffic at designated crosswalks.



   (B)  At any place of business where it is necessary for patrons
awaiting entry or service to wait on the sidewalks at the place of business
or for entry to service, it shall be the responsibility of the owner or
proprietor, or his agents or employees, to see that the patrons are lined in
a way that pedestrian traffic is not blocked because of the line of
patrons.  In no event may any patrons awaiting service line up, gather,
assemble, stand, or wait in the public streets or alleys of the town.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to events
sponsored by the town.



('72 Code, § 17-1) (Am. Ord. 1601, passed 6-11-09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.02  DISPLAY OF GOODS.



   No person shall place for display or sell any goods, wares, or
merchandise of any kind upon any sidewalks. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to events sponsored by the town.



('72 Code, § 17-2)  (Am. Ord. 1601, passed 6-11-09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.03  OBSTRUCTING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.



   No brick, stone, wood, or other substance obstructing the free passage
of persons and vehicles shall be placed or permitted to lie in any street of
the town; nor shall any person place on or in any street or sidewalk any
boxes, crates, casks, barrels, or other obstruction of any kind.  However,
any person erecting a building, may with permission, place building material
for immediate use on the streets in a way as not to interfere with the usual
traffic. The provisions of this section shall not apply to events sponsored
by the town.



('72 Code, § 17-3)  (Am. Ord. 1601, passed 6-11-09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.04  CONSTRUCTION NEAR SIDEWALK.



   Before building or remodeling any place that is in close proximity to a
sidewalk, an overhead covered passageway shall be constructed so as to leave
the sidewalk unobstructed and to provide safe and easy passage.



('72 Code, § 17-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.05  AWNINGS, SHEDS, AND POSTS.



   No person shall erect or repair over any sidewalk or street any wooden
shed for the support of an awning or erect upon any street or sidewalk a post
for the support of an awning.  However, this shall not be construed to
prevent the erection over the sidewalk of cloth awnings supported by metallic
frames firmly suspended from the building and at least seven feet above the
level of the sidewalk.



('72 Code, § 17-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.06  THROWING OR BURNING TRASH PROHIBITED.



   No paper, straw, lemon peel, banana peel, watermelon rind, or trash of
any kind shall be thrown or swept upon any sidewalk or street, nor shall any
trash, refuse, or rubbish be burned thereon.



('72 Code, § 17-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Trash regulations, see Ch. 95



§ 99.07  DEPOSITING SAND, TREE TRIMMINGS ON STREET PROHIBITED.



   No person shall place or allow to be placed any sand, tree trimmings,
or shrubbery trimmings on any street or sidewalk.



('72 Code, § 17-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.08  SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL.



   Every occupant of a store building, in front of which the sidewalk is
paved with stone, brick, asphalt, or cement, shall remove snow, ice, or other
obstruction from the sidewalk at the earliest possible time and as soon as
the weather permits.



('72 Code, § 17-8)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.09  PLAYING BALL ON SIDEWALK; PROHIBITED.



   No person shall play ball or bat or catch ball on any sidewalk or
street.



('72 Code, § 17-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.10  EXCAVATION ON STREETS; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall dig any hole, ditch, or excavation of any kind on any
street in the town without first having secured a permit therefor in writing
from the Town Clerk.



('72 Code, § 17-13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Required safety precautions, see § 99.11



   Repair after excavation, see § 99.13



§ 99.11  SAFETY PRECAUTIONS.



   Every person making an excavation for any purpose in any street or
sidewalk shall securely cover the excavation with planks or place ropes
around the same three feet from the ground, and shall place a sufficient
number of red lights around the excavation before dark and keep them burning
during each night the excavation is open.



('72 Code, § 17-14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.12  SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall build any sidewalk of any description from brick, wood,
or other material without a written permit from the town.



('72 Code, § 17-15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Required safety precautions, see § 99.11



   Repair after excavation, see § 99.13



§ 99.13  REPAIR AFTER EXCAVATION.



   Every person who opens or digs a ditch, trench, or hole in any street
or sidewalk of the town shall put the street or sidewalk in as good condition
in all respects as it was before.



('72 Code, § 17-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.14  INJURING STREET WITH MACHINES OR TOOLS; PROHIBITED.



   No person shall drag, run, or cause to be dragged or run any harrow or
other implement, engine, machine, or tool likely to injure the surface upon
any dirt street or permanently paved street of the town.



('72 Code, § 17-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.15  INJURING AND OBSTRUCTING BRIDGES, CULVERTS, AND THE LIKE.



   No person shall injure or misplace any part of any bridge, culvert,
ditch, drain, or other property belonging to or used by the town or shall
place any obstruction in any culvert, ditch, or drain.



('72 Code, § 17-11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.16  INJURING LIGHTS, SIGNS, AND THE LIKE.



   No person shall injure, tamper with, remove, paint upon, or deface any
sign, sign post, street light, traffic signal, bulletin board, or other
municipal property upon the streets and sidewalks, except employees of the
town in performance of their duties.



('72 Code, § 17-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 100:  ALARM SYSTEMS




Section




   100.01   Definitions



   100.02   Alarm companies, requirement for license



   100.03   Requirement for permit



   100.04   Alarm system malfunction; corrective action; and notice to
owner of malfunction



   100.05   Disconnection of alarm system



   100.06   Appeal



   100.07   Failure to disconnect or unauthorized reconnection of an
alarm system



   100.08   Reconnection of alarm system



 



   100.99   Penalties and remedies



§ 100.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "ALARM  COMPANY."  Any  private  individual  or business entity
that installs, monitors or services any alarm system within the town.



   "ALARM MALFUNCTION."  An alarm activation which results in the
response of the fire department or police department caused by mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation, or any other situation where the
enforcement official is unable to determine the apparent cause of the alarm
activation.



   "ALARM SYSTEM."  Any electronic or mechanical device transmitting an
alarm signal outside the location intended to alert law enforcement personnel
to an actual or attempted unauthorized entry into a building or to the
commission or attempted commission of a crime, or intended to alert fire or
emergency medical personnel to an actual or suspected fire or medical
emergency.



   "ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL."  The fire chief or the police chief of the
town or their designated representatives.



   "FALSE ALARM."  An alarm activation which results in the response of
the fire department or police department caused accidentally, avoidably,
negligently, intentionally, or because of misuse of the system by the owner,
his or her immediate family, employees, servants, guests or agents.  An
alarm is not considered a false alarm if activated due to malicious causes
beyond the control of the owner.



   "OWNER."  Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity owning
or leasing an alarm system.



(Ord. 1254, passed 8-17-95)



§ 100.02  ALARM COMPANIES, REQUIREMENT FOR LICENSE.



   Each alarm company shall be licensed under G.S. Chapter 74C.



(Ord. 1254, passed 8-17-95)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.03  REQUIREMENT FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   No alarm system shall be installed in any structure or
location within the town without the Alarm Company installing such system
first acquiring a permit in accordance with the provisions of this section.



   (B)   Permits shall be issued by the Town Manager or his designee
upon completion of forms providing the information as specified below and
payment of a fee of $25.  No fee shall be charged for alarm systems in
existence on the date of adoption of this chapter provided that the owner
submits to the town the following information within 180 days of the date of
adoption of this subchapter:



      (1)   Name and address of owner;



      (2)   Owner's home and business telephone numbers;



      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of at least three
persons that may be contacted and who are available to respond to an alarm
activation at the owner's property within 30 minutes of the alarm activation
if the owner is not available;



      (4)   The name, address and telephone number of any alarm
company that is charged with notifying the proper authorities of the
existence of an alarm activation on the owner's premises; and



      (5)   The date on which the alarm system became or becomes
active.



   (C)   The owner shall notify the town of any changes in the
information as specified in the preceding section within 30 days of the date
of such change.



   (D)   In the event information provided by the owner in connection
with securing the permit is found to be false, the permit may be revoked in
accordance with the provisions of § 100.06 hereinafter.



   (E)  Each alarm system installed within the town from and after the
date of this chapter shall be "UL" approved and the owner shall be required
to provide evidence satisfactory to the town that the system is so approved.



(Ord. 1254, passed 8-17-95; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 7-29-99)  Penalty, see §
100.99



§ 100.04  ALARM SYSTEM MALFUNCTION; CORRECTIVE ACTION; AND NOTICE TO OWNER
OF MALFUNCTION.



   (A)   A response to an alarm activation shall result when any police
officer or member of the fire department shall be dispatched to the premises
where the alarm has been activated or learns of the activation of the alarm
system by any means whatsoever and responds thereto by travelling to the
premises.  After responding to an alarm activation, the enforcement official
shall notify any person identified in the permit required pursuant to §
100.03 of the activation of the alarm system and such person shall thereupon
travel to the premises within 30 minutes of such notification to ascertain
the status thereof.  Failure of such person to appear at the premises within
30 minutes after being notified to do so shall be deemed a false alarm and
shall subject the owner to the penalties set forth hereinafter.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to reactivate an alarm
system without authorization from the enforcement official following an alarm
activation resulting in the dispatch of a police officer or member of the
fire department to the premises where the alarm was activated.



   (C)   If the enforcement official determines that an alarm signal
was transmitted as the result of an alarm malfunction, then such official
shall deliver to the owner an alarm activation report indicating that an
alarm activation has occurred and that it has been determined to have
resulted from an alarm malfunction.



   (D)   The activation of an alarm system due to an alarm malfunction
shall be deemed a false alarm and shall subject the towner to the penalties
set forth hereinafter.



(Ord. 1254, passed 8-17-95; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 7-29-99)  Penalty, see §
100.99



§ 100.05  DISCONNECTION OF ALARM SYSTEM.



   (A)   The enforcement official is authorized to order the
disconnecting or deactivation of any alarm system for which seven false
alarms have occurred within a 12 consecutive month period.  Notice of such
action shall be in writing and be mailed to the owner by certified mail,
return receipt requested, at the address shown on the permit application
required under § 100.03.  The notice shall specify the date on which the
owner shall be required to disconnect or deactivate the alarm system, which
date shall be at least 20 days following the day of the notice.  The owner
may appeal the order of the enforcement official in accordance with § 100.06.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any alarm
system installed or maintained in accordance with the North Carolina State
Building Code.



(Ord. 1254, passed 8-17-95)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.06  APPEAL.



   An owner to whom a notice to disconnect or deactivate an alarm system
is mailed pursuant to § 100.05 shall be entitled to appeal the order of the
enforcement official to the Town Manager.  An appeal must be in writing and
must be delivered to the Town Manager no later than five days prior to the
date disconnection or deactivation is to occur.  The appeal must state the
reasons why the order to disconnect or deactivate should be withdrawn.  Upon
receipt of an appeal in proper form, the Town Manager may schedule a hearing
at which time the owner and enforcement official shall appear.  The Town
Manager is authorized to waive a hearing and to make a decision based on the
written appeal from the owner and  information provided by the  enforcement
official.  The Town Manager is authorized to reverse the decision of the
enforcement official if the Manager determines that the revocation was based
on circumstances beyond the control of the owner, that medical necessity or
other reasons justify reinstatement of the permit or that justice will be
best served by reinstatement of the permit.  The decision of the Town
Manager in this matter shall be final.  The Town Manager shall notify the
owner of his/her decision in writing by mailing a copy of the decision by
first class mail addressed to the owner at the address provided on the permit
application in accordance with § 100.03.  If the Manager affirms the order
to disconnect or deactivate an alarm system, the owner shall have 10 days
from the date of the Manager's decision within which to comply with the
order.  The appeal of an order to disconnect or deactivate shall suspend the
effective date of the order until the appeal has been acted upon by the Town
Manager.



(Ord. 1254, passed 8-17-95)



§ 100.07  FAILURE TO DISCONNECT OR UNAUTHORIZED RECONNECTION OF AN ALARM
SYSTEM.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to disconnect or deactivate
an alarm system which has been ordered disconnected or deactivated pursuant
to § 100.05, including situations in which the Town Manager affirmed the
order to disconnect or deactivate.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
reconnect an alarm system which has been disconnected or deactivated pursuant
to the order of the enforcement official unless reconnection of the alarm
system is authorized pursuant to § 100.08.  In addition to the penalties
provided in § 100.99, any person violating the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a civil penalty of $200.  If a person fails to pay this
civil penalty within 10 days after being cited for a violation, the town may
seek to recover the penalty by filing a civil action in the nature of debt.



(Ord. 1254, passed 8-17-95)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.08  RECONNECTION OF ALARM SYSTEM.



   Any order to disconnect or deactivate an alarm system may be rescinded
by the enforcement official upon a finding by said enforcement official that
the owner has taken corrective action to remedy the cause of the false alarms
or alarm malfunctions at the premises.  In making a request for such a
rescission, the owner shall have the burden to show what corrective action
has been taken and that such action is sufficient to support a finding that
the cause of the false alarms or alarm malfunctions has been remedied.  The
enforcement official shall have the right to inspect the alarm system and
test it prior to rescinding the order to disconnect or deactivate.  Before
any reconnection of an alarm system after the order to disconnect said
system, a reconnection fee of $25 shall be assessed.  The enforcement
official shall not rescind an order to disconnect or deactivate if the owner
has failed to pay any fee charged the owner pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.



(Ord. 1254, passed 8-17-95)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.99  PENALTIES AND REMEDIES.



   (A)   A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided in G.S. § 14-4.



   (B)   Activation of an alarm system which is determined to be a
false alarm shall subject the owner to the following civil penalties:



      (1)   A first, second or third violation within any 12
consecutive month period, no civil penalty.



      (2)   For a fourth violation within any 12 consecutive month
period, $75.



      (3)   For a fifth violation within any 12 consecutive month
period, $150.



      (4)   For a sixth and any subsequent violation within any 12
consecutive month period, $400;



      (5)   A violation that occurs more than 12 months from the
prior and most recent violation shall be considered a first violation for
purposes of this section.



If a person fails to pay any civil penalty within 15 days after being cited
for a violation, the town may seek to recover the penalty by filing a civil
action in the nature of debt.  Further, in the event the civil penalty is
not paid within said 15 day period, the assessed fine shall be increased by
25%.



   (C)   The town may seek to enforce the provisions of this chapter
through any appropriate equitable action.



   (D)   The town may seek to enforce this chapter by using any one or
any combination of the foregoing remedies.



(Ord. 1254, passed 8-17-95; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 7-29-99)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



Chapter



   110.   LICENSES



   111.   BARS AND TAVERNS



   112.   [RESERVED]



   113.   PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS



   114.   VEHICLES FOR HIRE



   115.   OTHER BUSINESSES



   116.   MOVIE INDUSTRY



   117.   CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS



      APPENDIX: CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS



CHAPTER 110:  LICENSES



Section



General Provisions



   110.01   Definitions



   110.02   Construction



Levy



   110.10   Levy of tax



   110.11   Who must pay tax



   110.12   Period of license; due date



   110.13   [Repealed.]



   110.14   Refunds



   110.15   Separate businesses



   110.16   Exemptions



Licenses



   110.25   Application



   110.26   Reasons for refusal or revocation of a license



   110.27   Unqualified applicants; right to a conference



   110.28   Town to issue license; payment of tax a prerequisite



   110.29   Amount of tax disputed



   110.30   Revocation



   110.31   Form and contents of license



   110.32   Assignments



   110.33   Changes in the business conducted by licensee during the
tax year



   110.33   Town to furnish duplicates



   110.35   Record of conferences



   110.36   Providing notice to an applicant or licensee



Enforcement and Collection



   110.45   Duty to determine whether tax due



   110.46   Town to investigate



   110.47   Duty to keep books



   110.48   Duty to permit inspection



   110.49   Duty to post license



   110.50   Notice of deficiency



   110.51   Request for a conference



   110.52   Deficiency to become final



   110.53   Conference held



   110.54   Collection of deficiency



   110.55   Enforcement of chapter



License Tax Schedules



   110.65   Schedule of license taxes regulated by G.S. Chapter 105,
Article 2, Schedule B



   110.66   License fees unregulated by by G.S. Chapter 105, Article 2,
Schedule B



   110.67   Alcoholic beverages



   110.68   Taxicabs



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 110.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "BUSINESS."  Each trade, occupation, profession, business, and
franchise taxed under this chapter. A business is "SEASONAL" in nature when
it is conducted for profit six months out of the year or less.



   "PERSON."  Any individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary,
corporation, unincorporated association, partnership, sole proprietorship,
company, firm, or other legal entity.



('72 Code, § 7-4.1)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.02  CONSTRUCTION.



   This chapter is enacted for revenue purposes only. Therefore, it should
be construed to require payment of the maximum tax permitted under its terms.
In addition, issuance of a license pursuant to this chapter does not excuse a
licensee from compliance with any other applicable ordinance or statute. This
chapter does not prevent the town from imposing license taxes on additional
businesses, from increasing or decreasing the amount of any license tax, or
from regulating any business taxed.



('72 Code, § 7-4.2)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



LEVY



§ 110.10  LEVY OF TAX.



   An annual privilege license tax is hereby levied on each business
conducted within this town listed in §§ 110.65 through 110.68 in the
amounts set forth in those sections.



('72 Code, § 7-4.3)(Ord. 1090, passed



1-12-89)



§ 110.11  WHO MUST PAY TAX.



   Each person who conducts a business within this town is subject to this
chapter. A person "CONDUCTS BUSINESS" when he engages in one act of business
taxed under this chapter. He conducts the business "WITHIN THE TOWN" if he
maintains a business location within the town; or if, either personally or
through agents, he solicits business within the town limits or picks up or
delivers goods or delivers services within the town limits.



('72 Code, § 7-4.4)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.12  PERIOD OF LICENSE; DUE DATE.



   (A)   Annual license. Unless the section of this chapter levying the
privilege license tax applicable to a particular business provides otherwise,
a license issued pursuant to this chapter is good for the 12-month period
beginning July 1 and ending June 30. The tax is due on July 1 of each year.
However, if a person begins a business after July 1 of a year, the tax for
that year is due before the business is begun.



   (B)   Licenses for periods shorter than one year. If the section of
this chapter levying the privilege license tax applicable to a particular
business so provides, a license may be issued for a period of one day, one
week, or some comparable period of less than a full license year. A person
may not commence a business conducted within the town and taxed under such
provision until the privilege license tax due is paid and may not continue
such a business beyond the period for which the license is issued.



('72 Code, § 7-4.5)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



110.13  [REPEALED.]



§ 110.14  REFUNDS.



   If for any reason a licensee discontinues his business during the
license year, he is not entitled to a refund.



('72 Code, § 7-4.7)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.15  SEPARATE BUSINESSES.



   A separate license is required and a separate privilege license tax
must be paid for each place of business unless two or more places of business
under common ownership, each conducting a business subject to the same tax
under this chapter, are contiguous to each other, communicate directly with
and open into each other and are operated as a unit. In addition, a separate
privilege license tax must be paid for each business taxable under this
chapter conducted by the taxpayer at any one location; however, the town may
issue a single license for all taxable businesses conducted at one location
by a single taxpayer.



('72 Code, § 7-4.8)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.16  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Generally. Except as otherwise provided in this section or by
state law, no person is exempt from the payment of a privilege license tax
levied by this chapter.



   (B)   Charitable organizations. A person who operates a business for
a religious, educational, civic, patriotic, charitable, or fraternal purpose,
when the entire gross income of the business is used for such a purpose, is
exempt from paying any privilege license tax levied by this chapter.



   (C)   Blind persons and members of the armed forces and merchant
marine. Blind persons and persons who serve in the United States armed forces
or the merchant marine are exempt from paying any privilege license tax
levied by this chapter to the extent provided by G.S. § 105-249 and G.S. §
105-249.1.



   (D)   Must obtain license. A person exempt from paying a privilege
license tax levied by this chapter shall nevertheless obtain a license from
the town. The license shall state that the licensee is exempt from paying the
privilege license tax.



('72 Code, § 7-4.9)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



LICENSES



§ 110.25  APPLICATION.



   (A)   A person shall apply to the town for each license required by
this chapter no less than 30 days before the date the tax is due.



   (B)   The application, which shall be submitted on forms provided by
the town, shall contain:



      (1)   The name of the applicant and whether he or it is an
individual, a partnership, a corporation, or some other entity.



      (2)   The nature of the business.



      (3)   Where the business is conducted.



      (4)   An address to which may be mailed notices and statements
required by this chapter.



      (5)   Whether the business is one regulated by a state
occupational licensing board subject to G.S. Chapter 93B, and if so, the
serial number of the state license the application currently holds.



      (6)   Any other information the town determines to be
necessary to compute the amount of tax due.



('72 Code, § 7-4.10)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.26  REASONS FOR REFUSAL OR REVOCATION OF A LICENSE.



   The town shall refuse to issue or shall revoke a license for either of
the following reasons:



   (A)   The applicant misrepresents a fact relevant to the amount of
tax due or his qualifications for a license.



   (B)   The applicant refuses to provide information necessary to
compute the amount of tax due.



('72 Code, § 7-4.11)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.27  UNQUALIFIED APPLICANTS; RIGHT TO A CONFERENCE.



   (A)   After receipt of the completed application, if the town
believes that a reason exists for refusing a license under § 110.26, it
shall refuse to accept payment of the tax and shall not issue the license. At
the applicant's request, the town shall, pursuant to § 110.36, give him a
written statement of the reason for refusing the license. The applicant may,
within ten days after the date he receives this statement, request a
conference to discuss the refusal. In his request, he shall specify why his
application for a license should not be refused. The town shall arrange the
conference within a reasonable time.



   (B)   If the town refuses to issue a license, the applicant may
reapply for a license at any time thereafter. If the reason for which the
application was refused no longer exists, and if no other reason exists for
refusing to issue a license, the town shall issue the license pursuant to §
110.28.



('72 Code, § 7-4.12)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.28  TOWN TO ISSUE LICENSE; PAYMENT OF TAX A PREREQUISITE.



   After receipt of the completed application, if the town believes that
no reason exists for refusal of a license under § 110.26, he shall determine
the amount of tax due and notify the applicant of that amount. The town shall
not issue a license until the tax is paid.



('72 Code, § 7-4.13)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.29  AMOUNT OF TAX DISPUTED.



   If the applicant disputes the amount the town determines to be due, he
may either refuse to pay and request a conference to discuss the
determination, or pay the amount and request a conference to discuss his
right for a refund.  If a conference is requested, one shall be arranged
within a reasonable time.



('72 Code, § 7-4.14)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.30  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The town shall revoke a license if a reason exists to revoke
it as set forth in § 110.26. Before the town may revoke a license, it shall
give the licensee written notice of the grounds for revocation, pursuant to
§ 110.36. The licensee may within ten days after the day on which notice is
served request a conference with the town in writing. The request shall
specify the reasons why the license should not be revoked. The town shall
arrange the conference within a reasonable time.



   (B)   If the licensee fails to request a conference within ten days
after the day on which notice is served, the town shall revoke the license.
If the licensee requests a conference, the town may not revoke the license
until after the conference.



   (C)   If the town revokes a license, the former licensee may apply
for a new license at any time thereafter. If the reason for which the license
was revoked no longer exists and if no other reason exists for refusing to
issue a license, the town shall issue the license pursuant to § 110.28.



('72 Code, § 7-4.15)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.31  FORM AND CONTENTS OF LICENSE.



   A license shall show the name of the person licensed, the place where
the business in conducted (if it is to be conducted at one place), the nature
of the business licensed, the period for which the license is issued, and the
amount of tax paid. In addition, if a machine is licensed, the license shall
show the serial number of the machine. The Tax Collector shall keep a copy of
each license issued.



('72 Code, § 7-4.16)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.32  ASSIGNMENTS.



   A license may be assigned if a business licensed under this chapter and
carried on at a fixed place is sold as a unit to any person, and the
purchaser is to carry on the same business at the same place. Such a change
shall be reported to the town pursuant to § 110.33. Otherwise, each license
issued under this chapter is a personal privilege and is not assignable.



('72 Code, § 7-4.17)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.33  CHANGES IN THE BUSINESS CONDUCTED BY LICENSEE DURING THE TAX YEAR.



   A licensee or his assignee shall report a change in the formation
contained in the license application to the town within ten days after the
change occurs. If information shown on the license itself is affected
thereby, the licensee or his assignee shall surrender the license to the town
when reporting the change.



   (A)   Changes affecting the amount of tax due. If there are no
reasons for revoking the license under § 110.26 and the change results in
the imposition of a separate or additional tax, the town shall reissue a
license reflecting the change upon payment of the separate or additional tax.



   (B)   Changes not affecting the amount of tax due. If there are no
reasons for revoking the license under § 110.26 and the change does not
result in an imposition of a separate or additional tax, the town shall
reissue a license reflecting the change upon payment of a fee of $7.50.



   (C)   Change requiring refusal of a license. If there is reason for
revoking the license under § 110.26, the town shall refuse to reissue a
license and shall instead begin proceedings to revoke the license pursuant to
§ 110.30.



('72 Code, § 7-4.18)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.34  TOWN TO FURNISH DUPLICATES.



   Upon satisfactory proof that a license has been lost or destroyed, the
town shall furnish a duplicate for a fee of $7.50.



('72 Code, § 7-4.19)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.35  RECORD OF CONFERENCES.



   The town shall maintain for three years a record of each conference
held pursuant to this subchapter. The record shall contain the applicant's or
licensee's name, the date of the conference, and a brief statement of the
issues discussed and the result reached. After three years, the town shall
dispose of the record pursuant to G.S. § 121-5.



('72 Code, § 7-4.20)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.36  PROVIDING NOTICE TO AN APPLICANT OR LICENSEE.



   Whenever this chapter requires the town to give a written statement or
notice to an applicant or a licensee, it may do so in one of three ways:



   (A)   By personally delivering the statement or notice to the
applicant or licensee.



   (B)   By mailing the statement or notice by registered or certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the address specified for that purpose in
the license application.



   (C)   By causing the statement or notice to be served on the
applicant or licensee in accordance with the procedures of service of process
under Rule 4, North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure.



('72 Code, § 7-4.21)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



ENFORCEMENT AND COLLECTION



§ 110.45  DUTY TO DETERMINE WHETHER TAX DUE.



   Each person has the duty to determine whether the business he conducts
is taxed under this chapter and if so, whether that tax has been paid for the
current tax year.



('72 Code, § 7-4.22)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.46  TOWN TO INVESTIGATE.



   If the town has reason to believe that  a person is conducting a
business in the town in violation of this chapter, it shall conduct an
investigation to determine the person's tax liability.



('72 Code, § 7-4.23)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.47  DUTY TO KEEP BOOKS.



   Each person who conducts a business taxed under this chapter shall keep
all records and books necessary to compute his tax liability. If a person
fails to keep books and records as required, the town shall make its own
determination of that person's tax liability from the information available
to it.



('72 Code, § 7-4.24)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.48  DUTY TO PERMIT INSPECTION.



   Each person who conducts business in the town shall permit a
representative of the town to inspect his business premises during normal
business hours to determine the nature of the business conducted there and to
examine his books and records to determine the nature and amount of business
transacted.



('72 Code, § 7-4.25)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.49  DUTY TO POST LICENSE.



   A licensee shall post his license or licenses conspicuously in the
place of business licensed. If he has no regular place of business, the
license must be kept where it may be inspected at all times by the proper
town officials. If a machine is licensed, the license shall be affixed to the
machine.



('72 Code, § 7-4.26)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.50  NOTICE OF DEFICIENCY.



   If the town determines that a person has not paid the full amount of
tax due under this chapter, either for the current license year or for a
prior license year, it shall give the person written notice of the
deficiency, pursuant to § 110.36. The notice of deficiency shall specify: 
the total amount of tax due; the section of this chapter upon which the tax
is based; the amount of tax paid; any interest due; the balance owed; the
manner and time period in which the person may respond to the notice of the
deficiency; and the consequences to the person if he fails to respond as
specified.



('72 Code, § 7-4.27)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.51  REQUEST FOR A CONFERENCE.



   (A)   The person may, within ten days after the day on which notice
is served, request a conference in writing. The request shall specify the
person's objections to the notice of deficiency.



   (B)   By way of illustration but not limitation, a person who
receives notice of a deficiency may object on the following grounds:



      (1)   That the tax due has already been paid;



      (2)   That the town miscalculated the amount of tax due;



      (3)   That the town based its calculation on incorrect or
insufficient information concerning either the nature or the amount of
business conducted;



      (4)   That the town based its determination on an erroneous
interpretation of a section of this chapter that establishes a category of
business subject to a particular tax.



('72 Code, § 7-4.28)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.52  DEFICIENCY TO BECOME FINAL.



   If the taxpayer fails to request a conference under § 110.51, the
deficiency becomes final and the town shall proceed to collect the deficiency.



('72 Code, § 7-4.29)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.53  CONFERENCE HELD.



   If the taxpayer requests a conference, the town shall not proceed to
collect the deficiency until it hears the taxpayer's objections and
determines that the deficiency should become final. The town shall maintain a
record of each conference held, pursuant to § 110.35, for three years. The
record shall contain the name of the taxpayer, the date of the conference,
and a brief statement of the issues discussed and the results of the
discussion. After three years, the town shall dispose of the record pursuant
to G.S. § 121-5.



('72 Code, § 7-4.30)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.54  COLLECTION OF DEFICIENCY.



   (A)   The town may use any of the following methods to collect a
deficiency:



      (1)   Criminal prosecution in accordance with § 110.55(A).



      (2)   Equitable relief in accordance with § 110.55(B).



      (3)   The remedies of levy and sale and attachment and
garnishment, in accordance with G.S. § 160A-207. 



      (4)   The remedies of levy and sale of real and personal
property of the taxpayer within the town in accordance with the provisions of
G.S. § 105-109. 



   (b)   Any person who commences or continues to conduct a business
taxed under this ordinance without payment of the tax is liable for the
additional tax of 5% each 30 days, imposed by G.S. § 105-109.



('72 Code, § 7-4.31)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.55  ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   Criminal remedies. Conducting business within this town
without having paid the privilege license tax imposed by this chapter, or
without a valid license issued pursuant to this chapter, or without posting a
license pursuant to § 110.49, is a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in
G.S. §  105-109. Each day that a person conducts business in violation of
this chapter is a separate offense. Payment of a fine imposed in criminal
proceedings pursuant to this section does not relieve a person of his
liability for taxes imposed under this chapter.



   (B)   Equitable remedies. In addition to the criminal remedies set
forth in division (A) of this section and pursuant to G.S. § 160A-175(d),
the town may seek an injunction against any person who conducts a business in
violation of this chapter.



('72 Code, § 7-4.32)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



LICENSE TAX SCHEDULES



§ 110.65  SCHEDULE OF LICENSE TAXES REGULATED BY G.S. CHAPTER 105, ARTICLE
2, SCHEDULE B.



   A license tax shall be levied and collected for the privilege of
engaging in the following businesses:



   AMUSEMENTS



   Motion Picture Shows, Theatres, and Opera Houses.  (G.S. § 105.37)



   (1)   Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
operating a motion picture show, theatre, or opera house where public
exhibitions or performances are given for compensation



      Per year   $ 200.00



   (2)   Theatres in resort towns operated for less than 6 months each
year; or theatres open 3 days or less each week



      Per year   $ 100.00



   Dances and Athletic Contests.  (G.S. § 105-37.1)



   Every person, firm or corporation offering or managing any dance or
athletic contest of any kind, except high school and elementary school
athletic contests, for which the admission fee is in excess of $.50



      Per year   $  25.00



   Amusements Not Otherwise Taxed.  (G.S. § 105-37.1)



   Every person. firm or corporation engaged in the business of giving or
offering or managing any form of entertainment or amusement not otherwise
taxed or specifically exempted under Schedule "B" for which an admission is
charged for each room, hall, tent or other place where admission is charged



      Per year   $ 25.00



   ATHLETIC CONTESTS  (See AMUSEMENTS)



   AUTOMOBILE EQUIPMENT DEALERS, WHOLESALE  (G.S. § 105-89)



      (1)   Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the
business of buying, selling, distributing or delivering automotive
accessories, parts, tires, tools, batteries, or other automotive equipment or
supplies at wholesale



      Per year   $ 37.50



      (2)   This tax does not apply to businesses taxed as
automobile service stations under G.S. § 105-89(b). (See next heading -
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS)



   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS  (G.S. § 105-89)



   Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of servicing,
storing, painting, or repairing automobiles, or selling or delivering tires,
tools, batteries, motor fuels, lubricants or other automotive accessories



      Per year    $ 12.50



   BARBER SHOPS  (G.S. § 105-75.1) 



   Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of 
conducting a barber shop



      Per year    $ 2.50



   BEAUTY SHOPS  (G.S. § 105-75.1)



   For each barber, manicurist, cosmetologist, beautician or beauty shop
operator



      Per year    $ 2.50



   BICYCLE DEALERS.  (G.S. 105-49)



      (1)   Any person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business
of buying or selling bicycles, bicycle supplies or accessories



      Per year   $ 25.00



      (2)   If a dealer pays the tax imposed under the section
governing motorcycle dealers, no additional tax may be levied for handling
bicycles or bicycle supplies



   BILLIARD AND POOL TABLES  (G.S. § 105-64) 



   (1)   Every firm, person, or corporation renting, maintaining or
owning a building wherein there is a table or tables at which billiards or
pool is played, whether operated by slot or otherwise.



      Per year:   $25.00



   (2)   This tax does not apply to fraternal organizations having a
national charter or to the American Legion, YMCA or YWCA



   BOWLING ALLEYS  (G.S. § 105-64.1)



      (1)   Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the
business of operating a bowling alley



      Per year, per alley   $10.00



      (2)   This tax does not apply to fraternal organizations
having a national charter, the American Legion, YMCA or YWCA



   CAFES AND CAFETERIAS  (See RESTAURANTS)



   CAMPGROUNDS, TRAILER PARKS, TENT CAMPING AREAS  (G.S. § 105-61.1)



   Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of operating
any campground, trailer park, tent camping area, or similar place for profit
(but excluding those businesses taxed in G.S. § 105-61 of this section) and
advertising in any manner for transient patronage, or soliciting such business



      Per year   $12.50



   CHAIN STORES  (G.S. § 105-98)



      (1)   Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the
business of operating, under the same general management, supervision or
ownership, two or more stores where goods, wares or merchandise is sold is
deemed to be a branch or chain store operator, except for the particular
store which is designated as the principal office in the chain



      Per store, per year   $50.00



      (2)   This tax does not apply to:



      (a)   Retail and wholesale dealers in motor vehicles and
automotive equipment;



      (b)   Retail stores of non-profit organizations engaged
exclusively in the sale of merchandise processed by handicapped persons
employed by a non-profit organization; and



      (c)   Manufacturers, retail or wholesale sellers of
fertilizers, farm chemicals, soil preparants or seeds.



   CLEANERS  (See DRY CLEANERS)



   COLLECTING AGENCIES  (G.S. § 105-45) 



   Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of
collecting, for a profit, claims, accounts, bills, notes, or other money
obligations for others, and of rendering an account for same, shall be deemed
a collection agency



      Per year   $50.00



   CONSTRUCTION COMPANIES  (See CONTRACTORS)



   CONTRACTORS AND CONSTRUCTION COMPANIES  (G.S. § 105-54)



      (1)   Every person, firm or corporation which for a fixed
price, commission, fee, or wage offers or bids to construct any building,
street, sidewalk, bridge, sewer or water system, grading or other improvement
or structure.



      Per year   $10.00



      (2)   This tax does not apply to plumbers, electricians, or
heating contractors who are taxed under G.S. § 105-91. (See listing under
heading of PLUMBERS)



   DANCES  (See AMUSEMENTS)



   DRY CLEANERS, PRESSING CLUBS AND HAT BLOCKERS  (G.S. § 105-74)



      (1)   Every person, firm or corporation operating a dry
cleaning plant, pressing club, or hat blocking establishment located inside
the corporate limits



      Per business, per year   $50.00



      (2)   Every person, firm or corporation soliciting cleaning
work or pressing work to be done by a dry cleaning plant which has not paid
the license tax provided for in division (1) above.



      Per year, per vehicle   $200.00



      (3)   Cities and towns may not collect a license tax under
this section unless the state license tax, if due, has first been paid



   ELECTRICIANS  (See PLUMBERS, HEATING CONTRACTORS AND ELECTRICIANS)



   ELECTRONIC VIDEO GAMES  (G.S. § 105-66.1)



   Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of owning or
operating machines that play electronic video games when a coin or other
thing of value is deposited in the machine



      Per year, per machine   $ 5.00



   EMIGRANT AND EMPLOYMENT AGENTS  (G.S. § 105-90)



   Every person, firm or corporation, either as agent or principal,
engaged in the business of soliciting, hiring, and/or contracting with
laborers, male or female, in this state, for employment out of the state



      Per year   $100.00



   FORTUNETELLERS, PALMISTS, ETC  (G.S. § 105-58)



      (1)   Any person or persons receiving rewards for pretending
to tell fortunes, practicing the art of palmistry, clairvoyance and other
crafts of a similar kind



      (2)   The town shall not collect a tax and issue a license
under this section unless the state license (G.S. § 105-58b) has first been
procured from the Secretary of Revenue



      Per year   $200.00



   GARAGES  (See AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS)



   GUN DEALERS  (See PISTOL, KNIFE AND WEAPON DEALERS)



   HAIRDRESSERS  (See BEAUTY SHOPS)



   HAT BLOCKERS  (See DRY CLEANERS)



   HEATING CONTRACTORS  (See PLUMBERS)



   HOTELS, MOTELS, TOURIST COURTS, AND TOURIST HOMES  (G.S. § 105-61)



      (1)   Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the
business of operating a hotel, motel, tourist court or tourist home



      Per year, per room   $ 1.00



      (2)   (There is a minimum tax under this section of $25.00)



   ICE CREAM DEALERS AND MANUFACTURERS  (G.S. § 105-97) 



      (1)   Every person engaged in manufacturing ice cream, or
storing ice cream for distribution where ice cream is manufactured or stored
for distribution if the machines or equipment used is of the continuous
freezer type:



      $.37½ per gallon capacity per year, based on rated capacity per
hour according to manufacturer's rating, provided in no case shall the tax be
less than $2.50 per year for any freezer used



      (2)   Where the equipment used is not of the continuous
freezer type:



      $1.25 per gallon capacity per year for the freezer used;
provided, however, that in no case shall the tax be less than $2.50 per year
for any freezer used



      (3)   Where no standard freezer equipment with manufacturer's
capacity rating is used:



      Per year:   $12.50



      (4)   Trucks or other vehicles from another state selling or
delivering Ice Cream, on which the tax has not been paid as outlined above:



      Per truck, per year   $25.00



      (5)   Retail dealers selling ice cream purchased from a
manufacturer or distributor who has not paid a license tax as imposed by this
section:



      Per year   $ 2.50



      (6)   Manufacturers using counter freezer equipment and
selling at retail only:



      Per year   $ 2.50



      (7)   Farmers who manufacture and sell only the products of
their own cows are exempt from this tax



   INTOXICATING BEVERAGES  (See § 110.67)



   ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND SALESMEN  (G.S. § 105-53)



      (1)   Every itinerant salesman or merchant selling goods,
wares or merchandise, either on the streets or in a building, not being a
regular merchant of the municipality



   Per year   $100.00



   (2)   Any salesman or merchant offering for sale goods, wares or
merchandise, other than fruits and farm products, shall be deemed an
itinerant within the meaning of this section, if he conducts business within
a municipality for less than six consecutive months. When any salesman or
merchant does not pay the tax herein levied due to a stated intention to
become a regular merchant, the municipal Tax Collector may require him to
post a cash deposit in the sum of $100.00, which bond shall be forfeited for
the payment of the tax herein levied in the event such person discontinues
the business within six months for any reason other than death, disability,
insolvency, or destruction of stock by fire or other catastrophe



   (3)   This tax shall not apply to persons who sell books,
periodicals, printed music, ice, wood for fuel, fish, beef, mutton, pork,
bread, cakes, pies, dairy products, poultry, eggs, livestock or articles
produced by the individual offering them for sale. but shall apply to
medicines, drugs or articles assembled



   JUKEBOXES  (See MUSIC MACHINES)



   KNIVES  (See PISTOLS, KNIVES AND WEAPON DEALERS)



   LAUNDRIES  (G.S. § 105-85)



      (1)   Out-of-Town Laundries



      Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of
laundry work or supplying or renting clean linens, towels and wearing
apparel.  Tax may be charged only if the business is located inside the
corporate limits



      Per year   $ 50.00



      (2)   Soliciting Laundry Work



      Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of
soliciting laundry work to be done by a laundry or plant which has not paid
the license tax set forth in division (1) above



      For each vehicle used in carrying the laundry work,



      per year   $200.00



      (3)   Laundries Located in Town



      Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of
laundry work, or supplying or renting clean linen, towels or wearing apparel
who is not subject to divisions (1) or (2) above



      Per year   $ 50.00



      (4)   The town may not collect a license tax under this
section unless the state license tax, if due, has been paid first



   LOAN AGENCIES OR BROKERS  (G.S. § 105-88)



      Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the regular business
of making loans or lending money, accepting liens on, or contracts of
assignments of, salaries or wages, or any part thereof, or other security or
evidence of debt for repayment of such loans in installment payment or
otherwise, and maintaining in connection with same any office or other
located or established place for the conduct, negotiation, or transaction of
such business and advertising or soliciting such business in any manner
whatsoever



      Per year   $100.00



   MOTELS  (See HOTELS)



   MOTION PICTURE SHOWS  (See AMUSEMENTS)



   MOTORCYCLE DEALERS  (G.S. § 105-89.1)



      (1)   Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the
business of buying, selling, or distributing motorcycles or motorcycle
supplies



      Per year   $ 12.50



      (2)   Motorcycle dealers taxed under this section are not
liable for any additional tax as bicycle dealers if they also handle bicycles
and bicycle supplies



   MUSIC MACHINES  (G.S. § 105-65)



      Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of
operating, maintaining or placing on location any machine which plays records
or produces music



      Per year, per machine   $ 5.00



   MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS AND EQUIPMENT  (G.S. § 105-82)



      (1)   Every person, firm, or organization engaged in the
business of selling or offering for sale pianos, organs, records or record
players, radios or radio accessories, television sets or accessories, and
repair parts thereto



      Per year   $ 5.00



      (2)   Agents selling these commodities when the dealer is
located outside of the municipality



      Per year   $ 5.00



   PIANOS  (See MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS)



   PISTOL, KNIFE, AND WEAPON DEALERS  (G.S. § 105-80)



      Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of
selling pistols, knives or blank cartridge pistols



      Per year:



      Pistols   $ 50.00



      Bowie knives, daggers, or articles of  like kind    $200.00



      Blank cartridge pistols   $ 50.00



   PLUMBERS, HEATING CONTRACTORS, AND ELECTRICIANS  (G.S. § 105-91)



      (1)   Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the
business of a plumber, of a steam or gas fitter, or of installing heating
systems or electrical equipment



      Per year   $ 50.00



      (2)   Businesses licensed under this section shall not be
taxed as a contractor, or as an elevator or automatic sprinkler salesman or
repairman. (See headings of CONTRACTORS and ELEVATORS AND AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER
SYSTEMS)



   POOL TABLES  (See BILLIARD AND POOL TABLES)



   RADIOS  (See MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS)



   RESTAURANTS, CAFES, AND CAFETERIAS  (G.S. § 105-62)



      (1)   Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the
business of operating a restaurant, cafe, cafeteria, hotel with dining
service or other place where prepared food is sold



      Per year:



      0 - 4 seats   $25.00



      5 seats or more   $42.50



      (2)   Sandwiches made only of crackers, or cookies with food
filling, are not subject to the tax. Sales of any commodity through vending
machines are also exempt from the tax



   SALESMEN  (See ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND SALESMEN)



   SANDWICH STANDS  (See RESTAURANTS)



   SERVICE STATIONS  (See AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS)



   SUNDRIES LICENSE TAX  (G.S. § 105-65.2)



      (1)   Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in any one or
more of the following business activities:



      (a)   Sale of sandwiches in drug stores, service stations, or
any other stands or places not licensed and taxed as a restaurant under G.S.
§ 105-62; however, as used in this division, the word "SANDWICHES" shall not
be interpreted or construed to include crackers or cookies in combination
with any food filling;



      (b)   Operating, maintaining or placing on location fewer than
five of the following types of dispensers or machines;



         1.   Dispensers of cigarettes or other tobacco products;



         2.   Dispensers of soft drinks;



         3.   Dispensers of food or other merchandise, or



         4.   Weighing machines;



      (c)   Operating a soda fountain or soft drink stand; or



      (d)   Retailing or jobbing cigarettes, cigars, chewing
tobacco, snuff or any other tobacco products



      Per year   $ 4.00



      (2)   Only one sundries license shall be required for any one
location regardless of the number of enumerated businesses being  engaged in
at that location



      (3)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
sale, through dispensers or otherwise, of milk, milk drinks, dairy products,
or newspapers, or to dispensers dispensing merchandise for $.05 or less



   TAXICABS  (See § 110.68)



   TELEVISION  (See MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS)



   THEATRES AND SHOWS  (See AMUSEMENTS)



   TOURIST COURTS AND HOMES  (See HOTELS)



   WEAPONS  (See PISTOLS)



   WINE  (See § 110.67)



('72 Code, § 7-4.33)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89; Am. Ord. 1295, passed
9-25-97)




Statutory reference:





   Most of the statutes cited in this section have been repealed.  For
the continued authority of these statutes, however, see G.S. §160A-211.




§ 110.66  LICENSE FEES UNREGULATED BY G.S CHAPTER 105, ARTICLE 2, SCHEDULE
B.



   ANTIQUE AND GIFT SHOP



      Every person, firm, or corporation operating an antique or gift
shop within the corporate limits



      Per year   $ 50.00



   BAKERY PRODUCTS - RETAIL



      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a bakery products
(retail) shop within the corporate limits



   Per year   $ 40.00



   BAKERY PRODUCTS - WHOLESALE



      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a bakery products
(wholesale) shop within the corporate limits



      Per year   $ 40.00



   BINGO



      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a commercial bingo
game within the corporate limits



      Per year   $100.00



   BOATS AND BOAT MOTORS SALES OR SERVICE



      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a boat or boat
motors sales or service shop within the corporate limits



      Per year   $ 50.00



   BOOK STORES



      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a book store within
the corporate limits



      Per year   $ 25.00



   CLOTHING STORES



      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a clothing store
within the corporate limits



      Per year   $ 35.00



   COMMERCIAL FISHING PIERS



      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a commercial fishing
pier within the town limits



      Per year   $100.00



   DANCING



      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a commercial
establishment which provides for dancing and having the required square
footage for same



      Per year   $100.00



   DECORATORS, INTERIOR



      Every person, firm, or corporation operating an interior
decorators shop within the corporate limits



      Per year   $ 20.00



   DEPARTMENT STORES



      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a department store
within the town limits



      Per year   $100.00



   DRUG STORES



      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a drug store within
the corporate limits



      Per year   $ 35.00



   GAS - BOTTLED AND BULK



      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a gas station
(bottled and bulk) within the corporate limits



         Per year   $ 30.00



   GROCERY STORES



      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a grocery store
within the corporate limits



      Per year   $ 35.00



   HARDWARE STORES



      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a hardware store
within the corporate limits



      Per year   $ 35.00



   HOBBY AND PET SHOPS



      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a hobby or pet shop
within the corporate limits



      Per year   $ 25.00



   INSULATION (INSTALLERS)



      Every person, firm, or corporation operating an insulation shop
(installers) within the corporate limits



      Per year   $ 30.00



   LOUNGES, TAP ROOMS, BARS OR SIMILAR BUSINESSES



      Any person, firm, or corporation engaged in the operation of a
lounge, tap room, bar or similar business wherein alcoholic beverages are
sold to the public for consumption on the premises



      Per year   $100.00



   MARINAS



      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a commercial marina
or conducting the business of storage, dockage, repair or service of boats
for the public



      Per year   $ 50.00



   MEATS - RETAIL



      Every person, firm, or corporation operating a meat store
(retail) within the corporate limits



      Per year   $ 25.00



   WHOLESALE SEAFOOD



      Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the wholesale sale
of seafood



      Per year   $ 50.00



   MISCELLANEOUS (not otherwise taxed and not exempt)



      Per year   $ 25.00



('72 Code, § 7-4.34)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.67  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   WINE AND BEER



   (A)   Beer (Retail): (G.S. § 105-113.79)



      "On premises", per year   $ 15.00



      "Off premises", per year   $  5.00



   (B)   Wine (Retail): (G.S. § 105-113.79)



      "On Premises", per year   $ 15.00



      "Off Premises", per year   $ 10.00



    *(C)   Wholesale Dealers: (G.S. § 105-113.73)



      Beer - Per year   $ 37.50



      Wine - Per year   $ 37.50



      Both wine and beer under same license   $ 62.50



   *Only if dealer has a place of business in that municipality; cannot
tax deliveries only



('72 Code, § 7-4.35)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



§ 110.68  TAXICABS.



   TAXICABS  (G.S. § 20-97)



      Per vehicle. per year   $ 15.00



('72 Code, § 7-4.36)(Ord. 1090, passed 1-12-89)



CHAPTER 111:  BARS AND TAVERNS




Section




   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   Bathroom facilities



   111.03   Air cooling and ventilation



   111.04   Manager on duty; required



   111.05   Location restrictions



   111.06   (Reserved)



   111.07   Chapter is prospective



   111.08   Transfer of ownership; effect



 



   111.98   Remedies



   111.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Licenses, see Ch. 110



   License fee schedules, see §§ 110.65 through 110.68



Statutory reference:



   Alcohol Beverage Control Board, see G.S. Ch. 18B et seq.



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "BAR OR TAVERN LICENSED BY THE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL BOARD OF
NORTHCAROLINA."  Any place primarily engaged in the sale of malt beverages
as provided in G.S. Ch. 18B.



(Ord., passed 10-8-81)



§ 111.02  BATHROOM FACILITIES.



   All bars and taverns shall provide bathroom facilities as required by
the North Carolina State Building Code, Volume I.



(Ord., passed 10-8-81)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.03  AIR COOLING AND VENTILATION.



   All bars and taverns during the hours of operation shall keep the
windows and doors closed.  Air cooling and ventilation shall be from
mechanical means only and shall comply with the standards contained in Table
1500, Ventilation Design Criteria of the North Carolina State Building Code,
Volume III, for restaurants.



(Ord., passed 10-8-81)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.04  MANAGER ON DUTY; REQUIRED.



   All bars and taverns shall have a person managing the business on the
premises during the hours of operation at all times.  The name of the person
shall be conspicuously displayed at the entrance of the business premises.



(Ord., passed 10-8-81)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.05  LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.



   No bar or tavern shall be allowed to open and operate within 500 feet
of any establishment licensed by the North Carolina State Alcoholic Beverage
Control Board to sell alcoholic beverages as provided in G.S. Ch. 18B which
is in existence and doing business at the time of the proposed opening and
operation of any new bar or tavern.  Distances shall be determined by
straight line measurements from the nearest corner of the proposed
establishment to the nearest corner of the existing establishment licensed by
the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Board.



(Ord., passed 10-8-81)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.06  (RESERVED).



§ 111.07  CHAPTER IS PROSPECTIVE.



   (A)   This chapter is prospective and not retrospective, and is in
no way intended to affect any existing bars or taverns as described herein,
unless any existing bar or tavern shall close and remain closed for a period
in excess of 12 consecutive months, the existing bar or tavern shall be
deemed a new bar or tavern and be controlled by the provisions of this
chapter.



   (B)   Should the use of any bar or tavern change for any period of
time, it may not again be used as a bar or tavern unless it complies in all
respects as a new bar or tavern with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord., passed 10-8-81)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.08  TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP; EFFECT.



   No bar or tavern shall be affected by this chapter by the reason of the
mere transfer of ownership so long as it remains in operation as a bar or
tavern.



(Ord., passed 10-8-81)



§ 111.98  REMEDIES.



   (A)   Whenever the Board of Aldermen has reasonable cause to believe
that any person is violating or threatening to violate any section of this
chapter, the town may either before or after the institution of any other
action or proceeding authorized by this chapter, institute a civil action in
the name of the town for injunctive relief to restrain the violation or
threatened violation.



   (B)   The action shall be brought in the appropriate division of the
General Court of Justice in New Hanover County. The institution of an action
for injunctive relief under this section shall not relieve any party to the
proceeding from any civil or criminal penalty prescribed for violations to
this chapter.



(Ord., passed 10-8-81)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any operator of any bar or tavern who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of $50 per day
of continuing non-compliance.



   (B)   Criminal penalty as provided by § 10.99 shall be imposed for
any violation of any section of this chapter and shall be in addition to any
civil penalty imposed.



(Ord., passed 10-8-81)



CHAPTER 112:  [RESERVED]



CHAPTER 113:  PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS



Section



General Provisions



   113.01   Definitions



   113.02   Ferris wheels and other riding devices



Music and Dance Halls



   113.10   Dance hall regulations



   113.11   License required; application



   113.12   License nontransferable



   113.13   License denial; notice and hearing



   113.14   Public places having live music



   113.15   Music machines regulations



Bingo



   113.20   Permit required



   113.21   Permit fee



   113.22   Permit revocation



   113.23   Special permits



   113.24   Hours of operation



   113.25   Operation of game after permit revoked; prohibited



   113.26   Soliciting outside building; prohibited



Pool, Billiards, and Bowling



   113.35   License required



   113.36   Application for license



   113.37   License denial; grounds



   113.38   License denial; notice and hearing



   113.39   Form and content of license



   113.40   Licensee and employees; prohibitions



   113.41   Rules for operation of pool rooms



   113.42   Liability of licensee



   113.43   License suspension; revocation; notice and hearing



   113.44   Equitable remedies for violations



Cross-reference:



   Licenses, see, Ch. 110



   License fee schedules, see §§ 110.65 through 110.68



Statutory reference:



   Regulation of places of amusements, see G.S. § 160A-181



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "AGENT."  The person having the agency for the manufacturer, producer,
or distributor.



   "BUSINESS."  Any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation,
or calling of any kind, subject by the provision of this chapter to a license
tax.



   "DANCE HALL."  Any place where the public is allowed to dance in a
public dance hall or public business establishment.



   "ENGAGED IN THE BUSINESS."  Engaged in the business as owner or
operator.



   "FISCAL YEAR."  The period beginning with July l and ending with June
30 next following.



   "LIVE MUSIC."  Any music produced by one or more persons singly or in
concert with one another, vocally or by means of any musical instrument,
whether the music is produced professionally or otherwise.



   "PLACE OF AMUSEMENT."  Any pool hall, game room, billiard hall,
bowling alley, combination of these, or other establishment at which any game
is played for a fee or charge (whether direct or indirect).



   "PUBLIC PLACE."  Any place that is open to the public for business on
either a seasonal or year-round basis.



   "QUARTER."  Any three consecutive months.  ('72 Code, § 5-l)



§ 113.02  FERRIS WHEELS AND OTHER RIDING DEVICES.



   No person shall maintain or operate a carnival company, circus, show of
like kind, ferris wheel, merry-go-round, whip, other similar riding devices
and other shows, amusements, and enterprises of like kind, with or without a
name, within the town.



('72 Code, § 5-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



MUSIC AND DANCE HALLS



§ 113.10  DANCE HALL REGULATIONS.



   All public dances where any kind of music is furnished shall stop not
later than l:00 a.m. on Sunday morning; all dances shall stop promptly at
2:00 a.m. on weekdays.



('72 Code, § 5-15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.11  LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   Every person desiring to operate a dance hall shall first secure a
license from the town.  The person shall apply in writing to the Board of
Aldermen for the license, specifying in writing the street and building in
which the applicant intends to operate the dance hall and the name of the
person who shall actively manage the dance hall.  The application shall
contain the number of square feet available in the dance hall and shall be
signed by at least five residents in the town.



('72 Code, § 5-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.12  LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE.



   No license issued under this subchapter shall be transferred either to
other parties or to a new location, except after application to and expressed
permission of the Board of Aldermen.



('72 Code, § 5-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.13  LICENSE DENIAL; NOTICE AND HEARING.



   (A)   Before the Board of Aldermen shall refuse to issue a license
or refuse to renew a license previously issued, the Board shall provide the
applicant with adequate notice and opportunity to be heard in accordance with
division (B) and (C).



   (B)   When directed by the Board, the Town Manager shall give
written notice to the applicant that the Board has made a preliminary
decision to deny the license applied for and unless the person notifies the
Town Manager within ten days after receipt of the written notice that he
requests a hearing before the Board, the Board will proceed to deny the
license.



   (C)   If a hearing is requested in accordance with division (B), the
Board shall set a date for the hearing at the earliest convenient time, and
shall take no final action on the license until after this hearing has been
completed.  At the hearing, the reason or reasons for the Board's
preliminary decision to deny the license in question shall be explained. The
applicant shall be given an opportunity to explain why the Board's
preliminary decision should not become final.



   (D)   In deciding whether to deny a license, the Board may consider
by way of illustration and limitation, those requirements and prohibitions
for licensees contained in this subchapter.



§ 113.14  PUBLIC PLACES HAVING LIVE MUSIC.



   No person operating a public place shall have live music in the place
unless there is at least 1100 square feet of enclosed floor space in the
place.



('72 Code, § 5-21)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.15  MUSIC MACHINES REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No type of music machine located within the town limits shall
be played except between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and l:00 a.m. Monday through
Friday, 2:00 a.m. Saturday being considered a part of Friday for the purposes
of this section; between 10:00 a.m. on Saturday and 2:00 a.m. on Sunday; and
between 10:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on Monday.  ('72 Code, § 14-8)



     (B)   No person shall operate or allow to be operated any
coin-operated music machine, juke box, or piccolo, other than in a completely
walled and roofed enclosure. ('72 Code, § 14-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



  Cross-reference:



   Noise regulations, see Ch. 97



BINGO



§ 113.20  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate the game of bingo in the town without first
having obtained a permit from the Board of Aldermen.



('72 Code, § 5-22)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Bingo and raffles, see G.S. § 14-292.l



§ 113.21  PERMIT FEE.



   Every person granted a permit to operate the game of bingo by the Board
of Aldermen shall pay for the permit the sum of $200 per annum.



('72 Code, § 5-23)



§ 113.22  PERMIT REVOCATION.



   All permits issued by the town shall be conditional permits and subject
to revocation at the will of the Board of Aldermen.



('72 Code, § 5-24)



§ 113.23  SPECIAL PERMITS.



   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing the
Board of Aldermen from issuing special permits for bingo games for charitable
or public purposes.



('72 Code, § 5-25)



§ 113.24  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No person holding a permit from the Board of Aldermen shall operate a
game of bingo between the hours of l:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.



('72 Code, § 5-26)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.25  OPERATION OF GAME AFTER PERMIT REVOKED; PROHIBITED.



   No person shall engage in or operate the game of bingo within the town
after a permit to operate the game has been revoked by the Board of Aldermen.



('72 Code, § 5-27)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.26  SOLICITING OUTSIDE BUILDING; PROHIBITED.



   No person holding a permit to operate the game of bingo shall, outside
the building in which the game is to be played, solicit, induce, or attempt
to solicit or induce any person to engage in a game of bingo.



('72 Code, § 5-28)  Penalty, see § 10.99



POOL, BILLIARDS, AND BOWLING



§ 113.35  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall maintain or operate any pool or billiard table, game
room (including two or more pinball machines), bowling alley, or other table
or alley for any game or play for which a charge is made, either directly or
indirectly, unless he secures a license from the Board of Aldermen to do
so.  The license shall expire on June 30 each year, and shall not be
transferable, nor shall the license be issued to anyone other than the
operator.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   License tax, see § 110.10



Statutory reference:



   Billiards and pool tables, see G.S. § 105-64(C)



§ 113.36  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   An application for the license shall be made upon forms
provided by the Town Clerk and shall contain all information necessary for
the Board of Aldermen to act upon the application.  In addition, there shall
be a block to be checked indicating the applicant has read the entire chapter
regulating public amusements and will comply with the rules and regulations
therein.



   (B)   Completion of the application authorizes the Board or their
agents to verify the information contained therein by checking official
records within the framework of the National Privacy Act of l974.



   (C)   Completion of the application authorizes the Board or their
agents to inspect the premises, so licensed, upon reasonable notice at
reasonable times without a search warrant to determine if § 113.40 and §
113.41 are being complied with.



§ 113.37  LICENSE DENIAL; GROUNDS.



   The Board of Aldermen shall not issue a license to any person:



   (A)   Who has been convicted of unlawfully selling intoxicating
liquors within the last five years;



   (B)   Who has received a conviction for any violation of any
provision of this chapter;



   (C)   Who has been convicted of unlawfully selling narcotic drugs.



§ 113.38  LICENSE DENIAL; NOTICE AND HEARING.



   (A)   Before the Board of Aldermen shall refuse to issue a license
or refuse to renew a license previously issued, the Board shall provide the
applicant with adequate notice and opportunity to be heard in accordance with
division (B) and (C).



   (B)   When directed by the Board, the Town Clerk shall give written
notice to the applicant that the Board has made a preliminary decision to
deny the license applied for and unless the person notifies the Town Clerk
within ten days after receipt of the written notice that he requests a
hearing before the Board, the Board will proceed to deny the license.



   (C)   If a hearing is requested in accordance with division (B), the
Board shall set a date for the hearing at the earliest convenient time, and
shall take no final action on the license until after this hearing has been
completed.  At the hearing, the reason or reasons for the Board's
preliminary decision to deny the license in question shall be explained. The
applicant shall be given an opportunity to explain why the Board's
preliminary decision should not become final.



   (D)   In deciding whether to deny a license, the Board may consider
by way of illustration and limitation, those requirements and prohibitions
for licensees contained in §§ 113.36, 113.39, and 113.40 of this subchapter.



§ 113.39  FORM AND CONTENT OF LICENSE.



   Every license issued pursuant to this subchapter shall specify the
premises for which it is issued, the number of games, tables, or alleys to be
operated thereunder, the name of the operator, and the dates upon which the
license begins and shall expire.  The license shall be posted in a prominent
place on the premises at all times.



§ 113.40  LICENSEE AND EMPLOYEES; PROHIBITIONS.



   Licensees under this subchapter shall not, and neither shall their
employees:



   (A)   Suffer or permit any gambling on the licensed premises at any
time; or the sale or use of any racing, football, or other parlay cards;



   (B)   Suffer or permit the licensed premises to become disorderly;
or permit any profane, obscene, or indecent language thereon;



   (C)   Suffer or permit any intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs to
be sold, kept, or consumed on the licensed premises; or



   (D)   Suffer or permit any person under the age required by law to
possess or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises.



Cross-reference:



   Remedies for violation of this section, see §§ 113.43 and 113.44
Statutory reference:



   Permitting minors to enter billiard rooms, see G.S. § 14-317



§ 113.41  RULES FOR OPERATION OF POOL ROOMS.



   The following rules shall be observed by all operators of pool rooms
within the town:



   (A)   No play on any table shall be allowed during the times when
pool rooms are required by this chapter to remain closed.



   (B)   All pool rooms shall be operated only on the ground floor of a
building, and clear glass windows of a size not less than 50% of the frontal
area shall be in those parts of the building facing any street, so that a
clear view may be had from the street.



   (C)   No screens, curtains, blinds, partitions, or other
obstructions shall be placed between the entrance to the room where pool is
played and the rear wall of the room.  A clear view of the interior from the
entrance to the rear of the room must be maintained at all times.



   (D)   No partitions forming rooms, stalls, or other enclosures where
the public congregates shall be permitted; however, this shall not be
construed so as to prohibit the maintenance of closets used exlusively for
storage purposes, or of toilets.



   (E)   There shall not be permitted or maintained any open or secret
connections through doors, windows, trap doors, hidden doors, panels,
stairways, or other devices within any place.



Cross-reference:



   Remedies for violations of this section, see §§ 113.43 and 113.44



§ 113.42  LIABILITY OF LICENSEE.



   The acts and conduct of the agents and employees of the licensee in the
conduct of the business shall be deemed to be the acts and conduct of the
licensee.



§ 113.43  LICENSE SUSPENSION; REVOCATION; NOTICE AND HEARING.



   The Board of Aldermen, upon receipt of a clear cut, significant
violation of the rules and regulations set forth in § 113.40 and § 113.41
shall direct the Town Clerk to inform the licensee of a hearing to be held
within five days.  The notice will be in writing and proof of delivery
required.  The Board shall review the charges of violation and the licensee
shall have the opportunity to either refute the charges or offer evidence of
extenuation or mitigation.  The licensee shall have the right to benefit of
counsel, at his expense, in the hearing.  The Board, after hearing the case,
shall determine the appropriate action to be taken, i.e., specified
suspension, revocation, warning, or dismissal of charges.



§ 113.44  EQUITABLE REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS.



   In addition to the provisions of § 113.43, the provisions of this
subchapter may be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a
court of competent jurisdiction.



CHAPTER 114:  VEHICLES FOR HIRE



Section



   114.01   Definitions



   114.02   Vehicle for hire license requirements



   114.03   Liability insurance requirements



   114.04   Term of vehicle for hire license



   114.05   Maximum number of licenses



   114.06   [Reserved]



   114.07   [Reserved]



   114.08   Vehicle for hire license holders to file information on
authorized drivers



   114.09   Refusal to issue or revocation of license



   114.10   Revocation of vehicle for hire license; notice and hearing



   114.11   [Reserved]



   114.12   Refusal to pay charges



   114.13   Establishment of taxi stands



   114.14   Taxi stand regulations



   114.15   [Reserved]



   114.16   [Reserved]



   114.17   Records to be maintained



   114.18   Compliance with traffic regulations



   114.19   Fares



   114.20   Soliciting fares and persons for transportation



   114.21   Display of certain information



   114.22   Regularity of operation



§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “BUS.” A motor vehicle which has the capacity to transport more
than 15 passengers, for hire at a fixed rate on regular routes, with a fixed
schedule or between fixed terminals on the streets of the town. A van,
trolley or jitney with the capacity to transport more than 15 persons shall
be classified as a “BUS”.



   “CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.” The geographic areas of the Town of
Wrightsville Beach located between the northern line of Salisbury Street
(located between its easternmost point and the eastern end of the bridge
crossing Banks Channel) and the northern line of Latimer Street (extended
eastwardly to the 1939 Property Line and westwardly to the high water mark of
Banks Channel).



   “HORSE-DRAWN VEHICLES FOR HIRE.” Any hack, carriage, wagon or
similar vehicle which is operated by being drawn by a horse or mule or other
beast of burden, for the transportation “for hire” of passengers.



   “LIMOUSINE.” A motor vehicle for hire with the capacity to seat no
more than 15 persons, which does not accept passengers indiscriminately
between points and along streets, provided that compensation is not computed
by means of a taximeter.



   “LOW SPEED VEHICLE.” A four-wheeled electric or gas vehicle that
can only be operated on streets or roads with speeds of 35 miles per hour or
less.



   “OWNER.” The person or entity engaging in the vehicle for hire
business in the town by causing vehicles for hire which are under the
owner’s ownership or control to be used by the owner or someone under his
or her direction or supervision for the purpose of carrying passengers for
hire. The “OWNER” is also referred to herein as the “holder of the
vehicle for hire license.”



   “PEDICAB.” A cycle with three or more wheels operated by one person
for the purpose of, or capable of, transporting passengers for hire in seats
or on a platform made part of any “PEDICAB”.



   “RICKSHAW.” A two-wheeled vehicle pulled by one person for the
purpose of, or capable of, transporting not more than two passengers for hire.



   "TAXI STAND." A parking area located on a public street reserved
exclusively for a designated period of time for the parking of taxicabs.



   “TAXICAB.” A motor vehicle for hire which transports passengers for
a fare, which fare is determined in whole or in part, by a measurement to be
made during the trip, of the distance over which the passenger is transported.



   “TAXIMETER.” A mechanical instrument or device by which the charge
for the hire of a taxicab at a predetermined rate is mechanically calculated
and registered for the distance travelled and for the waiting time separately
and upon which such a charge shall be indicated by means of figures.



   “TOUR SERVICE MOTOR VEHICLE.” A motor vehicle engaged in the
business of carrying passengers for hire or offering to carry passengers for
hire through any part of the town when the primary purpose of riding in such
vehicle is not transportation but touring and sightseeing.



   “VEHICLE FOR HIRE.” Any motor vehicle, horse-drawn vehicle, or
other vehicle or device designed or used for the transportation of passengers
for hire, the charges for which are determined by agreement, mileage or by
the length of time, or donation for which the vehicle is engaged. As used in
this chapter a vehicle for hire does not include:



      (1)   School buses;



      (2)   Vehicles used or operated under the control of the
United States, the State of North Carolina, or any political subdivision of
the State of North Carolina;



      (3)   Vehicles used for ride-sharing programs on a non-profit
basis;



      (4)   Vehicles used for commuter services operated by an
employer for the exclusive use of its employees;



      (5)   Vehicles used as ambulances;



      (6)   Vehicles without a taximeter that are used exclusively
to provide transportation for persons with a mental or physical disability or
illness, older adults, or persons who require non-emergency medical treatment
and are operated by a non-profit corporation or a state or local social
service agency;



      (7)   Vehicles which are the subject of a cost sharing
arrangement between passengers and drivers, which arrangements are not
designed to generate a profit;



      (8)   Vehicles providing shuttle transportation of passengers
to or from prescribed locations such as hotels, motels, shopping centers,
business or commercial buildings, factories or theaters pursuant to a
contract with a business at the prescribed location where the passengers are
not charged a fee and passengers are not accepted or discharged
indiscriminately between prescribed locations; and



      (9)   Vehicles excluded from the town’s regulatory authority
by state law, including vehicles regulated by the Utilities Commission under
the provisions of G.S. § 62-260.



   “VEHICLE FOR HIRE LICENSE.” The license issued to any person who is
the owner of any vehicle for hire under this chapter.



   “‘W’ STICKER.” A sticker issued by the City of Wilmington to
taxicabs which serves as proof of passing the safety checks performed by the
City of Wilmington. All such stickers shall have an assigned number which is
displayed on the sticker.



(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10; Am. Ord. 1655, passed 5-12-11; Am. Ord. 1664,
passed 11-16-11; Am. Ord. 1689, passed 8-16-12; Am. Ord. 1712, passed 6-13-13)



§ 114.02  VEHICLE FOR HIRE LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Before any person shall operate a vehicle for hire on the
streets of the town, he or she shall first obtain a vehicle for hire license
(the “license”) to do so. The application shall be in writing on forms
supplied by the town and shall be filed with the Town Manager or designee. A
separate application shall be filed for each vehicle for hire and a separate
license shall be obtained for each vehicle for hire. The application shall
include such information deemed reasonably necessary to determine whether the
license shall be issued in accordance with the criteria set forth in this
chapter. All such information shall be accurate, to the best of the
applicant’s knowledge. The information shall include, but not limited to
the following:



      (1)   The name(s) of the owner(s) of the business operating
the vehicle for hire;



      (2)   Copies of registration cards showing VIN numbers and
appropriate tag numbers as required by the State of North Carolina for the
type of vehicle; or copies of leases showing VIN numbers and appropriate tag
numbers as required by the State of North Carolina for the type of vehicle
for any leased vehicles;



      (3)   Certificates of insurance complying with the
requirements set forth in this chapter;



      (4)   Copy of the current North Carolina Safety Inspection
Certificate completed by a certified North Carolina Inspection Station;



      (5)   Proof that each taxicab has passed a current safety
inspection covering the taxicab and its metering device. A current permit
from the Wilmington International Airport, the City of Wilmington, or the
City of Jacksonville will serve as sufficient proof that such inspection has
occurred;



      (6)   Copy of a current business license issued by the city.



   (B)   The Town Manager or designee shall determine whether or not
licenses shall be issued in accordance with this chapter for the privilege of
operating a vehicle for hire within the town. The Town Manager may refuse to
issue a license if the applicant fails to comply with or meet the
requirements set forth in this chapter.



   (C)   A vehicle for hire license shall expire on June 30 of each
calendar year. The license issued for the operation of any vehicle for hire
may not be transferred. Any change in the ownership of the business shall
require that the new owner of the business apply for a new license for each
vehicle to be operated in the town.



   (D)   A vehicle for hire license shall be issued only in the name of
the owner of the business operating the vehicle for hire.



   (E)   An annual license fee of $15 shall be charged for each vehicle
for hire operated upon the public streets of the town.



(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10; Am. Ord. 1664, passed 11-16-11)



§ 114.03  LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any vehicle
for hire over and upon the streets of the town without first taking out and
keeping in force at all times a policy or policies of liability insurance
with a company licensed to do business in the State of North Carolina.
Coverage will be applicable for claims arising from bodily injury and/or
property damage, including accidental death which may arise directly or
indirectly from the operation of such vehicle. The insurance shall be in the
following minimum amounts:



      (1)   For taxicabs, the amounts set forth in G.S. § 20-280;



      (2)   For all other vehicles for hire, the amount of such
insurance shall be $500,000 combined single limits for bodily injury and/or
property damage unless otherwise limited by law or regulation.



   (B)   Any person who is otherwise qualified for operating vehicles
for hire in the town as provided in this chapter shall file with the Town
Manager a certificate of insurance coverage certifying that there is in
effect a policy or policies of liability insurance as specified in division
(A) above. The insurance provider or its agent shall also certify on these
documents that it will notify the town by registered or certified mail at
least 20 days prior to any cancellation or non-renewal of coverage.



   (C)   If the vehicle for hire is to be operated by a lessee, such
insurance shall be furnished by the owner or the lessee or by both.



(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)



§ 114.04  TERM OF VEHICLE FOR HIRE LICENSE.



   (A)   A vehicle for hire license shall constitute a franchise from
the town for the operation of a vehicle for hire within the town subject to
the provisions of this chapter for one year. All certificates shall expire on
June 30 following the date of issuance.



   (B)   Applications for renewal shall be filed upon the expiration of
the license and shall be filed on forms provided by the Town Manager.



(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)



§ 114.05 MAXIMUM NUMBER OF LICENSES.



   (A)   The maximum number of vehicles for hire allowed to meet the
requirements for the convenience and necessity of the public within the town
are as follows:



      (1)   Taxicabs: 175;



      (2)   Buses/trolleys: 10;



      (3)   Horse-drawn vehicles for hire: 5;



      (4)   Limousines: 25;



      (5)   Low speed vehicles: 10;



      (6)   Pedicabs/rickshaws: 10.



   (B)   Licenses for each category will be issued on a
first-come-first-serve basis. No new license to operate vehicles for hire in
the town shall be issued once the maximum in the applicable category has been
reached.



(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10; Am. Ord. 1664, passed 11-16-11; Am. Ord. 1717,
passed 9-12-13)



§ 114.06  [RESERVED.]



§ 114.07  [RESERVED.]



§ 114.08  VEHICLE FOR HIRE LICENSE HOLDERS TO FILE INFORMATION ON
AUTHORIZED DRIVERS.



   The holder of a vehicle for hire license shall keep on file with the
Police Department a copy of the current North Carolina driver’s license
showing the name, address, picture ID and age of any person authorized and
hired by the license holder to drive the taxicab or vehicle for hire of the
license holder. Prior to hiring or allowing any such authorized person to
drive the holder’s taxicab or vehicle for hire, the holder shall furnish
the Police Department, in addition to the above information, satisfactory
evidence of the person’s qualifications as required by law.



(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)



§ 114.09  REFUSAL TO ISSUE OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   The Town Manager shall have the authority to refuse to issue a vehicle
for hire license or to revoke a license for any of the following reasons:



   (A)   If the applicant for a license or the holder of a current
license has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Failure to maintain liability insurance as required by the
state and the town.



   (C)   Failure to obtain and display proper license tags as required
by law.



   (D)   Failure to maintain motor equipment in good repair.



   (E)   Fraudulent sale or transfer of a Wrightsville Beach license.



   (F)   The holder of the license or any driver of a licensed vehicle
for hire is convicted of a felony against this state or convicted of any
offense against another state that would have been a felony if committed in
this state.



   (G)   The holder of the license or any driver of a licensed vehicle
for hire is convicted of a violation of any federal or state laws including
but not limited to the use, possession or sale of alcoholic beverages or
narcotic or barbiturate drugs and prostitution.



   (H)   Habitual violation of traffic laws or ordinances. If an
applicant for a license or the holder of a current license has, or employs
drivers that have, violated traffic laws or regulations resulting in an
accumulation, under G.S. § 20-16, within a three year period, of 12 or more
points; or eight or more points within the three year period following the
reinstatement of a state driver’s license that has been suspended or
revoked, or any comparable provisions of the law in another state; or has
been convicted of any other violation resulting in the suspension or
revocation of the state driver’s license.



   (I)   If an applicant for a license has had a vehicle for hire
license revoked three times in any five year period.



   (J)   If an applicant for a license has failed to timely pay any
penalty assessed for a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)



§ 114.10  REVOCATION OF VEHICLE FOR HIRE LICENSE; NOTICE AND HEARING.



   (A)   Upon the refusal to issue or the decision to revoke a vehicle
for hire license, the Town Manager shall give the applicant or the licensee
written notice of the grounds for the refusal or revocation. The applicant or
licensee may, within ten days after the day on which notice is served,
request in writing a conference with the Town Manager to discuss the refusal
or revocation. The request shall specify the reasons why the license should
be issued or should not be revoked. The Town Manager shall arrange the
conference within a reasonable time.



   (B)   If the applicant or licensee fails to request a conference
within ten days after the day on which notice is served, the Town Manager
shall revoke the license or the refusal to issue shall stand.



   (C)   If the Town Manager refuses to issue a vehicle for hire
license, or revokes a license, the applicant, or former licensee, may apply
for a new license at any time thereafter if the reason for which the license
was refused or revoked no longer exists, and if no other reason exists for
refusing to issue a license.



(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)



§ 114.11  [RESERVED.]



§ 114.12  REFUSAL TO PAY CHARGES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to fraudulently engage or use any
taxicab or vehicle for hire, not intending at the time to pay for the use of
the same, and then refuse to pay the rates prescribed.



(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)



§ 114.13  ESTABLISHMENT OF TAXI STANDS.



   (A)   A taxi stand is hereby established on the east side of South
Lumina Avenue beginning at the intersection of the eastern line of South
Lumina Avenue with the southern line of Stone Street and extending
southwardly for a distance of 124 feet.



      (1)   The northernmost 69 feet of the taxi stand referred to
in division (A) above has been further designated as a vehicle loading and
unloading zone during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. under the
provisions of Chapter 76. The area so designated as a vehicle loading and
unloading zone shall be used exclusively for that purpose during the hours of
6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and shall be used exclusively as a taxi stand during
the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.



      (2)   The southern portion of the designated taxi stand
consists of three marked and metered parking spaces. These three spaces shall
be used exclusively as general/metered parking for the public during the
hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and shall be used exclusively as a taxi stand
during the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.



      (3)   Drivers of taxicabs or other vehicles for hire are
prohibited from blocking any driveway or property access that is located in
the designated taxi stand.



   (B)   A taxi stand is hereby established on the east side of North
Lumina Avenue beginning at the intersection of the eastern line of North
Lumina Avenue with the northern line of Birmingham Street extending in a
northerly direction to the intersection of the eastern line of North Lumina
Avenue with the southern line of East Columbia Street.



      (1)   The southernmost 78 feet of this designated taxi stand
has been further designated as a loading and unloading zone during the hours
of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. under the provisions of Chapter 76. The area so
designated as a vehicle loading and unloading zone shall be used exclusively
for that purpose during the hours 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and shall be used
exclusively as a taxi stand during the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.



      (2)   The northern portion of the designated taxi stand
consists of two marked and metered parking spaces. These two spaces shall be
used exclusively as general/metered parking for the public during the hours
of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and shall be used exclusively as a taxi stand
during the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.



   (C)   A taxi stand is hereby established on the west side of North
Lumina Avenue beginning at the intersection of the western line of North
Lumina Avenue with the southern line of Columbia Street and extending
southwardly for a distance of 164 feet. This designated taxi stand consists
of seven marked and metered parking spaces. These seven spaces shall be used
exclusively as general/metered parking for the public during the hours of
6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. except from 6:00 p.m. Friday until 6:00 p.m. Sunday
and at any time on the legal holidays of Memorial Day, Independence Day and
Labor Day when these spaces shall be used exclusively as a fire safety lane.
During the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., these seven spaces may be used as
a taxi stand on the condition that during the time that such spaces are used
as a fire safety lane, drivers of taxi cabs must remain in their cabs at all
times and shall immediately vacate the fire safety lane for emergency
vehicles.



   (D)   Drivers of taxicabs using this taxi stand established by this
section may utilize any space within the taxi stand to pick up or drop off
passengers.



   (E)   Within the Central Business District as defined in this
chapter, drivers of taxi cabs may only pick up or drop off passengers within
the designated taxi stands established by this chapter. Provided, that this
prohibition shall not apply in those circumstances where a taxi cab is
responding to a call to pick up a passenger at a specific residential
structure located within the Central Business District.



(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10; Am. Ord. 1634, passed 7-15-10; Am. Ord. 1689,
passed 8-16-12)



§ 114.14  TAXI STAND REGULATIONS.



   (A) Taxi drivers shall not stand or park on any street except at
designated taxi stands, except while actually engaging in pick-up or delivery
of passengers.



   (B)   No driver shall park his or her taxicab in such a manner as to
interfere with traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian, at any location.



   (C)   No more than two taxis operated by any single business shall
occupy any one taxi stand at any one time.



(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)



§ 114.15 [RESERVED.]



§ 114.16 [RESERVED.]



§ 114.17  RECORDS TO BE MAINTAINED.



   The Town Manager or designee shall have the right to inspect the
records of the holder of a vehicle for hire license at any time during normal
business hours of the operation. Additionally, the holder of such license
shall provide reports to the Town Manager or designee as follows:



   (A)   A report of the termination of employment of any driver for
any reason within 15 days of such termination.



   (B)   A copy of the North Carolina Safety Inspection Certificate
within 15 days of the annual inspection of each vehicle, if applicable.



   (C)   A summary of any changes in the insurance coverage for any
vehicle for hire.



   (D)   A report of the revocation of the North Carolina driver’s
license of the holder of such license or any driver of a licensed vehicle for
hire or any conviction of the holder of such license or any driver of a
licensed vehicle for hire of any of the offenses described in § 114.09
hereinabove within five days of the date of such revocation or conviction.



   (E)   A report of any changes in the ownership of the business
within five days of such change.



(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)



§ 114.18  COMPLIANCE WITH TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   Any person having been issued a vehicle for hire license under this
chapter shall be subject to all traffic provisions of the State of North
Carolina and this code, as well as those rules and regulations established by
the Town Manager under the authority of this chapter.



(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)



§ 114.19  FARES.



   (A)   Every vehicle for hire shall have at all times prominently
displayed so as to be easily visible to passengers therein the rates of fare
charged by the owners of such vehicles for hire.



   (B)   If demanded by the passenger, the driver in charge of a
vehicle for hire shall deliver to the person paying for the hiring of the
same, at the time of such payment, a receipt in legible type or writing
containing the name of the owner, the name of the driver, the Wrightsville
Beach number of the vehicle for hire, and any items for which a charge has
been made, the total amount paid, and the date of such payment.



   (C)   No person may operate a taxicab unless the taximeter is used
in determining the fare to be charged for distance traveled, and no greater
fare shall be charged to a passenger than is recorded on the reading face of
the taximeter for a trip or waiting time. No other rates or methods of
measuring the distance or waiting time charges shall be allowed.



(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)



§ 114.20  SOLICITING FARES AND PERSONS FOR TRANSPORTATION.



   Whenever any vehicle for hire is being operated as such upon the
streets of the town, the driver thereof shall not leave his or her vehicle
for the purpose of soliciting passengers, except upon request to assist with
the handling of baggage for a passenger.



(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)



§ 114.21  DISPLAY OF CERTAIN INFORMATION.



   (A)   The driver of any vehicle for hire, as well as the owner
thereof, shall be responsible for insuring that the following items are
displayed so as to be visible to passengers:



      (1)   The vehicle for hire license shall be affixed to the
upper left hand corner of the driver’s side front window of the vehicle;



      (2)   A photograph of the driver;



      (3)   A schedule of fares.



   (B)   The driver of a vehicle for hire shall, upon the request of
any passenger, give to such passenger the correct name and address of such
driver and such other information as will identify the vehicle, driver and
owner thereof.



(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10; Am. Ord. 1658, passed 7-14-11)



§ 114.22  REGULARITY OF OPERATION.



   (A)   Every person having complied with the provisions of this
chapter and obtained a license, as provided for in § 114.02, shall operate
such vehicle for hire in such businesses with reasonable regularity. Every
owner shall have a telephone number listed or to be listed in a Wilmington
telephone directory.



   (B)   Every owner who fails to operate the same as herein provided
over any period of 30 days shall be given ten days’ notice to appear before
the Town Manager to show cause why such license should not be revoked. If,
upon such hearing, it shall appear that such vehicle for hire is not being
operated at least three days per week, the Town Manager is authorized to
revoke such license. Upon revocation of a license, the Town Manager may issue
said license to a different owner in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.



(Ord. 1630, passed 6-24-10)



CHAPTER 115:  OTHER BUSINESSES



Section



   115.01   Definitions



   115.02   Rental, sale, leasing of motorcycles, midget cars, and the
like



   115.03   Solicitors and canvassers



   115.04   Motor boats for hire



   115.05   Retail sale of food and beverages from mobile vehicle;
prohibited



   115.06   Public parking lots



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate businesses, see G.S. § 160A-194



§ 115.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "AGENT."  The person having the agency for the manufacturer, producer,
or distributor.



   "BUSINESS."  Any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation,
or calling of any kind, subject by the provision of this chapter to a license
tax.



   "DANCE HALL."  Any place where the public is allowed to dance in a
public dance hall or public business establishment.



   "ENGAGED IN THE BUSINESS."  Engaged in the business as owner or
operator.



   "FISCAL YEAR."  The period beginning with July l and ending with June
30 next following.



   "LIVE MUSIC."  Any music produced by one or more persons singly or in
concert with one another, vocally or by mean of any musical instrument,
whether the music is produced professionally or otherwise.



   "PUBLIC PLACE."  Any place that is open to the public for business on
either a seasonal or year-round basis.



   "QUARTER."  Any three consecutive months.



('72 Code, § 5-1)



§ 115.02  RENTAL, SALE, LEASING OF MOTORCYCLES, MIDGET CARS, AND THE LIKE.



   No person shall operate, maintain, or engage in any business, trade, or
activity which involves or includes the rental, sale, or leasing of any
motorcycles, motor bikes, midget cars, or other fuel or electrically driven
vehicles.



('72 Code, § 5-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.03  SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS.



   No person shall go upon the town streets or upon any private property,
residence, or premises in the town for the purpose of soliciting from any
occupant thereof for orders and sales of goods and merchandise or services of
any character, for the purpose of offering to give or furnish any goods and
merchandise or services of any character, or for the purpose of inducing or
inviting orders or making solicitations without having first obtained from
the Chief of Police a permit to do so.  However, this section shall not
apply to brokers and regularly employed traveling salesmen engaged in
soliciting sales and selling to merchants and regularly operating firms and
industries.



('72 Code, § 5-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Regulation of solicitors and merchants, see G.S. § 160A-178



§ 115.04  MOTOR BOATS FOR HIRE.



   All operators for hire of motor boats who ply the waters of the Banks
Channel adjoining the town and who, through representation or otherwise,
solicit business in the town shall obtain a license from the town and shall
pay therefor $12.50.  The license shall cover the period between June 1 and
September 30 of each year.  The Mayor and Board of Aldermen reserve the
right to revoke any license issued at any time for cause.



('72 Code, § 5-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.05  RETAIL SALE OF FOOD AND BEVERAGES FROM MOBILE VEHICLE; PROHIBITED.



   No person shall, within the jurisdiction of the town, operate,
maintain, or engage in any business, trade, or activity, which includes or
involves the retail sale of food or beverages from a mobile vehicle, either
motorized or otherwise. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
events sponsored by the town.



(Ord., passed 5-28-78; Am. Ord. 1603, passed 6-11-09)    Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 115.06  PUBLIC PARKING LOTS.



   All persons desiring to establish and maintain a public parking place
or garage for motor vehicles, for the use of which a charge shall be made,
shall apply in writing to the Mayor and Board of Aldermen, setting forth the
location of the proposed public garage or parking place and the size
thereof.  If the location for the garage or parking place is approved by the
Mayor and Board, the Town Clerk shall issue a license to the person and shall
charge and collect in advance therefor 1/2 of $.01 for each square foot of
land to be used and maintained as a parking place or public garage. 
However, in no event shall the amount to be collected be less than $15. The
license shall contain the provision that the public parking place or garage
shall be used and conducted in an orderly manner and shall conform to all
provisions of this code and other ordinances of the town.



('72 Code, § 5-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 116:  MOVIE INDUSTRY




Section




   116.01   Definitions



   116.02   Requirement for permit



   116.03   Town Manager to issue permits



   116.04   Payment of security deposit



   116.05   Use of town equipment or personnel



   116.06   Issuance of permit, denial or permit and appeal



   116.07   Changes in permit



   116.08   No filming during certain periods



   116.09   Required use of law enforcement officers



   116.10   Use of explosives, special effects and similar devices



   116.11   Changes in structures



   116.12   Damage to berm; discharge into waterways



   116.13   Notice to adjacent residents



   116.14   Evidence of insurance



   116.15   Restriction on filming hours



   116.16   Solid waste disposal



   116.17   Suspension or revocation of permit



   116.18   Permit exemptions



 



   116.99   Penalty



§ 116.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "NEWS PURPOSES."  Any filming activity conducted for the purposes of
reporting on persons, events or scenes which are in the news for newspapers,
television news, and other news media.  News purposes shall not include
advertising or publicity films.



   "PRODUCTION COMPANY."  Any person, partnership or corporation engaged
in the business of film making activities subject to regulation under this
provisions of this chapter.



   "PUBLIC PROPERTY."  Any property owned by or controlled by the town. 
Such property shall include, but not be limited to, public street rights of
way within the town.



(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1278, passed 8-8-96)



§ 116.02  REQUIREMENT FOR PERMIT.



   Any production company undertaking filming activities within the town
shall be required to secure a permit on forms provided by the office of the
Town Manager and in accordance with the terms and conditions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1278, passed 8-8-96)



§ 116.03  TOWN MANAGER TO ISSUE PERMITS.



   Permits required under the provisions of this chapter shall be issued
by the Town Manager or his designee.  Applications for permits shall be
submitted utilizing forms provided by the office of the Town Manager and must
be submitted to the Town Manager at least seven days in advance of any
activities requiring issuance of such permit.



(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93)



§ 116.04  PAYMENT OF SECURITY DEPOSIT.



   (A)   If the activities described in the permit are to occur on
public property, the applicant shall make a deposit of up to $7,500 as
required by the Town Manager prior to issuance of a permit along with a
Certificate of Insurance with policy amounts satisfactory to the town. 
Additional requirements will be based on the overall impact production may
have on public property.  The deposit required under the provisions of this
section shall be paid in cash or by certified funds or bank check payable to
the town.  Such deposit shall be delivered to the town at the time the
application described in this chapter is delivered.  The application
required in accordance with the terms of this chapter shall be considered
incomplete and shall not be considered by the Town Manager until and unless
the deposit, as required herein, is made.



   (B)   In the event the production company damages any public
property in the course of carrying out its activities, the town may use the
deposit described herein for the purpose of repairing such damages. 
Further, to the extent the town incurs costs which result solely from the
activities pursuant to the permit and the production company fails to
reimburse the town for such costs, then the town shall be permitted to
utilize the deposit for payment in whole or in part of such expenses. 
Provided, however, that the giving of the deposit and use thereof as
described in this section shall in no way limit the town's rights to recover
from the production company for any loss, claim or damage resulting from the
activities undertaken by the production company.



   (C)   Upon completion of the activities pursuant to the permit, the
deposit shall be returned to the production company in the event there is no
damage or loss resulting from the activities of the production company
pursuant to the permit.  No refund of deposit will be made until appropriate
clearance has been received from the Town Manager or his or her designee.



(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1378-A, passed 4-26-01)



§ 116.05  USE OF TOWN EQUIPMENT OR PERSONNEL.



   (A)   The production company may request use of town equipment
and/or personnel at the time its application for a permit is submitted.  The
Town Manager shall have the sole discretion to determine whether such
equipment and personnel shall be made available in accordance with such
request.  In the event equipment or personnel are made available, payment by
the production company for the use of such equipment or personnel shall be
made in accordance with the provisions of a schedule of charges approved by
the Board of Aldermen and maintained in the office of the Town Manager. 
Payment for such equipment or personnel must be made prior to any refund of
deposit.  Such requests may be cancelled up to 24 hours prior to the time
that such equipment or personnel are required and in such event, the amount
paid by the production company shall be refunded in full.  In the event the
request is cancelled later than 24 hours prior to the time such personnel or
equipment is requested, no refund shall be made.



   (B)   Town equipment made available pursuant to this section shall
be operated only by authorized and qualified town employees.



(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1378-A, passed 4-26-01)



§ 116.06  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT, DENIAL OF PERMIT AND APPEAL.



   (A)   The Town Manager or his designee is charged with the
responsibility for issuing the permit to a production company as described
herein.  The Town Manager may refuse to issue a permit when the activity
described in the request for the permit would create a situation that would
prejudice the safety of the town or its  inhabitants, would unnecessarily
disturb the residents of the town, would unnecessarily impede traffic on
streets within the town limits, or would violate any ordinance, statute or
regulation of the town, state or United States Government.  In the event the
Manager denies a request for a permit, the applicant may appeal the Manager's
decision to the Board of Aldermen.  Such appeal will be heard by the Board
of Aldermen at the next regularly scheduled meeting at which the appeal can
be scheduled consistent with agenda deadlines established by the Town
Manager.  The decision of the Board of Aldermen shall be final.



   (B)   Any application that requires the closing of a street or the
beach strand for any period of time whatsoever shall be approved by the Board
of Aldermen. The decision of the Board of Aldermen in such event shall be
final.



   (C)   Each filming location shall require a separate permit
application.  In cases where a security deposit is required, there shall
only be one deposit required.



   (D)   The issuance of a permit as described hereinabove does not
include the right to use or occupy private property.  In addition to the
permit required under this chapter, a production company shall obtain a
property owner's written permission to use such private property in any
manner whatsoever.



(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1278, passed 8-8-96)



§ 116.07  CHANGES IN PERMIT.



   No schedule, proposed activity, filming location or other matter as
outlined in the permit application shall be changed by the production company
without an amendment to the permit approved by the Town Manager.  Any
request for a permit amendment shall be submitted to the Town Manager at
least 24 hours before any activity described in the amendment is to occur. 
Any services contracted under § 116.05 will be billed if 24-hour
notification is not received.



(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1378-A, passed 4-26-01)



§ 116.08  NO FILMING DURING CERTAIN PERIODS.



   No permit will be issued to a production company for filming during the
weekend of the North Carolina Azalea Festival or on any weekend (Friday after
5:00 p.m., Saturday or Sunday) from May 1st of each year through September 30.



(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord 1378-A, passed 4-26-01)



§ 116.09  REQUIRED USE OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.



   A production company shall be required to utilize Wrightsville Beach
law enforcement officers together with appropriate equipment as determined by
the Town Manager to assist in any circumstance where traffic is affected by
the filming activities or where such activities may cause crowd control
problems.  The determination as to whether law enforcement officers and
equipment are needed and the required number of law enforcement officers and
equipment shall be made exclusively by the Town Manager.  In the event law
enforcement officers and associated equipment are required, the cost of such
shall be paid by the production company in accordance with the schedule
referred to in § 116.05 above.  All payments for services must be paid
prior to release of any deposit made by the production company.



(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1218, passed 9-9-93; Am. Ord. 1378-A,
passed 4-26-01)



§ 116.10  USE OF EXPLOSIVES, SPECIAL EFFECTS AND SIMILAR DEVICES.



   No filming activity may be undertaken which involves the use of
explosives, pyrotechnics, fire, smoke-making machines or other special
effects designed for simulation of fire or explosion unless specifically
approved by the Fire Chief acting through the Town Manager.  The use of such
equipment shall be strictly in accordance with any local, state or federal
ordinances, statutes and regulations.  The permit application submitted in
conjunction with any filming activities undertaking the use of such materials
shall include a specific description of the plans for the storage, handling
and transfer of any explosive devices, pyrotechnics or other incendiary
devices or any materials of a hazardous nature that may be used in connection
with such filming.



(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93)



§ 116.11  CHANGES IN STRUCTURES.



   Any alteration of a structure in connection with filming, either
temporarily or permanently, shall be carried out in accordance with the North
Carolina State Building Code and shall require any applicable permits from
the Town's Building Inspection Division.



(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93)



§ 116.12  DAMAGE TO BERM; DISCHARGE INTO WATERWAYS.



   Any production company undertaking filming operations which might cause
damage to the berm and dune system adjacent to the Atlantic Ocean or which
might result in the discharge of any substances into the waterways
surrounding the town will specifically outline in their application a plan
for preventing such damage or discharge.



(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93)



§ 116.13  NOTICE TO ADJACENT RESIDENTS.



   All residents of premises in any area where filming activities may
cause an inconvenience or an interruption of normal activities are required
to be notified at least five days prior to the filming of the date and time
such filming is to be undertaken.  Such notice shall give the residents the
name, local address and local telephone number of a person employed by the
production company that can be contacted concerning such filming.  The Town
Manager, or his or her designee, may require signed acknowledgments from such
residents acknowledging receipt of such notification in the case of unusual
filming circumstances or where the residents may be particularly sensitive to
filming activities because of the location or configuration of the
surrounding area.



(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1278, passed 8-8-96; Am. Ord. 1378-A,
passed 4-26-01)



§ 116.14  EVIDENCE OF INSURANCE.



   If required as a condition of issuance of the permit, the production
company shall submit a policy of insurance naming the town as an additional
insured, such policy to be written with a company and in an amount
satisfactory to the town.



(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93)



§ 116.15  RESTRICTION ON FILMING HOURS.



   No filming shall be conducted in residential areas between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. unless specifically allowed in the permit issued by
the Town Manager.



(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93; Am. Ord. 1595, passed 4-9-09)



§ 116.16  SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL.



   If required by the permit issued by the town, the production company
shall utilize a dumpster or other recepticle as required by the town for the
disposition of solid waste, trash or garbage generated as a result of the
filming activities.  The production company shall be charged based on the
then existing fees utilized by the town.  The production company shall be
required to utilize the solid waste disposal services provided by the town. 
And solid waste, trash or garbage generated as a result of the production
company activities which is subject to recycling shall be recycled at the
town's recycling center located at the municipal complex.



(Ord. 1216, passed 8-26-93)



§ 116.17  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The film permit may be suspended or revoked by the Town
Manager, or his designee, if the permittee, its agents, employees or
contractors, fails to comply with the requirements as set forth in this
chapter, or with conditions imposed in the filming permit; or, if the Town
Manager or his designee determines that the permit was issued based on false
or misleading information, or that the public safety or welfare is being
imperiled by the filming activity.



   (B)   If a permit is suspended or revoked, the production company
shall cease operations immediately.  The permit shall only be reactivated
upon approval of the Town Manager, or his designee.



   (C)   Except for activities necessary to close down the location and
remove equipment and other property of the permit holder, no permittee shall
allow any filming activity to continue after the suspension or revocation of
a film permit pursuant to this section.



   (D)   Appeals of the permit suspension or revocation shall be
conducted in the manner specified in § 116.06.



(Ord. 1278, passed 8-8-96)



§ 116.18  PERMIT EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Filming activities for news purposes as defined in this
section.



   (B)   Filming activities conducted for use in a criminal
investigation or other governmental use.



   (C)   Filming activities conducted solely for private or family use.



   (D)   Filming activities by students for the purpose of fulfilling
class work assignments; filming activities conducted by recognized public or
private schools.



   (E)   Filming performed by a business entity conducted at the place
of business to promote sales events, announcements or other lawful activities.



   (F)   Non-commercial still photography.



(Ord. 1278, passed 8-8-96)



§ 116.99  PENALTY.



   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor
punishable as provided in G.S. § 14-4, to include, but not be limited to, a
fine not to exceed $500.



(Ord. 1278, passed 8-8-96)



CHAPTER 117: CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS



Section



Article I:  In General



   117.01   Statement of intent and purpose



   117.02   Short title



   117.03   Definitions



   117.04   Discriminatory practices prohibited



   117.05   Subscriber privacy



   117.06   Rate regulation



   117.07   Rights reserved to grantor



   117.08   Non-enforcement by the town



   117.09   Governing law and choice of forum



   117.10   Severability



   117.11   Publication of notices



Article II:  FRANCHISE



   117.12   Unlawful to operate without a franchise



   117.13   Franchises non-exclusive



   117.14   Franchises competitively neutral and non-discriminatory



   117.15   Term of the franchise



   117.16   Federal, state, and town jurisdiction



   117.17   Rights reserved to grantor



   117.18   Franchise agreement



   117.19   Initial franchise applications



   117.20   Consideration of initial applications



   117.21   Franchise renewal



   117.22   Grant of additional franchise



   117.23   Permits for non-franchised entities



   117.24   Review for competition



   117.25   Application and renewal fees



   117.26   System design



   117.27   The system



   117.28   Drops to public buildings



   117.29   Use of grantee facilities



   117.30   Upgrade of system



   117.31   Non-discriminatory access to cable system



   117.32   Institutional network, access channels



   117.33   General technical standards and customer service practices



   117.34   [Reserved]



   117.35   Books and records available to the grantor



   117.36   Reports required



   117.37   Technical standards



   117.38   Test and compliance procedure



   117.39   Emergency requirements



   117.40   Programming decisions



   117.41   Cable system office hours and telephone availability



   117.42   Parental control



   117.43   Installations exceeding standard installation



   117.44   Service area and line extension policy



   117.45   Town monitoring



   117.46   Access to inside wiring



Article III:  Construction Standards



   117.47   Right-of-way construction



   117.48   Compliance with laws



   117.49   Minimum interference



   117.50   Repair of property



   117.51   Erection of poles



   117.52   Reservations of street rights



   117.53   Underground installation



   117.54   Conduit



   117.55   Clearing poles and cables



   117.56   Moving facilities



   117.57   Work performed by others



   117.58   Duty to grantee



   117.59   System construction capabilities and schedule



Article IV:  General Financial and Insurance Provisions



   117.60   Franchise fee



   117.61   Performance bond



   117.62   Penalties procedure



   117.63   Bonds, indemnification, and insurance



   117.64   Grounds for revocation



   117.65   Procedure



   117.66   Foreclosure



   117.67   Receivership



   117.68   Purchase by grantor upon termination or revocation of
franchise



   117.69   Sale or transfer of franchise



   Appendix: Customer Service Standards



ARTICLE I:  IN GENERAL



§ 117.01  STATEMENT OF INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   The town, pursuant to applicable federal and state law, is
authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive franchises to construct,
operate, maintain, and reconstruct cable systems within the incorporated
areas of the town.



   (B)   The Board of Aldermen of the town finds that cable service has
become an integral part of its citizens’ lives and that evolving cable
systems have the potential to play an even more dramatic role in the future,
providing great benefits and advanced capabilities to the town.  At the same
time, the Board further finds that the public convenience, safety, and
general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers that are
vested in the town or such persons as the town designates.



   (C)   In order to ensure that the town and its residents receive
state-of-the-art cable services and capabilities as this technology further
evolves, all franchises granted pursuant to this chapter will be subject to
periodic review and modifications to keep current with changing law,
technology, and services.  It is the intent of this chapter to help ensure
that local cable operators provide the best possible cable service to
residents of the town, and any franchises issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be deemed to include this finding as an integral part thereof.



   (D)   Further, it is recognized that cable systems have the capacity
to provide entertainment and information services to the town’s residents
and may have the capacity to provide a variety of broadband, interactive
communications services to institutions and individuals.  For these
purposes, the following goals underlie the regulations contained herein:



      (1)   Cable television services should be made available to
all of the town’s residents at the lowest reasonable cost.



      (2)   The system should be capable of accommodating both the
present and reasonably foreseeable future state-of-the- art cable television
needs of the town.



      (3)   The systems authorized by this chapter shall be
responsive to the needs and interests of the local community and shall
provide the widest possible diversity of information sources and services to
the public.



      (4)   Each of the above-enumerated goals shall be sought to
the maximum extent, taking into account the costs and benefits to the
residents of the town.



   (E)   The Board further finds that on- going industry consolidation
could result in less local accountability, and that, therefore, stringent
customer service standards, including liquidated damages provisions, may be
the only practical means of ensuring compliance and approximating the costs
of franchise agreement noncompliance to the town and its residents.



§ 117.02  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as “Town of Wrightsville
Beach Cable Television Services Ordinance” (hereinafter referred to as this
“chapter”), and it shall become a part of the code of the town.  This
chapter shall take effect and be in force from and after its adoption for the
grant of any new franchise agreement or renewal of any franchise existing at
the time of adoption.  All ordinances or parts of the Town Code in conflict
with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.  When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number.  The words
“shall” and “will” are mandatory and “may” is permissive. Words
not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.



   “ADDITIONAL SERVICE.”  Any cable service other than basic service
provided over the system.



   “BASIC CABLE SERVICE.”  Any cable service tier that includes the
lawful retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any public,
educational, and governmental access programming required by this chapter or
a franchise agreement to be carried on the basic tier.  “BASIC CABLE
SERVICE” as defined herein shall be consistent with 47 U.S.C. § 543(b)(7)
(1997), and shall include any signal of any television broadcast station that
is provided by a grantee to any subscriber, except a signal which is
secondarily transmitted by a satellite carrier beyond the local service area
of such station.  Additional signals may be added to the basic tier by the
grantee.



   “BOARD.”  The Board of Aldermen of the town or its delegates.



   “CABLE ACT.”  The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Pub. L.
No. 98549, (codified at 47 U.S.C. §§ 521—611 (1982 & Supp. V. 1987) as
amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of
1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L.
No. 104-104 (1996) as may, from time to time, be amended.



   “CABLE INTERNET SERVICE.”  Any service offered by a grantee
whereby persons receive access to the internet or high-speed data information
services through the cable system.



   “CABLE SERVICE” or “SERVICE.”



      (1)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video
programming or (ii) other programming service;



      (2)   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for
the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.



   “CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM” or “CABLE SYSTEM.”  A facility
consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal
generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide
cable service to multiple subscribers within the franchise area, but such
term does not include:



      (1)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations;



      (2)   A facility that serves subscribers without using any
public right- of-way; or



      (3)   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in
whole or in part, to the provisions of 47 U.S.C. §§ 201—226, except that
such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility,
whether on a common carrier basis or otherwise, is used in the transmission
of video programming directly to subscribers



   “CAPITAL CONTRIBUTION.”  A contribution provided by a grantee as
determined in a franchise agreement that may at the town’s discretion be
utilized for the capital costs of the municipal access channel facilities or
to help defray the costs of an I-Net.



   “CAPITAL COSTS.”  Costs associated with the purchase of assets,
products, or other resources that are designed to provide service for more
than one year, whether incurred during initial construction or throughout the
life of the system.



   “CHANNEL.”  A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum
that is capable of carrying one standard video signal, in either analog or
digital form.  Consistent with future changes in technology and/or
applicable law, the parties may mutually agree to a different definition in
an individual franchise agreement.



   “COMMUNITY ACCESS CORPORATION” or “CAC.” A non-profit access
corporation serving the town, or any other person designated by the grantor
whose duties shall include the financing, management, and programming of
public access channels, and whatever other duties with respect to the public
access channels that the grantor from time to time may delegate.



   “COMPLAINT.”  Any written or electronic inquiry, allegation, or
assertion made by a person regarding service.



   “CONTROL.”  The holding of legal or financial control of or over
the holder of the franchise, regardless of whether such control is direct or
indirect, or is exercised or is permitted to be exercised directly or
indirectly through other persons, holdings, or entities.  Control shall
always be deemed to rest in the hands of any person that has the right or
authority to establish or change any policy or practice of the holder of the
franchise, whether such control may be exercised directly, or indirectly
through other persons.



   “CONVERTER.”  An electronic device that converts signals to a
frequency not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a
subscriber and, through the use of an appropriate channel selector, permits a
subscriber to view all authorized subscriber signals delivered at designated
converter dial locations.



   “DIRECT INCREMENTAL COSTS.”  The costs actually incurred by
grantee in meeting an obligation under its franchise which grantee would not
otherwise have incurred in order to either operate and conduct the business
of its cable system or meet another obligation of the franchise.



   “DOWNSTREAM SIGNAL.”  A signal originating from or provided by a
system to a subscriber terminal or other terminal including video, audio, or
digital signals or any other type of data or information for either programs
or other uses such as security alert services, etc.



   “DROP.”  The cable or cables that connect users of the system to
the distribution system in order to receive service.



   “EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNELS.”  Channels specially designated for
locally produced non-commercial educational access programming use.



   “EFFECTIVE DATE.”  The date a franchise becomes effective in
accordance with the franchise and the rules and procedures of the town.



   “FAIR MARKET VALUE.”  The price that a willing buyer would pay to
a willing seller for a going concern based on the system valuation prevailing
in the industry at the time.



   “FCC.”  The Federal Communications Commission or its designated
representative.



   “FRANCHISE.”  The rights and obligations extended by the town
pursuant to an initial authorization or a renewal thereof, to a person to
own, lease, construct, maintain, or operate a cable system in the right-of-
way within the franchise area for the purpose of providing cable services. 
Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include:
(i) any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of
transacting and carrying on a business within the town required by the
ordinances and laws of the town, including the provision of
telecommunications services; (ii) any generally applicable nondiscriminatory
permit, agreement, or authorization required in connection with operations in
the right-of-way, including, without limitation, permits and agreements for
placing devices on or in poles, conduits, or other structures, whether owned
by the town or a private entity, or for excavating or performing other work
in or along the right-of-way.



   “FRANCHISE AGREEMENT.”  That document which grants a franchise
pursuant to this chapter.



   “FRANCHISE AREA.”  The geographic area for which a franchise is
granted under the authority of this chapter.  If not otherwise specifically
stated in the franchise agreement, the franchise area shall be the entire
geographic area within the town as it is now, or may in the future be,
constituted.



   “FRANCHISE FEE.”  Any tax, fee, or assessment of any kind imposed
by the town or other governmental entity on a grantee or cable subscriber, or
both, solely because of status as such.  The term “FRANCHISE FEE” does
not include: (i) any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability; (ii)
capital costs that are required by a franchise agreement to be incurred by a
grantee for public access channels equipment and facilities; (iii)
requirements or charges incidental to the award or enforcement of a
franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit,
insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or (iv) any fee
imposed under Title 17 of the United States Code.



   “GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNELS.”  Channels specially designated for
locally produced non-commercial governmental access programming use.



   “GRANTEE.”  A person who is granted a franchise or that person’s
lawful successors, transferees, or assignees.



   “GRANTOR.”  The town.



   “GROSS REVENUES.”



      (1)   Any and all revenue of any kind, arising from,
attributable to, or in any way derived by the grantee from the operation of a
grantee’s system to provide cable service (it being agreed that for
purposes of this franchise agreement the term “cable service” shall be
defined by reference to FCC regulations), whether such revenue is received by
the grantee, its affiliates, or any person in which the grantee has a
financial interest, or by any other person who operates the system, directly
or indirectly.  “GROSS REVENUE” includes, by way of illustration and not
limitation, amounts charged for basic service; tier services; optional
premium, per-channel, per-program services; cable programming services; audio
services; channel guide subscriptions; installation, disconnection,
reconnection, and changes-in-service; equipment sales or rentals; leased
channel fees; late fees and administrative charges of any type; advertising
revenue; and revenue from the sale of subscriber names and addresses.  To
the extent that grantee receives revenue from cable services provided to a
subscriber for a fixed price that also includes non-cable services (that is,
those services are “bundled”), grantee shall allocate an appropriate
portion of those revenues for inclusion in “GROSS REVENUES.” If the fixed
price of the bundled services is lower than the aggregate of the prices of
those services if purchased individually, then the appropriate amount of the
revenue to be allocated to each service shall be proportional to the
individual price of that service when compared to the aggregate of the
individual prices of those services when unbundled.



      (2)   “GROSS REVENUES” shall not include:



         (a)   Deposits, refunds, and credits made to subscribers
and bad debt, except to the extent that bad debt is recovered.



         (b)   Pass-through payments received by the grantee from
third-party programmers to purchase services from entities other than the
grantee, which services benefit only the third-party programmers and for hich
the grantee neither received nor provides any consideration.



         (c)   Any taxes on services furnished by the grantee
which are imposed directly on any subscriber by the state, the town, or other
governmental unit and which are collected by the grantee on behalf of said
governmental unit.



         (d)   Any franchise fees collected by grantee under the
terms of this agreement.



      (3)   To the extent the scope of “GROSS REVENUES” is
limited by federal law or judicial action, the definitions herein shall be so
amended.



   “HEADEND.”  The electronic control center of the system including
components that amplify, filter, and convert incoming broadcast and other
television and electronic signals for distribution over the cable system.



   “INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK” or “I-NET.”  Capacity, fibers, or
both, from both within the primary cable network and/or separately
constructed networks that are dedicated to municipal users or other
governmental and educational users as determined by the town for two-way,
broadband, non-commercial, non- competitive, not-for-profit communications. 
The I-Net includes all equipment and maintenance of equipment required to
make the capacity available, including but not limited to fiber, cable
modems, coaxial cable, and all switching, routing, transmitting, and
receiving equipment necessary for the use of the I-Net as determined in the
individual franchise agreement.



   “INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK SERVICES.”  The provision of an I-Net by a
grantee to municipal users and other governmental and educational users as
determined by the town, pursuant to the terms of a franchise agreement for
non-commercial, noncompetitive, not-for-profit applications, including but
not limited to two-way dedicated voice, data, video, Internet, and telephony
channels connecting and interconnecting user facilities; computerized traffic
control systems; GIS systems; and the interconnection of facilities serving
police, fire, and other public safety systems.



   “LOCKOUT DEVICE.”  A mechanical or electrical accessory to a
subscriber’s terminal that inhibits the video or audio portions of a
certain program or certain channel(s) provided by way of a cable system.



   “NON-COMMERCIAL.”  Channels or programming operated on a
not-for-profit basis.



   “NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS.”  Those hours during which most similar
businesses in the community are open to serve customers.  In all cases,
“NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS” must include some evening hours at least one
night per week and/or some weekend hours.



   “NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS.”  Those service conditions that are
within the control of the franchisee.  Those conditions that are not within
the control of the franchisee include but are not limited to natural
disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and
severe or unusual weather conditions.  Those conditions that are ordinarily
within the control of the franchisee include but are not limited to special
promotions, pay-per- view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal
demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.



   “OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICE.”  Information that a grantee makes
available to all subscribers generally.



   “PERSON.”  Any corporation, partnership, proprietorship,
individual, organization, company, governmental entity, or any natural person.



   “PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNELS.”  Channels specially designated for
locally produced non-commercial public access programming use.



   “PUBLIC BUILDING.”  A building, or any portion thereof, owned,
leased, or otherwise occupied by the town.



   “REASONABLE NOTICE.”  Written notice addressed to the town or
grantee at such location as the parties have designated in the franchise
agreement as the address to which notice shall be transmitted to it, which
notice shall be sent by certified mail and postmarked not less than seven
business days prior to that day in which the party giving such notice shall
commence any action which requires the giving of notice.  In computing said
seven days, holidays recognized by the town shall be excluded.



   “RESIDENT.”  Any person residing in the town.



   “RIGHT-OF-WAY.”  Each of the following which have been, or are
hereafter, dedicated to the public and maintained by any public authority or
by others and located within the town, including, without limitation, the
surface and space within, above, and below any real property in which the
town has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee or other estate or
interest, or as a trustee for the public, including but not limited to any
public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court,
sidewalk, parkway, swale, river, tunnel, viaduct, bridge, park, or any other
place, area, easements, rights-of-way and similar public property and areas,
or real property owned by or under the control of the town.



   “SCHOOL.”  Any state-accredited public or nonprofit educational
institution including primary and secondary schools, both public and private.



   “SERVICE INTERRUPTION.”  The loss of picture or sound on one or
more cable channels.



   “STANDARD INSTALLATION.”  Any service drop not exceeding 150 feet
from a single point or pedestal attachment to the subscriber’s residence.



   “STATE-OF-THE-ART.”  The addition of new services and associated
equipment as they are developed, available, and when economically feasible
and marketable to subscribers as specifically required under the terms of a
franchise agreement.



   “SUBSCRIBER.”  Any person who or which elects to subscribe for any
purpose to cable service provided by a grantee by means of, or in connection
with, the cable system, and whose premises or facilities are physically wired
and lawfully activated to receive cable service from grantee’s cable system.



   “SYSTEM.”  A grantee’s cable system operated pursuant to a
franchise agreement within the franchise area.



   “TOWN.”  The Town of Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina, as it is
now, or may in the future be, constituted.



   “TOWN ADMINISTRATOR.”  A person designated by the town to
represent the town in all business with the grantee.



   “TRAINED REPRESENTATIVE.”  Employees of the grantee who have the
authority and capability while speaking with a subscriber to, among other
things, answer billing questions, adjust bills, and schedule service and
installation calls.



   “UPSTREAM SIGNAL.”  A signal originating from a subscriber’s
terminal to the headend of the system, including video, audio, or digital
signals or any other type of data or information for either programs or other
uses such as security alert services, etc.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.04  DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED.



   No grantee shall deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate
against subscribers, programmers, or general citizens on the basis of race,
color, religion, national origin, sex, disability, or age.  Every grantee
shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements of
state and federal law.  Each grantee shall comply at all times with all
other applicable federal, state, and local laws, and all executive and
administrative orders relating to non-discrimination.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.05  SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY.



   Grantees shall at all times comply with the federal subscriber privacy
requirements codified at 47 U.S.C. §551.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.06  RATE REGULATION.



   The town reserves the right to regulate rates for basic cable service
and any other services offered over the cable system, to the extent permitted
by federal or state law.  Grantee shall be subject to the rate regulation
provisions provided for herein, and those of the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) at 47 C.F.R., Part 7117.900, Subpart N.  The town shall
follow the rules relating to cable rate regulation promulgated by the FCC at
47 C.F.R., Part 7117.900, Subpart N.  To the extent required by applicable
federal or state law, grantee shall establish rates that are
nondiscriminatory within the same general class of subscribers and which must
be applied fairly and uniformly to all subscribers in the franchise area for
all services.  Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the grantee from
offering (i) discounts to commercial and multiple-family dwelling subscribers
billed on a bulk basis; (ii) promotional discounts; (iii) reduced
installation rates for subscribers who have multiple services; (iv) discounts
for senior citizens and/or low income residents; or (v) reduced rates to
subscribers who receive non-cable services in addition to cable services.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.07  RIGHTS RESERVED TO GRANTOR.



   (A)   Upon either the expiration or revocation of a franchise,
grantor may permit and/or require a grantee to continue to operate the cable
system for an extended period of time not to exceed three months from the
date of such expiration or revocation.  A grantee shall continue to operate
the system under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the applicable
franchise agreement and to provide cable service and any and all other
services that grantee had been providing.



   (B)   The grantor shall have the right to compel continued operation
of the cable system, whether by the grantee or a trustee or receiver or by
the grantor, and to ensure that such operation is consistent with public
interest as determined by a court of competent jurisdiction.  The grantee
may not remove equipment or documents necessary for continued operation of
the system.



   (C)   At all reasonable times, grantee shall permit examination by
the town of the system, together with any appurtenant property of grantee
situated within or without the town when necessary to ascertain the
grantee’s compliance with this chapter, the franchise agreement, and all
applicable laws.



   (D)   The town shall have the right of intervention in any suit or
proceeding to which the grantee is a party relative to grantee’s operations
in the town, and the grantee shall not oppose such intervention by the town.



   (E)   Except as otherwise provided by applicable law, the grantee
shall have no recourse whatsoever against the town or its officials, boards,
commissions, agents, or employees for any loss, cost, expense, or damage
arising out of any provision or requirements of this chapter or the franchise
agreement, or of their enforcement.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.08  NON-ENFORCEMENT BY THE TOWN.



   Grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of
the provisions of this chapter or the franchise agreement by reason of any
failure of the town to enforce prompt compliance.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.09  GOVERNING LAW AND CHOICE OF FORUM.



   Any dispute arising with respect to this chapter or a franchise
agreement granted pursuant to it shall be subject to review by the state and
federal courts having primary jurisdiction in the town.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.10  SEVERABILITY.



   If any material portion of this chapter, or a franchise agreement
adopted pursuant to it, is held by an authority of competent jurisdiction, to
be invalid or unlawful as conflicting with applicable laws now or hereafter
in effect, or is held by a court or competent governmental authority to be
modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such
applicable laws, such provision shall be considered a separate, distinct, and
independent part of this chapter or franchise agreement, and, to the extent
possible, such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of
all other provisions thereof.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.11  PUBLICATION OF NOTICES.



   All public notices required to be published by grantor under this
chapter or any franchise agreement shall be published in a manner consistent
with the public notice laws of the state.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



ARTICLE II:  FRANCHISE



§ 117.12  UNLAWFUL TO OPERATE WITHOUT A FRANCHISE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, operate, or maintain
a cable system or to provide cable service in the town without a franchise. 
Any such person shall be subject to a fine of $500 per day.  The payment of
such fine notwithstanding, all such violators shall be subject to all other
applicable provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to the
payment of a franchise fee.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.13  FRANCHISES NON-EXCLUSIVE.



   Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive. 
The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such
additional franchises for a cable system or any component thereof to any
other person, including itself, as it deems appropriate, subject to
applicable federal and state law.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.14  FRANCHISES COMPETITIVELY NEUTRAL AND NON-DISCRIMINATORY.



   (A)   (1)   The town shall grant franchises on terms that are
competitively neutral and non-discriminatory and shall include similar terms
pertaining to:



         (a)   Term;



         (b)   Franchise fees;



         (c)   Public, educational, and governmental (“PEG”)
access channels;



         (d)   PEG access capital and operating support



      (2)    Any franchise granted, when evaluated as a whole, shall
not be more favorable or less burdensome than any other franchise granted
under this chapter.



   (B)   Procedure for review and equal requirements.



      (1)   The town will notify existing grantees in writing at
least 30 days in advance, with a copy of a proposed additional franchise, of
its intent to grant an additional franchise for cable services.



      (2)    Within ten days after receipt, existing grantees may
give written notice to town that the proposed additional franchise is
inconsistent with (A) above.



      (3)   The town shall, prior to approving the additional
franchise, notify existing grantees of the town’s determination related to
notice under the terms of this chapter.



      (4)   If the town determines that the terms of an additional
franchise are more favorable or less burdensome than those imposed upon the
grantees, then:



         (a)   Except for PEG capital and operating grant
requirements:



            1.    The town may make such modifications as it
deems necessary to ensure that the terms of the additional franchise are no
more favorable or less burdensome than those imposed upon existing grantees;
or



            2.   The town may modify the terms and
requirements of existing franchises as mutually agreed to by existing
grantees, and if the existing grantees do not reasonably so agree, the town
shall be deemed to have fulfilled its obligations under (A) above.



         (b)   The town may adjust the peg capital and operating
grant requirements to ensure the total dollars contributed by a new grantee
are the same as required of existing grantees.  In the event existing
grantees have paid town amounts in excess of the amounts required of the new
grantee, the town will refund the difference to existing grantees.



      (5)   The town shall provide notice to existing grantees of
the date, time, and place of its proceedings relating to the approval of the
proposed franchise.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.15  TERM OF THE FRANCHISE.



   A franchise agreement shall establish the term of each individual
franchise.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.16  FEDERAL, STATE, AND TOWN JURISDICTION.



   (A)   The town shall exercise appropriate regulatory authority under
the provisions of this chapter, the Cable Act, and all applicable laws. 
This authority shall be vested in the Town Board and administered through the
Town Manager or his/her designee in order to provide day-to- day
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and any
franchise granted hereunder, and to carry out the town’s responsibilities
with regard to cable service.



   (B)   This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with
all applicable federal and state laws.



   (C)   In the event that the federal or state government discontinues
preemption in any area of cable communications over which it currently
exercises jurisdiction in such manner as to expand rather than limit
municipal regulatory authority, grantor may, if it so elects, adopt rules and
regulations in these areas to the extent permitted by law, provided that the
same do not materially alter the rights and obligations of a grantee under
any existing franchise.



   (D)   Grantee’s rights are subject to the police powers of the
town to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety, and
welfare of the public.  Grantee shall comply with all applicable general
laws and ordinances enacted by the town pursuant to that power.



   (E)   (1)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all
franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of this chapter. 
This chapter shall also apply to all existing franchises, to the extent not
inconsistent with the terms of any such franchise or applicable law.  In the
event of any conflict between the terms and conditions of a franchise
agreement and the provisions of this chapter, and other generally applicable
regulatory ordinances of the town, the specific terms of the franchise
agreement shall control.  A franchise agreement (including all of
grantee’s particular rights, powers, protections, privileges, immunities,
and obligations associated therewith as the same exist on the date hereof)
shall constitute a legally binding contract between the town and grantee, and
as such, cannot be amended, modified, or changed by the town without the
consent of grantee in any manner whatsoever, whether by ordinance, rule,
regulation, or otherwise, to impose on grantee more stringent or burdensome
requirements or conditions, provided, however, that nothing herein contained
shall preclude the town from the proper exercise of its police powers or its
powers of eminent domain.



      (2)   In the event of a change in state or federal law which
by its terms would require the town to amend this chapter, the parties shall
modify the existing franchise in a mutually agreed upon manner.



   (G)   Grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter or a franchise agreement by reason of
any failure of the town to enforce prompt compliance.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.17  RIGHTS RESERVED TO GRANTOR.



   In addition to any rights specifically reserved to grantor by this
chapter or a franchise agreement, grantor reserves to itself every right and
power that is required to be reserved by a provision of any other ordinance
or under any other franchise.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.18  FRANCHISE AGREEMENT.



   (A)   Every grantee shall agree to the terms and provisions of a
franchise agreement as negotiated between the grantee and the grantor.



   (B)   In addition to those matters required elsewhere in this
chapter to be included in the franchise agreement, each franchise agreement
must contain the following express representations by each grantee:



      (1)   Grantee has examined all of the provisions of this
chapter and accepts and agrees to all of the provisions of this chapter, as
it exists as of the effective date of the grantee’s franchise agreement,
except as set forth in this chapter and any supplementary specifications as
to construction, operation, or maintenance of the system which the town may
include in the franchise agreement, unless otherwise agreed in the applicable
franchise agreement.



      (2)   Grantee recognizes, unless otherwise agreed in the
applicable franchise agreement, the right of the town to adopt such
additional regulations of general applicability as it shall find necessary in
the exercise of its police power.



   (C)   Every franchise agreement shall contain such further
conditions or provisions as may be negotiated between the town and a grantee,
except that no such conditions or provisions shall be such as to conflict
with any provisions of state or federal law.  In case of any conflict or of
any ambiguity between any terms or provisions of a franchise agreement and
this chapter, the provisions of the franchise agreement shall control.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.19  INITIAL FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS.



   Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable system shall file
an application with the town.  An application for an initial franchise for a
cable television system shall contain, where applicable:



   (A)   A statement as to the proposed franchise area;



   (B)   Resumé of prior history of applicant, including the legal,
technical, and financial expertise of applicant in the cable television field;



   (C)   List of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant,
if a partnership, or a list of the principals of the applicant, if a limited
liability company, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by
shareholders holding 10% or greater, if a corporation;



   (D)   List of officers, directors, and managing employees of
applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person;



   (E)   The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of
applicant or any other business entity owning or in control of applicant, in
whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by applicant;



   (F)   A current financial statement of applicant verified by a CPA
audit or otherwise certified to be true, complete, and correct to the
reasonable satisfaction of the town;



   (G)   Proposed preliminary construction and cable service schedule;
and



   (H)   Any additional information that the town may require for the
administration of the franchise.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.20  CONSIDERATION OF INITIAL APPLICATIONS.



   Upon receipt of any application and application fee for an initial
franchise, the Town Administrator shall prepare a report and make his or her
recommendations respecting such application to the Board.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.21  FRANCHISE RENEWAL.



   Franchise renewals shall be in accordance with applicable law,
including but not limited to the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as
amended.  Grantor and a grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal
negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.22  GRANT OF ADDITIONAL FRANCHISE.



   In considering whether to grant one or more additional franchises, the
town shall consider granting such additional franchise on a competitively
neutral basis with terms that, when taken, as a whole are no less burdensome
than any current franchise(s).  The purpose of this section is to ensure
that any competition which may occur among grantees will be on terms which
when taken as a whole are nondiscriminatory according to federal law.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.23  PERMITS FOR NON-FRANCHISED ENTITIES.



   (A)   The town may issue a license, easement, or other permit to a
person other than the grantee to permit that person to traverse any portion
of the grantee’s franchise area within the town in order to provide service
outside, but not within the town.  Such license or easement, absent a grant
of a franchise in accordance with this chapter, shall not authorize nor
permit said person to provide cable service to any subscriber within the town
nor render any other service within the town.



   (B)   The granting of such license, easement, or permit shall be
conditioned upon the payment of fee for occupancy of the public right-of-way
to the extent permitted by applicable law.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.24  REVIEW FOR COMPETITION.



   The town recognizes that the cable television and telecommunications
industries are in a period of convergence, that the technologies and services
provided by these industries are rapidly changing, and that the
Telecommunications Act of 1991 promoted and encouraged competition between
and among these formally discrete industries.  At this time it is premature
to know fully the extent to which there will be changes in law, technology,
or services that may impact entities that have been or may be granted
franchises or licenses to use the town’s rights-of-way.  It is the desire
of the town to be a communications friendly town that encourages the
development of competitive advanced communications capabilities for the
benefit of all its citizens.  For this reason the regulatory ordinances and
franchises of the town should not impede or restrict the fair opportunity to
compete, but rather are intended to provide uniform and consistent
requirements for all similarly situated providers.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.25  APPLICATION AND RENEWAL FEES.



   (A)   An application fee shall not be deemed to be “franchise
fees” within the meaning of Section 11722 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C.
§542), and such payments shall not be deemed to be (i) “payments in
kind” or any involuntary payments chargeable against the compensation to be
paid to the town by grantee, or (ii) part of the compensation to be paid to
the town by grantee pursuant to this chapter or a franchise agreement.



   (B)   All applicants for an initial franchise grant shall submit an
application fee of $6,500 to compensate the town for its costs in reviewing,
preparing, and awarding a franchise, including the costs of outside
consultants.  Upon grant of a franchise the town may request the payment of
an additional fee to the extent that the reasonable costs of the franchise
review and negotiation process exceed the initial application fee amount. 
Consistent with the Cable Act, all such fees shall not constitute or be
credited towards a grantee’s franchise fee obligations.  Reasonable costs
include staff time, professional fees, and administrative costs as determined
by the town to be necessary.



   (C)   The town reserves the right, unless prohibited by applicable
law, to require a grantee to pay the reasonable costs of the franchise
renewal and negotiation process.  Reasonable costs include staff time,
professional fees, and administrative costs determined by the town to be
necessary and generally will not exceed $7,500, the payment of which shall
not be treated as a franchise related cost or passed through to subscribers.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.26  SYSTEM DESIGN.



   (A)   Every grantee shall offer service that meets the current and
future needs of the town, taking into account the costs of meeting those
needs.  The franchise agreement shall incorporate a description of the
grantee’s proposal including the general design and capabilities of the
system to identify for the town how the system will meet the current and
future cable service needs of the town.



   (B)   State-of-the-art review.  The grantee shall ensure that cable
service and the cable system is compatible with changes in law, technology,
and programming and services to maintain a state-of-the-art system throughout
the franchise term in accordance with the provisions contained in the
franchise agreement.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.27  THE SYSTEM.



   Every system shall pass by every single- family dwelling unit and
multiple-family dwelling unit within the franchise area in accordance with
line extension policies set forth in this chapter.  Service shall be
provided to subscribers in accordance with the schedules and line extension
policies.  Unless specified otherwise, service shall also be extended to
commercial buildings on a consistent basis with the residential line
extension policies.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.28  DROPS TO PUBLIC BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Every grantee shall provide installation of at least one cable
drop and provide monthly CPST service, without charge, to public buildings in
accordance with the line extension policies of this chapter, or as otherwise
specified in the applicable franchise agreement.  Schools shall also receive
one cable drop and monthly CPST service at no charge.  Following the
town’s designation of additional public buildings(s) to receive cable
service, and upon the town’s request, a grantee shall complete construction
of the drop and outlet within 30 days to that new building.



   (B)   All such cable service outlets shall not be utilized for
commercial purposes.



   (C)   In instances where the drop to the public building exceeds 150
feet, the grantee may charge for the actual and reasonable cost of its labor
and materials.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.29  USE OF GRANTEE FACILITIES.



   The town shall have the right to install and maintain town equipment
upon the poles and conduit owned by the grantee, at the actual cost of the
space and on terms mutually agreeable to the town and the grantee. 
Installed town equipment shall not unreasonably interfere with the operation
of the cable system.  The town shall relinquish its use of such poles and
conduit upon 90 days’ notice from grantee that town’s use interferes with
the grantee’s actual or anticipated use of same.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.30  UPGRADE OF SYSTEM.



   Every grantee shall upgrade its system (herein referred to as the
“system upgrade”), if required, as set forth in its respective franchise
agreement.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.31  NON-DISCRIMINATORY ACCESS TO CABLE SYSTEM.



   Grantee may be required to allow non- discriminatory access to its
cable system if such shall be required by federal law.  Prior to the
enactment of any such requirement, a grantee shall be provided with
reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard, including the right to
present evidence with respect to the need for such a requirement.  Grantee
reserves, and has not waived, any right it may have, or may later be
determined to have, to challenge the town’s implementation of an open
access requirement.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.32  INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK, ACCESS CHANNELS.



   (A)   Every grantee may, to the extent required by the franchise
agreement, provide institutional networks as a condition of an initial grant
or renewal, or transfer of a franchise.  To the extent that a grantee is
obligated to provide such support pursuant to its franchise agreement, such
obligation will be implemented in a competitively neutral manner, on a per
subscriber basis with respect to any other franchises granted after the
adoption of this chapter.  Costs associated with construction and operation
of an I-Net shall not be a franchise fee unless otherwise specified in the
franchise agreement.



   (B)   Every grantee may provide a channel or channels, bandwidth
capacity, service, and funding for public, educational, and government
(“PEG”) access channels, as specified in its franchise agreement.  Such
PEG access channel(s) shall be available to all subscribers as part of basic
cable service, unless mutually agreed upon by the town and the grantee or as
per state or federal law.



   (C)   Oversight and administration of the PEG access channel(s)
shall be set forth in the franchise agreement.  The town may designate a
community access corporation or similar entity to administer one or more of
the PEG access channel(s).



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.33  GENERAL TECHNICAL STANDARDS AND CUSTOMER SERVICE PRACTICES.



   (A)   This chapter incorporates technical standards and establishes
customer service practices with which a grantee must comply.  In addition, a
grantee shall comply with any additional or stricter requirements established
by FCC regulations, or other federal regulation that may be adopted or
amended from time to time.



   (B)   A grantee shall maintain such equipment and keep such records
as are required to enable the grantor to determine whether the grantee is in
compliance with all standards required by these regulations and other
applicable laws.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.34  [RESERVED]



§ 117.35  BOOKS AND RECORDS AVAILABLE TO THE GRANTOR.



   (A)   The grantee shall maintain an office conveniently located to
serve the subscribers of the town.  The town shall have the right, upon
reasonable request, to inspect and copy or transcribe at any time during
normal business hours all books, records, maps, plans, financial records,
service complaint logs, performance test results, and other like materials of
the grantee kept or maintained by grantee or under its control concerning the
operations, finances, affairs, transactions, or property of grantee when
necessary to ascertain the grantee’s compliance with this chapter or the
franchise agreement.  Access to the aforementioned records shall not be
denied by the grantee on the basis that said records contain
“proprietary” information.



   (B)   If any of such maps or records are not kept in the town, or
upon reasonable request made available to the town, and if the town shall
determine that an examination of such records is necessary or appropriate,
all reasonable expenses necessarily incurred in making such examination shall
be paid by grantee.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.36  REPORTS REQUIRED.



   The grantee shall file with the town, upon reasonable request by the
town, unless otherwise noted:



   (A)   Regulatory communications.  All reports required by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), including but not limited to annual
proof of performance tests and results, equal employment opportunity (EEO)
reports, and all petitions, applications, and communications of all types
submitted by grantee to the FCC, the Security and Exchange Commission (SEC),
or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency, having
jurisdiction over any matter affecting operation of grantee’s system.



   (B)   Facilities report. An annual report setting forth the physical
miles of plant construction and plant in operation at the end of the fiscal
year will be made available at the local office of the grantee for review by
the town.



   (C)   Rebuild/upgrade/construction reports.  Such reports shall be
sent to the town 30 days after the initial franchise agreement is awarded and
monthly thereafter until construction is completed as specified in this
chapter or the franchise agreement.



   (D)   Proof of performance tests. Proof of performance test results
performed as required by the FCC shall be supplied to the town.



   (E)   Tests required by town.  Tests required by town as specified
in this chapter shall be submitted within 30 days of notification.



   (F)   Grantee rules. The grantee’s schedule of charges, regular
subscriber service policy regarding the processing of subscriber complaints,
delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures, and any other
terms and conditions adopted as the grantee’s policy in connection with its
subscribers.  All such charges and policies shall be in accordance with
applicable state and federal laws, rules, or regulations.



   (G)   Proof of bonds and insurance.  Grantee shall submit to the
town the required performance bond, or a certified copy thereof, and
insurance certificates as required under the terms and conditions described
in this chapter.



   (H)   Financial and ownership reports. The following financial
reports for the franchise area shall be submitted to the town, upon
reasonable notice and as required by the town:



      (1)   A statement verifying the amount of gross annual
revenues derived from the franchise, certified by the Vice President for
Finance or a duly authorized officer or manager of the grantee.



      (2)   An annual list of officers and members of the board of
directors of grantee and of grantee’s parent corporation, if applicable.



   (I)   Additional reports.  The grantee shall prepare and furnish to
the town at the times and in the form prepared by grantee in the ordinary
course of business, such additional reports with respect to its operation,
affairs, transactions, or property as may be reasonably necessary and
appropriate to ascertain grantee’s compliance with this chapter or the
franchise agreement.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.37  TECHNICAL STANDARDS.



   The technical standards used in the operation of a system shall comply,
at a minimum, with the technical standards promulgated by the FCC relating to
cable systems pursuant to the FCC’s rules and regulations found in Title
47, Sections 7117.11701 to 7117.11717, as may be amended or modified from
time to time, which regulations are expressly incorporated herein by
reference.  The results of any tests required by the FCC, or a franchise
agreement shall be made available to the town within 30 days of written
request.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.38  TEST AND COMPLIANCE PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Tests for a system shall be performed periodically in a manner
so as to conform with FCC specifications.  The town shall notify the grantee
of its desire to witness such tests for a period of 90 days beyond the date
of request.  Grantee shall notify the town at least three business days
prior to conducting such tests.  Representatives of the town may witness the
tests and written test reports shall be made available to the town upon
request.  If any test locations fail to meet such specifications, the
grantee shall be required to indicate what corrective measures have been or
will be taken.  Grantee shall have the site retested on a timely basis as
needed.



   (B)   Complaints.  Whenever there have been similar complaints made
or when there exists other evidence, which, in the reasonable judgment of the
town, casts doubt on the reliability or quality of the grantee’s system,
the town shall have the right and authority to compel the grantee to test,
analyze, and report on the performance of its system.  The town may require
additional tests, full or partial repeat tests, different test procedures, or
tests involving a specific subscriber’s terminal.  Reports on such tests
shall be delivered to the town no later than 30 days after the town formally
requests the tests and shall include the following information:  the nature
of the complaints which precipitated the special tests; what system component
was tested; the equipment used, and procedures employed in said testing; the
results of such tests; and methods by which said complaints were resolved. 
Said tests and analyses shall be supervised by an engineer or other trained
technical specialist who shall sign all records of the special tests and
forward same to the town with a report interpreting the results of the tests
and recommending what actions should be taken by the town.  All such tests
conducted by grantee shall be at the expense of the grantee.



   (C)   Consultants.  The town shall have the right to employ or
contract with qualified consultants and attorneys if necessary or desirable,
to assist in the administration of this or any other section of this chapter
or the franchise agreement.  If an independent qualified consultant makes a
finding that grantee’s test results differ (negatively) by more than 10%
from the FCC technical standard, the grantee shall reimburse the town for its
reasonable costs associated with the testing.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.39  EMERGENCY REQUIREMENTS.



   Each grantee must provide emergency alert override capabilities in a
manner consistent with the FCC’s emergency alert system (“EAS”) rules
and consistent with any state and/or regional emergency alert system plans
adopted in response to the FCC’s EAS rules that are applicable to the
franchise area.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.40  PROGRAMMING DECISIONS.



   Each grantee shall provide programming from each of the broad
programming categories identified in its franchise agreement.  All
programming decisions remain within the sole discretion of each grantee,
provided that each grantee complies with federal law regarding notice to
grantor and subscribers prior to any channel additions, deletions, or
realignments, and further subject to the grantee’s signal carriage
obligations pursuant to 47 U.S.C. §§531—53117, as may be amended, and
subject to the town’s rights pursuant to 47 U.S.C. §545, as may be
amended.  The grantee shall use its good faith efforts to ensure diversity
of programming.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.41  CABLE SYSTEM OFFICE HOURS AND TELEPHONE AVAILABILITY.



   Attached as Appendix A are the Federal Communication Commission (FCC)
customer service standards with which grantee must comply.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.42  PARENTAL CONTROL.



   Every grantee shall make available to any subscriber upon request a
“lockout” device for blocking both video and audio portions of any
channel(s) of programming entering the subscriber’s premises.  Such device
shall be provided at a reasonable charge, except to the extent that federal
law specifically provides otherwise.  The grantee may, however, require a
reasonable security deposit for the use of such a device.  This section
shall not apply to channels that are on the basic or expanded basic tier of
programming unless the subscriber receives service via a programmable
terminal device, such as a converter.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.43  INSTALLATIONS EXCEEDING STANDARD INSTALLATION.



   Service drops in excess of 150 feet and concealed wiring in the home
shall be charged to the subscriber based upon time and material.  The desire
of the subscriber as to the point of entry into the residence shall be
observed whenever possible.  Runs in building interiors shall be as
unobtrusive as possible.  The grantee shall use due care in the process of
installation and shall repair any damage to the subscriber’s property
caused by said installation.  Such restoration shall be undertaken within no
more than ten days after the damage is incurred and shall be completed as
soon as possible thereafter.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.44  SERVICE AREA AND LINE EXTENSION POLICY.



   (A)   No grantee may discriminate in the build-out of its system to
a particular area of the town in providing service to an individual or groups
of residents on the basis of race, creed, religion, or economic condition. 
Unless the franchise agreement provides otherwise, every grantee shall serve
all areas of the town equally.  Unless the franchise agreement provides
otherwise, every grantee shall extend service to commercial areas at no
additional cost.



   (B)   During the initial construction phase of a new system, a
grantee may implement its system in stages pursuant to a schedule and line
extension policy established in its franchise agreement that serves all areas
of the town equally, provided that any deviation from the service and line
extension requirements of this chapter do not discriminate between different
areas of the town on the basis of race, creed, religion, or economic
condition.  A grantee of any such new franchise shall comply with all
customer service obligations with respect to customers whose premises are
passed by portions of the grantee’s network that are fully activated,
tested, and available for service.



   (C)   Cost-sharing.  In newly annexed areas with less than 20 homes
per proposed cable mile, grantee shall offer a cost- sharing arrangement to
residents.  Grantee shall bear its pro rata share of the current
construction costs based upon the actual number of homes per mile.  The
cost-sharing arrangement shall consist of the following: on the request of a
resident desiring service, grantee shall prepare, at its cost, an engineering
survey and cost analysis to determine the cost of the plant extension
required to provide service to the resident from the closest usable point on
the cable system.  The cost of construction shall be allocated based on the
following formula: if a request for extension into a residential area
requires the construction of cable plant which does not pass at least 20
homes per cable mile, a proportionate share of construction costs shall be
borne by grantee and by the subscribers.  For example, if there are ten
dwelling units per mile, grantee’s share will equal 10/20ths of the
construction cost.  The remaining cost will be shared equally by each
subscriber in the area to be constructed.  The line extension formula shall
also be applied to a portion of a cable mile meeting proportionate density
requirements.  For example, if there are ten dwelling units per one-half
mile, the grantee shall construct the plant.  The cost sharing described
above would be utilized if there were less than the proportionate share of
dwelling units per the portion of a mile needed to reach the dwelling
units.  Should additional subscribers request cable service, subscribers
utilizing the cost-sharing plan for extension shall be reimbursed pro rata
for their contribution or a proportional share thereof.  In such case, the
pro rata shares shall be recalculated and each new subscriber shall pay the
new pro rata share, and all prior subscribers shall receive refunds.  In any
event, at the end of 24 months from completion of the project, the
subscribers are no longer eligible for refunds, and the amounts paid by
subscribers will be credited to the plant account of the grantee.  The
average cost of the line extension shall be recalculated annually based upon
the current costs of labor and material.  Each subscriber contributing
toward the direct cost of the line extension shall waive all ownership
interest in the line extension.  All equipment and components of the line
extension, including but not limited to cable wire, electronics, and
pedestals, shall at all times remain the exclusive property of the grantee.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.45  TOWN MONITORING.



   In addition to free cable service required by the chapter, grantee
shall provide one service feed to Town Hall (unless otherwise specified by
town) that shall receive without charge all basic and expanded basic cable
programming provided by grantee.  Such service shall be provided in such a
manner that the town may monitor the programming and use of the cable system
for compliance with the franchise agreement and this chapter.  The service
provided pursuant to this requirement shall be in a secure office location,
and not in a location open to public viewing.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.46  ACCESS TO INSIDE WIRING.



   Access to, and ownership of, inside wiring shall be in accordance with
Section 7117.800 et. seq. of the FCC rules and regulations as the same may be
amended from time to time.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



ARTICLE III:  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS



§ 117.47  RIGHT-OF-WAY CONSTRUCTION.



   Prior to commencing any construction in the town, a grantee must obtain
all necessary permits and licenses required by federal, state, and generally
applicable town laws, ordinances, and rules and pay all associated
non-discriminatory fees.  Further, a grantee shall comply with all
applicable laws, ordinances, rules, and standards relating to the
construction, operation, and maintenance of a cable system.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.48  COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS.



   The construction, installation, and maintenance of the cable system
shall be effectuated by grantee in a manner that is consistent with the laws,
ordinances, and construction standards of the state, the Occupational Safety
and Health Administration, the National Electrical Safety Code, National
Electrical Code, and the FCC to the extent applicable, as well as all other
laws, rules, regulations, and ordinances that are generally applicable and
promulgated pursuant to the town’s lawful police power.  All open
connections on splitters, couplers, and other devices shall be properly
terminated.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.49  MINIMUM INTERFERENCE.



   All of grantee’s construction, installation, operation, repair, and
maintenance and the arrangement of its lines, cables, and other appurtenances
on public or private property shall be conducted in such a manner as to not
unreasonably interfere with the rights and reasonable convenience of property
owners that may be affected.  In the event such work is not in accordance
with applicable rules and regulations, the town may require the removal,
within such period of time after notice as is reasonable under the
circumstances, of grantee’s lines, cables, and appurtenances from the
rights-of-way in question, at the sole expense of the grantee.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.50  REPAIR OF PROPERTY.



   Grantee shall promptly repair and restore any town or private property
that may be damaged as a result of the construction, installation, operation,
repair, maintenance, or removal of the cable system.  Any such property
damaged or destroyed shall be promptly repaired and restored by grantee, at
grantee’s sole cost and expense, to the reasonable satisfaction of the town
to its condition prior to being damaged or shall be replaced by grantee with
equivalent property.  The town may inspect and approve the condition of the
right-of- ways and cables, wires, attachments, and poles after restoration. 
The liability, indemnity, insurance, and performance bond as provided herein
shall continue in full force and effect during the period of any removal and
until the grantee has fully complied with the terms and conditions of this
chapter and the franchise agreement.  In the event of a failure by the
grantee to complete any restoration work required by the town within the time
as may be established by the town and to the reasonable satisfaction of the
town, the town may, following reasonable notice to the grantee, cause such
work to be done, and the grantee shall reimburse the town the cost thereof
within 30 days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs, or the town
may at its option recover such costs through the performance bond provided by
grantee.  The town shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to
enforce the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.51  ERECTION OF POLES.



   Grantee shall not erect any pole on or along any rights-of-way in an
existing aerial utility system without the advance written approval of the
town.  If additional poles in an existing aerial route are required, grantee
shall negotiate, as needed, with the owners thereof for the installation of
the needed poles.  Grantee shall negotiate the lease of pole space and
facilities from the existing pole owners for all aerial construction, under
mutually acceptable terms and conditions.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.52  RESERVATIONS OF STREET RIGHTS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the town from
constructing storm or sanitary sewers, grading, paving, repairing, or
altering any rights-of-way, or laying down, repairing, or removing water
mains, traffic signal control systems, town fiber plant, or constructing or
establishing any public utility, service, or other public work that the town
may operate or undertake now or in the future.  All such work shall be done,
insofar as practicable, in such manner as not to obstruct, injure, or prevent
the free use and operation of poles, wires, conduits, conductors, pipes, or
appurtenances of grantee.  If town in its reasonable judgment shall
determine that grantee’s facilities interfere with the construction,
location, or repair of any rights-of-way or public improvement, then all such
facilities of grantee shall be removed or replaced, or temporarily
disconnected, in such manner as shall be directed by the town so that the
same shall not interfere with the public works of the town.  Such removal or
replacement shall be at the expense of grantee, provided, however, that
nothing in this chapter shall preclude grantee from seeking reimbursement for
removal or replacement costs from any public funds generally available to
rights-of-way users for the reimbursement of such costs.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.53  UNDERGROUND INSTALLATION.



   In those areas within the town where cable television, telephone, or
electrical facilities are currently placed underground, all cable system
facilities shall remain or be placed underground.  In areas where either
telephone or electric utility facilities are above ground at the time of
installation, grantee may install its cable system facilities above ground,
provided that at such time as both electric and telephone utility facilities
are placed underground, grantee shall likewise place its cable system
facilities underground without cost to the town.  Nothing contained in this
section shall require a grantee to construct, operate, and maintain
underground any ground-mounted appurtenances, except that grantee shall take
steps to minimize the number and visual impact of such facilities.  If the
grantor reimburses any utility for such relocation, grantee shall be
similarly reimbursed.  This section shall not prevent the town or any of its
agencies or joint agencies from requiring the installation or relocation of
cable services facilities underground pursuant to a separate ordinance or
regulation or requirement imposed in accordance with the exercise of the
general police power or regulatory function of such agency or joint agency.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.54  CONDUIT.



   (A)   The town shall not be responsible for any cuts or damage to
buried or underground facilities of a grantee that are not clearly marked or
cannot be located through the state “one-call” service.



   (B)   Grantee shall provide strand and trench maps without detailed
measurement, calculations in a format mutually agreeable to both the town and
grantee.  Such information shall be subject to and not restrict any other
town ordinances.  Town agrees to treat the maps as proprietary information
to the extent provided under law, or as may be indicated in town ordinances.



   (C)   Grantee shall provide a contact number for the town to call in
emergency situations requiring an immediate response on the part of the
town.  If the grantee does not properly and effectively identify the precise
location of its facilities within a reasonable period of time, taking into
account the circumstance of an emergency call from the town, the town shall
not be responsible for damage to the grantee’s facilities.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.55  CLEARING POLES AND CABLES.



   Grantee shall have the right to remove, trim, and cut and to keep clear
of its poles, cables, underground conduits, and related equipment the trees
in and along the rights-of-way, but, in the exercise of such right, grantee
shall not cut such trees to any greater extent than is reasonably necessary
for the construction, erection, installation, maintenance, and use of cable
system equipment.  Except in emergency situations, grantee shall not remove,
trim, or cut such trees from any rights-of-way without first providing
reasonable written notice to the town of its intention to do so, such notice
to be delivered not less than ten days in advance.  No clearing may go
forward without written approval from town.  Town agrees to use its best
efforts to provide such written approval no later than 48 hours in advance of
the scheduled clearing.  Town may, at its discretion, have town staff
observe the scheduled clearing.  Such personnel are authorized to stop all
clearing activities if it appears to such staff that the clearing exceeds the
authority granted by town or for other good and sufficient reasons.  The
grantee shall compensate the town or any private owners of such trees for any
damage proximately caused by grantee’s negligent conduct.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.56  MOVING FACILITIES.



   Grantee, on the request of the town, or any person holding a building
permit issued by the town, or any permit issued by an appropriate state
agency, shall temporarily move its wires, cables, poles, or other cable
system facilities to permit the moving of large objects, vehicles, buildings,
or other structures.  The expense of such temporary moves shall be paid to
grantee by the person requesting the same, and grantee shall have the
authority to require such payment in advance. Grantee shall be given not less
than 30 days advance notice to arrange for such temporary moves.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.57  WORK PERFORMED BY OTHERS.



   To the extent applicable, all provisions of this chapter shall apply to
any subcontractors or others performing any work or services pursuant to the
provisions of a franchise agreement on behalf of a grantee.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.58  DUTY TO GRANTEE.



   Nothing contained in this chapter shall relieve any person from
liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid
injuring grantee’s facilities while performing any work connected with
grading, regrading, or changing the line of any rights-of-way or with the
construction or reconstruction of any sewer or water system or utility system.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.59  SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION CAPABILITIES AND SCHEDULE.



   (A)   The cable system shall generally conform to the system design
and channel capacity specifications set forth by the grantee in its
application for a franchise submitted to the town.  The grantee is permitted
to modify its design and implementation plan, pursuant to the conditions
provided herein, to accommodate technological innovations and refinements,
which enhance system reliability and capacity.



   (B)   The initial construction required under initial franchise
agreement shall be completed in compliance with a schedule specified
therein.  If the grantee shows, notwithstanding its due diligence, that it
has been unable to extend service to a specified area because the acts or
omissions of a third party (excluding the grantee’s subcontractors or
agents) or that other factors have caused a delay in construction beyond that
reasonably expected during the course of construction, and the grantee
proposes a reasonable alternative deadline for extension of service to that
area, the town shall grant reasonable extensions of time to complete
construction.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



ARTICLE IV:  GENERAL FINANCIAL ANDINSURANCEPROVISIONS



§ 117.60  FRANCHISE FEE.



   (A)   The administration of this chapter or the franchise agreement
imposes upon the town additional regulatory responsibility and expense, and
in consideration of permission to use the rights-of-way of the town for the
construction, operation, and maintenance of a cable system within the town, a
grantee of any franchise hereunder shall pay to the town a franchise fee in
an amount as designated in the franchise agreement, up to the maximum amount
allowed by applicable law.  To the extent that applicable law changes the
maximum authorized franchise fee, the town reserves the right to change the
franchise fee as stated in the franchise agreement, by adopting an ordinance
establishing the new franchise fee rate and allowing reasonable notice to the
grantee for administration of the change.  The town shall hold a public
hearing prior to adopting any change in the franchise fee.



   (B)   Payments due grantor under this section shall be computed
quarterly, for the preceding quarter.  Each quarterly payment shall be due
and payable no later than 30 days after the end of the preceding quarter. 
Each payment shall be accompanied by a brief report by a grantee showing the
basis for the computation and a “franchise fee worksheet” listing all of
the sources of revenues attributable to the operation of grantee’s system
in the town.  All such payments shall be certified as correct by an officer
of the grantee.



   (C)   No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord
that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance
of payment be construed as a release of any claim grantor may have for
further sums payable under the provisions of this chapter or a franchise
agreement.  All amounts paid shall be subject to audit and re-computation by
grantor or its designee at any time during any calendar year (but not more
than once per calendar year) upon 20 calendar day’s notice, which shall
include a request for any documents sought to be reviewed.  Audits shall be
at the expense of the grantee if the additional amount due is greater than
10% of the amount paid. Any additional amount due to the town as a result of
the audit shall be paid within 60 days following written notice to the
grantee by the town which notice shall include a copy of the audit report. 
Grantor’s right to audit and grantee’s obligation to retain records
related to the franchise fee audit shall expire three years from the date on
which the most recent franchise fee payment by the grantee was due from the
time of written notice of request of audit.



   (D)   In the event that any franchise payment or recomputed amount
is not made on or before the dates specified herein, grantee shall pay as
additional compensation an interest charge, computed from such due date, at
the annual rate equal to the commercial prime interest rate of the town’s
primary depository bank during the period that such unpaid amount is owed.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.61  PERFORMANCE BOND.



   Each grantee shall maintain a performance bond with the town to ensure
compliance with this chapter and the applicable franchise agreement, in an
amount and in a manner as set forth in the grantee’s franchise agreement.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.62  PENALTIES PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Whenever grantor has reason to believe that a grantee has
violated any material provision of a franchise agreement or this chapter,
grantor shall first notify the grantee of the material violation and demand
correction within a reasonable time, which shall not be less than 20 days in
the case of the failure of a grantee to pay any sum or other amount due the
grantor under a franchise agreement, and 30 days in all other cases.  If a
grantee fails to correct the violation within the time prescribed, or if a
grantee is unable to correct the violation and fails to commence corrective
action within the time prescribed and to diligently remedy such violation
thereafter, the grantee shall then be given written notice of not less than
20 days for public comment.  Said notice shall indicate with reasonable
specificity the violation alleged to have occurred.



   (B)   At the public hearing, the Board shall hear and consider all
relevant evidence and thereafter render findings and a decision based upon
the evidence.  Any such hearing must, at a minimum, provide the grantee a
full and fair opportunity to be heard by the Board.



   (C)   In the event the Board finds that a grantee has corrected the
violation or promptly commenced correction of such violation after notice
thereof from grantor and is diligently proceeding to fully remedy the
violation or that no violation has occurred, the proceedings shall terminate
and no penalty or other sanction shall be imposed.



   (D)   In the event the Board finds that a violation exists and that
a grantee has not corrected the same in a satisfactory manner or did not
promptly commence and diligently proceed to correct the violation, the Board
may impose liquidated damages to be collected from the security fund, as set
out in the franchise agreement.



   (E)   If the Board elects to assess liquidated damages, then such
election shall constitute grantor’s exclusive remedy for a period of 60
days.  Thereafter, if a grantee remains in non-compliance, the grantor may
pursue any other available remedy.



   (F)   In the event that a franchise is cancelled or terminated by
reason of the default of a grantee, the security fund deposited pursuant to a
franchise agreement shall remain in effect and be available to the grantor
until all pending claims or penalties are resolved or settled, after which
point any remaining amounts in the security fund shall revert to the grantee.



   (G)   The rights reserved to grantor with respect to the security
fund are in addition to all other rights of grantor, whether reserved by a
franchise agreement, this chapter, or authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding, or exercise of a right with respect to such security fund shall
affect any other right grantor may have.



   (H)   In instances of repeated violations, whether remedied or not,
the grantor shall serve special notice outlining additional remediation
requirements.  Failure to cure, as measured by repeated instances of the
same violation, is evidence of an evasive practice and may lead to revocation
under §117.64.



   (I)   Grantee acknowledges that non- compliance with the provisions
of the franchise agreement and this chapter will harm subscribers and the
town and that the amounts of actual damages will be difficult or impossible
to ascertain.  The town may therefore assess the following liquidated
damages against grantee for unexcused non- compliance with the requirements
of the franchise agreement and this chapter.



   Grantee acknowledges that the liquidated damages set forth below are a
reasonable approximation of actual damages and that this provision is
intended to provide compensation and is not a penalty.  All damages provided
shall be cumulative, unless expressly stated.



      (1)   For failure to materially complete construction or
extend service in accordance with the chapter and the franchise agreement:
$250 per calendar day for each day the violation continues;



      (2)   For failure to materially comply with requirements for
public access channels: $250 per calendar day for each day the violation
continues;



      (3)   For failure to pay franchise fees in accordance with
this chapter/franchise agreement:  $100 per calendar day for each day the
violation continues, plus interest computed on the unpaid amount computed at
the current bank rate of interest.;



      (4)   For repeated, willful, or continuing failure to submit
reports, maintain records, or provide documents or information:  $50 per
calendar day for each day the violation continues;



      (5)   For failure to comply with the material requirements of
the customer service standards:  $50 per calendar quarter the violation
continues;



      (6)   For failure to comply with the transfer provisions: 
$250 per calendar day for each day the violation continues;



      (7)   For violation of other material provisions of the
chapter and the franchise agreement:  $50 per calendar day for each day the
violation continues.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.63  BONDS, INDEMNIFICATION, AND INSURANCE.



   Each grantee shall maintain bonds and insurance with the town in
amounts and in a manner as set forth in the grantee’s franchise
agreement.  Each grantee also shall be required to indemnify the town in a
manner as set forth in the grantee’s franchise agreement.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.64  GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION.



   Grantor reserves the right to revoke the franchise, and all rights and
privileges pertaining thereto, in the event that:



   (A)   A grantee substantially violates any material provision of
this chapter or a franchise agreement;



   (B)   A grantee attempts to evade any of the material provisions of
this chapter or a franchise agreement;



   (C)   A grantee practices an act of fraud or deceit upon the grantor;



   (D)   A grantee becomes insolvent, unable, or unwilling to pay its
debts or is adjudged bankrupt;



   (E)   A grantee fails to provide or maintain in full force and
effect the liability and indemnification coverage or the performance bond as
required pursuant to its franchise; or



   (F)   A grantee violates any orders or rulings of any regulatory
body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to this chapter or the
franchise and, after notice thereof, shall continue the violation and not
remedy the same within 60 days.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.65  PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Whenever grantor has reason to believe that there may be
grounds for revocation of a franchise, grantor shall first notify the grantee
in writing of its basis for believing grounds for revocation exist.  Such
notice shall indicate with reasonable specificity the grounds for revocation
that are believed to exist so that the grantee may have a reasonable
opportunity to cure or otherwise address the same.  If a grantee fails to
adequately cure or address the purported grounds for revocation within 30
days of such notice, then the grantor may, upon 30 days written notice to the
grantee, commence a public administrative hearing to determine whether there
exists any ground for revocation.



   (B)   The administrative hearing shall be conducted so as to protect
the full due process rights of the parties and provide for, at a minimum, the
right to have counsel, the right to call and cross examine witnesses, and the
right to a full transcript of the proceedings.



   (C)   After the close of the hearing, grantor or the designated
hearing officer shall issue a written decision based on the record of the
proceedings, stating with specificity the findings and reasons supporting the
decision.



   (D)   Upon revocation, a grantee shall have a period of 120 days
subsequent to the date of the formal adoption of a revocation of the
franchise by the town within which to file an appeal with a court of
competent jurisdiction.



   (E)   During the appeal period, the franchise shall remain in full
force and effect.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.66  FORECLOSURE.



   Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a part of a
system, a grantee shall notify grantor of such fact, and such notification
shall be treated as a notification that a change in control of the grantee
has taken place, and the provisions of this chapter governing the consent to
transfer or change in ownership shall apply without regard to how such
transfer or change in ownership occurred.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.67  RECEIVERSHIP.



   Apart from and supplemental to the right to revoke a franchise, grantor
shall have the right to cancel a franchise agreement 120 days after the
appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of
a grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy, or other
action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been
vacated prior to the expiration of said 120 days, or unless:



   (A)   Within 120 days after its election or appointment, the
receiver or trustee has fully complied with all the provisions of grantee’s
franchise agreement and this chapter and remedied all defaults thereunder; and



   (B)   Such receiver or trustee, within said 120 days, has executed
an agreement, duly approved by a court having jurisdiction, whereby such
receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every
provision of this chapter and the applicable franchise agreement.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.68  PURCHASE BY GRANTOR UPON TERMINATION OR REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE.



   The grantor may, in accordance with and to the extent permitted by 47
U.S.C. §547, upon the payment of a fair valuation, purchase, condemn,
acquire, take over, and hold the property and plant of a grantee, in whole or
in part, on the following conditions:



   (A)   Upon revocation of a franchise, a fair valuation shall be an
equitable value that shall not include any sum attributable to the value of
the franchise itself, and plant and property shall be valued according to its
book value at the time of revocation, or the system’s initial cost less
depreciation and salvage.



   (B)   At the expiration of a franchise agreement and following a
denial of renewal of the franchise agreement, a fair valuation shall be the
fair market value of the plant and property, exclusive of the value
attributed to the franchise itself.



   (C)   In the event grantor shall acquire a franchise pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter or a franchise agreement, and commenced operation
of the system, grantor shall reimburse the grantee for the fair market value
of the system.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



§ 117.69  SALE OR TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.



   (A)   No grantee shall sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet, or
dispose of, in whole or in part; an interest in or control of a franchise or
cable system or any of the rights or privileges granted by a franchise
agreement, without the prior consent of the grantor, which consent shall not
be unreasonably denied or delayed and may be denied only upon a good faith
finding by the grantor that the proposed transferee lacks the legal,
technical, or financial qualifications to consummate the transaction and
operate the system so as to perform its obligations under this chapter and
the applicable franchise agreement.  This section shall not apply to sales
of property or equipment in the normal course of business.  Consent from the
grantor shall not be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage, or other
instrument of hypothecation, in whole or in part, to secure indebtedness, or
for a transfer to a person controlling, controlled by, or under common
control with a grantee.



   (B)   The following additional events shall be deemed to be a sale,
assignment, or other transfer of an interest in or control of a grantee or
its franchise or cable system requiring compliance with this section: (i) the
sale, assignment, or other transfer of all or a majority of a grantee’s
assets; (ii) the sale, assignment, or other transfer of capital stock or
partnership, membership, or other equity interests in a grantee by one or
more of its existing shareholders, partners, members, or other equity owners
so as to create a new controlling interest in a grantee; (iii) the issuance
of additional capital stock or partnership, membership or other equity
interest by a grantee so as to create a new controlling interest in a
grantee; and (iv) a grantee’s agreement to transfer management or operation
of the grantee or the system.  The term “controlling interest” as used
herein is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual working
control in whatever manner exercised.



   (C)   In the case of any sale or transfer of ownership of an
interest in or control of a grantee or its franchise or cable system, the
town shall have 120 days to act upon any request for approval of such sale or
transfer that contains or is accompanied by such information as is required
in accordance with FCC regulations and the requirements of this chapter and
the applicable franchise agreement, including information related to the
legal, technical, and financial qualifications, and the proposed
transferee’s ability to operate the system in accord with this chapter and
the franchise agreement.  Failure to provide all information reasonably
requested by the town as part of its review may be grounds for a denial of
the proposed transfer.  If the town fails to render a final decision on the
request within 120 days after receipt by the town of all required
information, such request shall be deemed granted unless the grantee and the
town agree to an extension of the 120-day period.



   (D)   The consent or approval of the town to any transfer of the
grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the town in
and to the rights-of-way, and any transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly
subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise
agreement.



   (E)   In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the town will
not approve any transfer or assignment of the franchise prior to completion
of construction of the proposed initial system.



   (F)   Any approval by the town of a transfer shall be contingent
upon the prospective new grantee becoming a signatory to the franchise
agreement.



(Ord. 1497, passed 2-22-06)



APPENDIX: CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS



   A.   Grantee will at all times comply with the town’s customer
service standards in addition to compliance with the FCC standards (Title 47
C.F.R. Part 76.309 (Cable Television Service), Subpart H (General Operating
Requirements) as amended.



   B.   The town’s customer service standards are:



      (a)   The customer service standards as set forth below are
the standards set for all affected cable operators.  This provision is the
town’s notice of its intent to enforce the standards.



      (b)   Effective with adoption of this chapter, a cable
operator shall be subject to the following customer service standards:



         (1)   Cable system office hours and telephone
availability.



            (A)   The cable operator will maintain a local,
toll-free or collect call telephone access line which will be available to
its subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week.



               (i)   Trained representatives will be
available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business
hours.



               (ii)   After normal business hours, the
access line may be answered by a service or an automated response system,
including an answering machine.  Inquiries received after normal business
hours must be responded to by a trained representative on the next business
day.



            (B)   Under normal operating conditions, telephone
answer time by a trained representative, including wait time, shall not
exceed 30 seconds when the connection is made.  If the call needs to be
transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall
be met no less than 90% of the time under normal operating conditions,
measured on a quarterly basis.



            (C)   The cable operator will not be required to
acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone
answering standards above, unless an historical record of complaints
indicates a clear failure to comply.



            (D)   Under normal operating conditions, the
customer will receive a busy signal less than 3% of the time.



            (E)   Customer service center and bill payment
locations will be open at least during normal business hours and will be
conveniently located.



         (2)   Installations, outages, and service calls.  Under
normal operating conditions, each of the following four standards will be met
no less than 95% of the time measured on a quarterly basis:



            (A)   Standard installations will be performed
within seven business days after an order has been placed.



            (B)   Excluding conditions beyond the control of
the cable operator, the cable operator will begin working on “service
interruptions” promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the
interruption becomes known.  The cable operator must begin actions to
correct other service problems the next business day after notification f the
service problem.



            (C)   The “appointment window” alternatives
for installations, service calls, and other installation activities will be
either a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block during normal
business hours.  (The cable operator may schedule service calls and other
installation activities outside of normal business hours for the express
convenience of the customer.)



            (D)   A cable operator may not cancel an
appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day
prior to the scheduled appointment.



            (E)   If a cable operator representative is
running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep
the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted.  The
appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time that is convenient
for the customer.



         (3)   Communications between cable operators and cable
subscribers.



            (A)   Notifications to subscribers.



               1.   The cable operator shall provide
written information on each of the following areas at the time of
installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any
time upon request:



                  (i)   Products and services offered;



                  (ii)   Prices and options for
programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other
services;



                  (iii)   Installation and service
maintenance policies;



                  (iv)   Instruction on how to use the
cable service;



                  (v)   Channel positions of programming
carried on the system; and



                  (vi)   Billing and complaint
procedures, including the address and telephone number of the local franchise
authority’s cable office.



               2.   Customers will be notified of any
changes in rates, programming service, or channel positions as soon as
possible in writing.  Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of 30
days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the
cable operator.  In addition, the cable operator shall notify subscribers 30
days in advance of any significant changes in the other information required
by paragraph (c)(3)(i)(a).  Notwithstanding any other provision of Part 76,
a cable operator shall not be required to provide prior notice of any rate
change that is the result of a regulatory fee, franchise fee, or any other
fee, tax, assessment, or charge of any kind imposed by any federal agency,
state, or franchising authority on the transaction between the operator and
the subscriber.



            (B)   Billing.



               1.   Bills will be clear, concise, and
understandable.  Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations, including
but not limited to basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. 
Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period,
including optional charges, rebates, and credits.



               2.   In case of a billing dispute, the cable
operator must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days.



            (C)   Refunds.  Refund checks will be issued
promptly, but no later than either:



               1.   The customer’s next billing cycle
following resolution of the request or 30 days, whichever is earlier; or



               2.   The return of the equipment supplied by
the cable operator if service is terminated.



            (D)   Credits.  Credits for service will be
issued no later than the customer’s next billing cycle following the
determination that a credit is warranted.



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Chapter



   130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY



   131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



   132.   OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS



CHAPTER 130:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY



Section



   130.01   Aircraft operations



   130.02   Discharge of firearms



   130.03   Consumption and possession of malt beverages, unfortified
wine and alcoholic beverages



   130.04   Disorderly houses



   130.05   Exterior lighting



   130.06   Posting of signs prohibiting carrying of concealed handguns
on municipal property



 



   130.99   Penalty



§ 130.01  AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS.



   (A)   No airplane, helicopter, dirigible, balloon, or similar
vehicle propelled through the air shall fly at a height of less than 500 feet
above the town, except for official government operations and activities
directly associated with public safety activities (example: aerial searches,
reconnaissance and damage assessment).



   (B)   Except for official government operations and flight
activities directly associated with public safety, no aircraft (airplane,
helicopter, dirigible, balloon, or similar vehicle) shall be permitted to
operate from public property within the town (exception will be the necessity
to land an aircraft as a last resort due to the occurrence of an in-flight
emergency).



   (C)   Agencies planning to operate aircraft from town property shall
contact the Wrightsville Beach Police Department at least 24 hours in advance
of anticipated activities. Requesting agencies shall provide the Wrightsville
Beach Police Department with information pertaining to the reason for
operations, intended landing site, type of aircraft, planned time and date of
operation, and approximate duration of the activity.



   (D)   Upon notification of the intent to conduct aircraft operations
from municipal property, the Wrightsville Beach Police Department will advise
the Town Manager or his/her designated representative.



   (E)   Authority to waive the restrictions set forth in this section
lies exclusively with the Board of Aldermen.



(Ord. 1525, passed 10-26-06)



§ 130.02  DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.



   (A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any kind of
firearm whatsoever within the city limits of the town.  For the purpose of
this section, firearms shall include those guns known as "BB guns" and guns
fired by the use of compressed air.  ('72 Code, § 14-2)  (Ord., passed
5-26-83)



   (B)  Any person who shall knowingly and willfully permit his minor
child under 18 years to discharge, fire, shoot, or operate, within the
corporate limits of the town any air rifle, BB gun, or pellet gun, shall be
guilty of a punishable violation.



Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate firearms



      and pellet guns, see G.S. § 160A-189, 190



§ 130.03  CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF MALT BEVERAGES, UNFORTIFIED WINE
AND ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



     (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this chapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



   "ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE."  Any beverage containing at least 0.5 alcohol by
volume, including malt beverages, unfortified wine, fortified wine,
spirituous liquor and mixed beverages.  (G.S. 18B-101(4))



   "MALT BEVERAGES."  Beer, lager, malt liquor, ale, porter and any other
brewed or fermented beverage containing at least 0.5% and not more than 6%
alcohol by volume.  (G.S. 18B-101(9))



   "OPEN CONTAINER."  A container for the transportation of any malt
beverage or unfortified wine other than the original manufacturer's container
or a container of malt beverage or unfortified wine on which the
manufacturer's seal has been broker.



   "PEDESTRIAN."  A person traveling on or present in any public street,
right-of-way, alley, facility or other property owned or occupied by the town
by means other than in a motor vehicle as defined in G.S. Ch. 20.



   "PERSON."  An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
commercial establishment, other organization or group or other combination of
individuals acting as a unit.



   "UNFORTIFIED WINE."  Wine that has an alcoholic content produced only
by natural fermentation or by the addition of pure cane, beer or dextrose
sugar, and that has an alcoholic content of not more than 17% alcohol by
volume.  (G.S. 18B-101(15))



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for:



      (1)   Any person to consume a malt beverage or unfortified
wine on any public street, road, highway, sidewalk, right-of-way, alley,
facility or other property owned or occupied by the town;



      (2)   Any pedestrian on any public street, road, highway,
sidewalk, right-of-way, alley, facility or other property owned or occupied
by the town to possess in an open container any malt beverage or unfortified
wine;



      (3)   Any person to possess a malt beverage or unfortified
wine on any public street, road, highway, sidewalk, alley, parking lot or
right-of-way which is temporarily closed to regular traffic for special
events.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic
beverages on any property or premises owned or occupied by the town.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to aid, abet, command,
counsel, induce or procure another to violate this section or in any manner
to facilitate a violation of this section.



   (E)   All premises licenses for the sale of any alcoholic beverages
shall post a conspicuous notice at each exit stating as follows: "NO
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE MAY BE CARRIED IN AN OPEN CONTAINER OUT OF THESE PREMISES."



(Ord. 1259, passed 9-21-95)



§ 130.04  DISORDERLY HOUSES.



   No occupant of any house, whether residence or business, shall permit
the same to be kept in an indecent, offensive, or disorderly manner or shall
permit loafers or idle persons to congregate therein or in front to the
annoyance of persons passing by or living in the vicinity.



('72 Code, § 14-4)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.05  EXTERIOR LIGHTING.



   No exterior electric, gas, neon, or other illuminated advertising sign,
whether by reflection or otherwise, shall remain burning between the hours of
1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.



('72 Code, § 14-5)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.06  POSTING OF SIGNS PROHIBITING CARRYING OF CONCEALED HANDGUNS ON
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   The Town Manager is hereby authorized and instructed to post
conspicuous signage at appropriate locations on or within each park and each
building or portion of a building owned, leased as lessee, operated,
occupied, managed or controlled by the town, as well as the appurtenant
premises to such buildings, indicating that carrying a concealed handgun is
prohibited therein.



   (B)   Signs on buildings shall be visibly posted on the exterior of
each entrance by which the general public can access the building.  The Town
Manager shall exercise discretion in determining the number and appropriate
location of signs to be placed on or within appurtenant premises and parks.



   (C)   The prohibition on carrying concealed handguns effectuated by
the signage as described in divisions (A) and (B) of this section shall not
apply to the following persons:



      (1)   Officers and enlisted personnel of the armed forces of
the United States when in discharge of their official duties as such and
acting under orders requiring them to carry arms and weapons;



      (2)   Civil officers of the United States while in the
discharge of their official duties;



      (3)   Officers and soldiers of the militia and the national
guard when called into actual service;



      (4)   Officers of the state, or of any country, city or town,
charged with the execution of the laws of the state when acting in the
discharge of their official duties; and



      (5)   Sworn law-enforcement officers, when off-duty, if so
authorized in accordance with G.S. 14-269.



   (D)   Any handgun possessed in violation of the signage described in
divisions (A) and (B) of this section is hereby declared to be contraband. 
The Chief of Police or his designee shall seize and hold such handgun for
disposal pursuant to law.



(Ord. 1266, passed 12-11-96)



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of § 130.03 shall be
subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $100 to be recovered by the town
in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the
penalty within 15 days after having been cited for violation of the
ordinance. In accordance with G.S. § 160A-175(b), a violation of the section
enumerated herein shall not be subject to the penalty provisions of G.S. §
14-4 and shall not be considered a breach of the penal laws of the state.



   (B)   A violation of any remaining section of this chapter is a
misdemeanor punishable in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 14-4. The
fine for such violation shall not exceed $500.



   (C)   A violation of any remaining section of this chapter shall
subject the offender to a civil penalty of $100. If any person fails to pay a
civil penalty within 15 days after being cited for a violation, the town may
seek to recover the penalty in a civil action in the nature of debt.



   (D)   The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by an
appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (E)   Each day’s continuing violation of any provisions of this
chapter shall be a separate and distinct offense.



   (F)   Any person issued a civil citation under the provisions of
this section may appeal the issuance of such citation to the Wrightsville
Beach Chief of Police (“Chief of Police”). An appeal shall be perfected
in accordance with the following:



      (1)   An appeal shall be taken by giving written notice of
appeal to the Chief of Police within 14 calendar days of the date of issuance
of the civil citation. In determining the 14 calendar days within which such
appeal may be taken, the date of the civil citation shall not be counted.



      (2)   Such written notice must be received by the Chief of
Police no later than 5:00 p.m. on the fourteenth day of the appeal period. If
the fourteenth day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday recognized by the
town, the time for filing such appeal shall be extended to 5:00 p.m. on the
next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or holiday.



      (3)   A copy of the citation issued to the appealing party
shall be attached to such written notice of appeal.



      (4)   The written notice of appeal shall set forth the grounds
for the appeal, include other information that the appealing party believes
supports its position and must include the name, email address, mailing
address and telephone number of the appealing party.



      (5)   Within 15 calendar days of receipt of the written notice
of appeal, the Chief of Police shall issue a written decision. The Chief of
Police may uphold the citation, dismiss the citation or reduce the citation
to some lesser offense. Provided, that the Chief of Police may not impose any
penalty greater than that set forth in the citation from which appeal was
taken. The written decision of the Chief of Police will be emailed or mailed
by first class mail to the appealing party within five days of issuance to
the email address or mailing address of the appealing party shown on the
written notice of appeal.



      (6)   The decision of the Chief of Police shall be final.



      (7)   If the Chief of Police upholds the citation or takes
other action that requires the appealing party to make payment to the town,
such payment must be made within 30 days of the date of the written decision
of the Chief of Police. If the appealing party fails to make payment within
that time, the town shall undertake enforcement action as appropriate.



(Ord. 1341, passed 7-29-99; Am. Ord. 1359, passed 4-13-00; Am. Ord. 1423,
passed 8-22-02; Am. Ord. 1686, passed 7-12-12; Am. Ord. 1711, passed 6-13-13)



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



Section



   131.01   Injury to private property



   131.02   Injuring property of town



   131.03   Unlawful storage of vehicles and other personal property on
town property



   131.04   Tents and campsites; restricted



§ 131.01  INJURY TO PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful to injure any property belonging to another.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.02  INJURING PROPERTY OF TOWN.



   It shall be unlawful to injure, damage, deface, trespass upon, break,
or injure any property belonging to the town.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§  131.03  UNLAWFUL STORAGE OF VEHICLES AND OTHER PERSONAL PROPERTY ON
TOWN PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful to park, store or place any vehicle (as defined in
§ 70.01 of the town code), bicycle, motorcycle or other personal property
used as a means of transportation on any public park that is owned, operated
or controlled by the town. Provided, that the terms of this section shall not
apply to parking lots or other authorized parking areas used in connection
with such public parks.



(Ord. 1235, passed 5-26-94) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.04  TENTS AND CAMPSITES; RESTRICTED.



   No persons shall set up or construct any temporary structure or tent
for the purpose of camping within the corporate limits of the town.  This
restriction is to include any type of campsite.



(Ord. 1256, passed 8-17-95)



CHAPTER 132:  OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS 




Section




   132.01   Purpose and policy



   132.02   Profane and boisterous language



   132.03   Exposure of female breast



 



   132.98   Remedies



   132.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Obscene literature and exhibitions, see G.S. § 14-190.l



   Disseminating sexually oriented material to minors, see G.S. §
14-190.10



§ 132.01  PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   The Board of Aldermen finds that there exists an increasing trend in
the display of sexually explicit material in commercial establishments in a
manner that the material is within the open view of minors and is thereby
easily accessible to them. The Board further finds that the public display of
this material is adverse and detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare
of its citizens, particularly minors, and the peace and dignity of the town,
and as a matter of policy the display should be regulated under the police
power of this town, pursuant to G.S. § 153A-121



(Ord., passed 5-26-83)



§ 132.02  PROFANE AND BOISTEROUS LANGUAGE.



   No person shall use loud and boisterous language so as to become a
nuisance or use any form of profanity or indecent language on the street, in
a gathering, audience, assembly, or in any public place whatsoever.



('72 Code, § 14-ll)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.03  EXPOSURE OF FEMALE BREAST.



   No fully developed female shall willfully expose her breast in any
public beach, in any public street or in any public park and in the presence
of any other person or persons of the opposite sex.  For purposes of this
section, the terms "expose here breast" shall mean the revealing of the
female breast with less than a fully opaque covering on any portion thereof
lower than the top of any part of the areola.



(Ord. 1103, passed 11-2-89)



§ 132.98  REMEDIES.



   In addition to the criminal penalties herein provided, violations of
this section may be enforced by the institution of proceedings in the form of
a civil action for equitable and injunctive relief to restrain or prohibit
the violation.  The proceeding shall be brought in the Superior Court of New
Hanover County.  The institution of any proceeding for equitable or
injunctive relief under this chapter shall not relieve any party to the
proceedings for any criminal penalty prescribed for violations of any part of
this chapter.



(Ord., passed 5-26-83)



§ 132.99  PENALTY.



   Violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor.  Any person
convicted of violating this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
$50 or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day during which a
violation continues shall be determined a separate and distinct offense.



(Ord., passed 5-26-83)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



Chapter



   150.   BRIDGES, PIERS, AND THE LIKE



   151.   BUILDING CODE



   152.   MINIMUM HOUSING CODE



      APPENDIX: FORMS



   153.   [RESERVED]



   154.   [RESERVED]



   155.   UNIFORM DEVELOPMENT



      APPENDIX A: DEFINITIONS



      APPENDIX B: INSTALLATION DETAIL



CHAPTER 150:  BRIDGES, PIERS, AND THE LIKE



Section



Piers, Docks, and Bridges



   150.01   Definitions



   150.02   Piers to be kept repaired and clean



   150.03   Litter barrels and littering on piers



   150.04   Injuring piers prohibited



   150.05   Construction of piers



   150.06   Building of piers and boat houses; restricted areas



   150.07   Prohibition of breakwaters, groins and jetties



   150.08   (Reserved)



   150.09   Boat ramps



   150.10   Construction permit for piers or docks required



   150.11   Application for permit



   150.12   General pier and dock construction requirements



   150.13   Minimum dimensions



   150.14   Structural specifications



   150.15   Safety features



   150.16   Maintenance of structures



   150.17   Authority to remove hazardous structures



   150.18   Renting of docks prohibited



   150.19   Vacant lots not to be used for parking



   150.20   Other governmental regulations; effect



   150.21   Exceptions authorized



   150.22   Appeals from stop order



Cross-reference:



   Beach and shore regulations, see Ch. 92



PIERS, DOCKS, AND BRIDGES



§ 150.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "BREAKWATER." A structure built to reduce wave energy on the shoreline
by trapping sand between the shore and the breakwater.



   "GROIN." An erosion-control structure built perpendicular to the
shoreline to protect individual properties.



   "JETTY." A structure designed to protect and/or stabilize a navigation
entrance.



   "PIER" or "DOCK."  A mooring pile or piling, dolphin of any type,
fender, ramp, floating dock, or other structure occupying the area beyond the
high water line.  The mean high water line is 2.05 feet above mean sea level.



('72 Code, § 15-11; Am. Ord. 1152, passed 8-22-91; Am. Ord. 1541, passed
8-9-07)



§ 150.02  PIERS TO BE KEPT REPAIRED AND CLEAN.



   All piers shall be kept in good repair at all times, and shall be kept
clean and free from obnoxious uses.



('72 Code, § 15-l)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.03  LITTER BARRELS AND LITTERING ON PIERS.



   (A)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or proprietor of any
commercial fishing pier within  the corporate limits  of the  town to
fail  to provide a  litter  barrel  or basket  every 50  feet  on 
the piers for patrons to deposit trash and garbage.  The barrels shall
begin, in location, 50 feet east of the pier tackle shop.  Litter barrels
shall also be placed near the entrance to the pier tackle shop and on the
approach ramp thereto.



   (B)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or proprietor of any
commercial fishing pier within the corporate limits of the town to fail to
provide signs every 50 feet along both sides of the pier notifying patrons of
the penalty for littering, including the depositing of litter in the water.



   (C)  It shall be the duty of any commercial fishing pier owner,
proprietor, or employee to notify the police of any person who shall litter
on the pier or from the pier into the water or shoreline surrounding the pier.



   (D)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of any commercial fishing
pier owner or proprietor to have all litter from the above mentioned barrels
deposited in the regular refuse receptacle from which refuse is collected by
the town's Sanitation Department.



('72 Code, § 15-l)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Garbage, trash, rubbish, see Ch. 95



§ 150.04  INJURING PIERS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall tamper with or damage any private or public pier in the
town.



('72 Code, § 15-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.05  CONSTRUCTION OF PIERS.



   (A)   No person shall build, place, erect, or cause to be built,
placed, or erected any piling, post, pier, stake, pipe or implement
whatsoever, either permanently or temporarily, at or beyond any street ends
of street right-of-way between the shore and the pierhead line within the
town.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
set pilings for the mooring of boats or vessels of any kind or to moor boats
or vessels of any kind, either permanently or temporarily, at or beyond any
street ends or street right-of-way between the shore and the pierhead line
within the town.



('72 Code, § 15-3)



(Ord., passed 7-26-79; Am. Ord. 1565, passed 1-10-08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.06  BUILDING OF PIERS AND BOAT HOUSES; RESTRICTED AREAS.



   No structure of any kind shall be built upon the land lying west of
Waynick Boulevard from Stone Street southwardly to Sunset Avenue.  However,
piers and bathhouses may be built within this area after application has been
made and a permit granted for the purposes in accordance with the
specifications and conditions the Board of Aldermen may prescribe.



('72 Code, § 15-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.07  PROHIBITION OF BREAKWATERS, GROINS AND JETTIES.



   No breakwater, groin, or jetty shall be constructed within the limits
of the town. This prohibition does not apply to “ocean beaches” as
defined in G.S. § 77-20(e).



(Ord. 1624, passed 4-8-10)



§ 150.08  (RESERVED).



§ 150.09  BOAT RAMPS.



   (A)  No boat ramp shall be built along the shores of the town, unless
it is constructed so as to lie on and conform to the natural contour of the
bottom so as not to impede the natural flow of the waters about the town.



   (B)  This section shall not apply to any existing structure or to one
for which a permit has already been granted.



('72 Code, § 15-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.10  CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FOR PIERS OR DOCKS REQUIRED.



   No pier or dock shall be constructed within the limits of the town
without an approved permit issued by the Building Inspector in accordance
with the requirements of this subchapter.



('72 Code, § 15-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.11  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)  Any property owner fronting upon the inland waters of the sounds
and channels within the town who desires to construct a pier, dock, or
similar structure and who has riparian rights including the right of using
the water frontage for the construction of a pier or dock, shall apply in
writing to the Building Inspector requesting a permit to construct the pier
or dock.  All requests for the construction, maintenance, or extension of
the structures shall be submitted in writing in accordance with the
requirements of this subchapter.



   (B)  The Inspector shall require the applicant to submit as a part of
the written application information, plans, and other data necessary to
determine adequately the complete conformity of the construction to this and
other chapters and ordinances applicable to the structures.



   (C)  An application shall include a drawing/survey to scale drawn by a
licensed registered professional surveyor and bearing his or her seal.  The
survey shall show the mean high water line, the applicant’s property lines
projected on each side, and the pierhead line and all existing piers,
structures, bulkheads, or other construction within 15 feet of the
applicant’s property lines projected.



   (D)  The Inspector shall have prepared forms which shall be available
to persons wishing to apply during normal office hours.  All applicants
shall secure and submit to the Inspector the completed form, properly signed
by the property owner.  The applicant shall attach thereto suitable plans
satisfactory to the Inspector which shall include existing facilities, if
any, and which shall reflect the dimensions of various components of the new
and existing structures.  (See division (C) above, §§ 150.12, 150.13,
150.14 and 150.15.)



   (E)  There shall be on display in the Town Building Inspector's office
or thereabouts the pierhead line map which provides dimension control for the
outward limits of pier extensions.



   (F)  Plans shall include a complete floor plan of the pier, dock, or
other structure; detailed cross-sections through the access pier and pierhead
or T at its end; information as to the size, length, and treatment of piling
to be used and its penetration into hard ground; the methods of fastening and
connecting all members of the pier; sufficient detailing of superstructures
to be constructed on the pier, such as floats, stairs, hand-railings, all
types of boxes and lockers, or other facilities to be placed thereon.



('72 Code, § 15-10; Am. Ord. 1152, passed 8-22-91)



§ 150.12  GENERAL PIER AND DOCK CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All construction, repair, or modification of any pier or dock
shall be governed by the following regulations.  No pier, dock, or other
structure shall be constructed which:



      (1)   Is not within the applicant's property lines
projected.  An exception may be made in unusual cases where notarized
written approval by adjacent property owners allows the construction or where
joint ownership of a facility to be constructed exists.



      (2)   Is closer to the owner's property lines extended than 15
feet, except as provided above.  All pilings or dolphins, single or
multiple, used in any way for mooring, shall conform to this setback
requirement.



      (3)   Extends beyond the pier line as shown on the official
pier line map, which map, duly adopted, after a public hearing, shall be kept
in the Town Hall.



      (4)   Is within 15 feet of any other pier other than one which
is a part of the same mooring system.



      (5)   Where there would be more than one pier or dock
projection from the shore for any single lot of 100 feet or less.  A pier
shall not be constructed on a lot which does not provide for the clearances
herein required from adjacent lot lines.  Owners having frontages greater
than 100 feet shall be allowed an additional projecting pier or dock for each
additional 50 feet of shore frontage in addition to the basic 100 feet.



   (B)   No vessel may be moored at any pier, dock, pilings, or
dolphins so that it extends farther than its width beyond the pierhead line.



('72 Code, § 15-12)  (Ord., passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1152, passed
8-22-91)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.13  MINIMUM DIMENSIONS.



   All piers or docks constructed hereafter shall have dimensions which
conform to the following:



   (A)  The length of all piers or docks extending from the shore line
shall be limited to the pier line as established and shown on the pier line
map.



   (B)  The height of the deck of all fixed piers shall be not less than
the mean high-water line, which for the purposes of this subchapter, shall be
established at 6.5 feet MLW, Beaufort Datum.



   (C)  All walkway projections from the shore outward shall have a
minimum width of three feet and a handrail on at least one side of the
projection.



   (D)  The width of all T-heads, pierheads, or projections running
parallel to the shore line shall be not less than four feet and shall have a
handrail on at least one side of the pierhead.  The pierhead shall be of an
elevation no lower than that stated for the access walkway; however, the use
of multiple elevation platforms or attached floating platforms shall not be
denied.



   (E)  No pier, dock, or structure shall have a diving board or other
projections supported by the main pier frame, which shall project within five
feet of the pierhead line, nor shall the projection be beyond three feet from
the face of the outermost portion of the pier.  Boat hoists and davits shall
be allowed, provided they are movable and can be moved to a position in which
they do not overhang the pier when not in use.



('72 Code, § 15-13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.14  STRUCTURAL SPECIFICATIONS.



   All structures shall conform to the following requirements:



   (A)  Every pier or dock shall be designed to withstand a live load of
100 pounds per square foot applied on all flat areas of the structure.



   (B)  The structural requirements for the coastal sea of the state
building code shall govern the general design and strength requirements of
all piers and docks; however; the additional requirements  as set out herein
shall take precedence.



   (C)  Piling having a diameter of less than six inches shall not be
used on any pier or dock.  All piling shall penetrate the ground below hard
bottom a distance of not less than six feet.  No concrete pile of less than
eight inches in its smallest cross-sectional dimension shall be used. The
wood pile shall be pressure treated with creosote to a retention of 18 pounds
per square foot.



   (D)  The deck of all piers shall be constructed of planks having a
thickness of not less than 5/4-inch of optional widths, and shall be
supported by not less than l-l/2 feet on centers.  No stringer, joist, or
rafter shall be used having a dimension of less than nominal two by six
inches. Concrete, metal, or plastic materials may be used if in conformity
with division (B) above.



   (E)  All superstructure, roofs, or other construction above the deck
of any pier or dock shall be in conformity with the building code of the town
and shall be open on all sides.  Dock and gear boxes not over four feet in
total height shall be allowed on docks, provided they are securely fastened
to the deck in a manner as to prevent their being removed by wind or water.



   (F)  Floating docks, piers, and walkways shall meet the following
additional requirements:



      (1)  All floating structures shall be no less than four feet in
width. No horizontal dimension shall be greater than two times the other
horizontal dimension.  Access piers shall be an exception; however, a
suitable method of providing stability is used, such as finger projections or
a minimum width of five feet for all access piers longer than eight feet is
maintained.



      (2)  All floating piers shall have a freeboard (distance from
water to top of deck) of not less than 16 inches.



      (3)  All fastenings shall be sufficient to withstand all
movements anticipated in storm periods of hurricane force winds.  The
Building Inspector shall have the right to disapprove any fastenings which do
not appear to be sufficient.  All metal fastenings shall be galvanized or of
metals resistant to corrosion.



      (4)  All floating piers shall be secured with pilings.  There
shall be not less than one pile for each 80 square feet of pier surface.



      (5)  No houses or structures other than deck or gear boxes will
be placed on floating piers.  All boxes shall be securely fastened to the
pier.  No box shall be higher than four feet above the pier surface and
occupy more than 2/5 of the surface.



('72 Code, § 15-14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.15  SAFETY FEATURES.



   (A)  All docks constructed within the town, with the exception of
floating docks, shall have handrails on at least one side of access walkways,
T's, or L's.  Handrails shall be not less than three feet above the deck and
shall be substantially constructed so as to assure a safe and permanent
support for persons using the facilities.



   (B)  It is recommended that all piers have a ladder or stairway at
their outer end extending down sufficiently to allow persons in the water to
gain access to the pier.  All stairways shall have handrails.



   (C)  Owners of private piers may erect gates or barricades at the
landward end of access walkways denying the use of the pier to others than
their guests.  The barricades or gates should be clearly marked to define
the pier as a private structures.



   (D)  No cross-bracing or structural members beneath the pier shall be
erected in that zone between high and low waters so as to obstruct the use of
this area by the public.



('72 Code, § 15-15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.16  MAINTENANCE OF STRUCTURES.



   (A)  Each owner shall be responsible for the proper and satisfactory
maintenance of any pier, dock, or other structure which he erects within the
town.  All structures shall be subject to inspection at any time by the
Building Inspector, and where faulty maintenance is found, the Inspector
shall notify the owner in writing as to the maintenance required.  The owner
shall promptly apply for a permit to accomplish the maintenance and shall
within 90 days of the written notice proceed with the accomplishment of the
maintenance.



   (B)  Failure to maintain properly a pier, dock, or other structure in
accordance with this subchapter may result in its removal as provided for in
§ 150.17.



('72 Code, § 15-16)



§ 150.17  AUTHORITY TO REMOVE HAZARDOUS STRUCTURES.



   (A)  In the event that an improperly maintained pier, dock, or other
structure now exists or will exist in the future, after the owner of the
pier, dock, or other structure has been notified by the Building Inspector
and has failed to repair and bring the structure into a safe condition, the
town may remove entirely this structure and its appurtenances and dispose of
all materials, refuse, and wreckage therefrom. The town may assess against
the property owner the cost of the removal which shall become a lien upon his
property payable immediately. After a period of 60 days there shall be
assessed an additional interest rate of 6% until the cost is paid.



   (B)  Any structure, pier, dock, piling, dolphin, fender, or other
structure which now exists and is considered to be in bad condition may be
removed by the town after notification of the owner, in the manner described
in this section, by the Inspector, and the cost thereof assessed against the
property.



('72 Code, § 15-17)



§ 150.18  RENTING OF DOCKS PROHIBITED.



   (A)  The renting of docks, dock spaces, or moorings for any purpose
whatsoever is prohibited in residential zones, and is also prohibited in the
shore zone where the shore zone is opposite and between the water and
residential zones.



   (B)  No services may be made available by owners of piers and docks to
persons using piers or docks who are not owners; however, water and
electricity may be supplied at no cost to the non-owner user by the
consenting owner.



   (C)  No commercial activity of any kind may be carried on incidental
to the ownership or use of any pier or dock in any residential zone or in the
shore zone where it is opposite and between the water and a residential zone.



   (D)  This section does not apply to piers, docks, or other moorings in
existence on 12-ll-75, except that modifications or new construction shall
conform to the terms of this section.



(Ord., passed 12-ll-75)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.19  VACANT LOTS NOT TO BE USED FOR PARKING.



   Vacant lots in residential zones where there are piers or docks may not
be used as parking lots for those using the pier or dock since the principal
intended use of lots in residential zones is for residences.  However,
parking space for up to four cars may be provided by the owner for the use of
himself and his guests, but no charge may be made for the parking.



(Ord., passed 12-11-75)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.20  OTHER GOVERNMENTAL REGULATIONS; EFFECT.



   (A)  Nothing in this subchapter shall preclude or deny the
requirements of any other governmental agency relevant to the construction of
pier facilities within the town.  All areas where piers are to be
constructed beyond the high water line are the property of the state, and
where navigational jurisdiction exists, the requirements of the federal
government shall be met.



   (B)  The acquisition of permits for construction from other
governmental agencies shall not be considered paramount for the construction
of a pier under the requirements of this subchapter.  Pier construction not
conforming to this subchapter shall be denied and prevented under penalty of
law.



('72 Code, § 15-18)



§ 150.21  EXCEPTIONS AUTHORIZED.



   The Board of Aldermen, at its discretion and as a result of careful
study of unusual and difficult situations which occur, may waive certain
limitations as to dimensions and location if it appears to be clearly in the
best public interest and safety. Provided that the Board of Alderman shall
not be authorized by this exception to permit a pier to be constructed beyond
the pier line as shown on the official pier line map. The construction of a
pier or dock by the town at the terminus of streets or public areas shall not
be limited by the requirements of this chapter.



('72 Code, § 15-l9) (Am. Ord. 1431, passed 10-24-02)



§ 150.22  APPEALS FROM STOP ORDER.



   Appeals from a stop order authorized by G.S. § 160A-421 and issued in
connection with a violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be taken
to the Town Manager. Such appeals shall be taken, heard and decided in the
manner prescribed in G.S. § 160A-421.



('72 Code, § 15-22) (Ord. 1100, passed 7-27-89)



CHAPTER 151:  BUILDING CODE; FLOODLAN REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   151.001   General construction requirements; minimum standards



   151.002   Structures of unusual design



   151.003   Removal of refuse, debris from building construction



   151.004   Condemnation and removal of dangerous structures



   151.005   (Reserved)



   151.006   Movement of buildings within town limits



   151.007   Requirements for portable toilets to be tied down



   151.008   Definition



   151.009   Restrictions on use of household appliances



Numbering of Buildings



   151.035   Display of property number



   151.036   Duty of inspector as to numbering



   151.037   Annexation



   151.038   Change in block



   151.039   Alternative street numbering provisions



Administration and Enforcement



   151.110   Building Inspector



   151.111   Building permit fees



   151.112   Inspection boxes required



 



   151.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.001  GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS; MINIMUM STANDARDS.



   For provisions concerning minimum standards for general construction
requirements see §§ 152.021 through 152.026 of the minimum housing code of
the town and the most recent editions of Volumes 1 and 1B of the State
Building Code wind resistive construction sections.



(Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87)



§ 151.002  STRUCTURES OF UNUSUAL DESIGN.



   When a structure of unusual design as to system or materials is
certified, by an architect or engineer registered in the state, to meet or
exceed the basic structural requirements and the fire resistant standards of
the town minimum housing code and does not otherwise violate any existing
code or ordinance, the Building Inspector may issue a permit for construction.



(Ord., passed 7-22-70; Am. Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87)



§ 151.003  REMOVAL OF REFUSE, DEBRIS FROM BUILDING CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   All repairs or construction which exceed a cost of $10,000
shall be required to provide on the construction site a bulk construction
debris dumpster or trailer constructed of a noncombustible material and
suitable for removing the debris so as to prevent litter and provide for fire
safety; however, construction debris shall not include neat and orderly
stacks of construction materials.  Any container required under the
provisions of this section shall be emptied promptly when filled to
capacity.  In any case, where more than two cubic yards of construction
debris accumulate on a site, prompt removal is required.  No burning of
construction debris shall be allowed within the town limits.



   (B)   The Fire Official as described in Chapter 94 is hereby
authorized to enforce this § 151.003 in addition to enforcement of this
section by the Municipal Building Inspector as provided in § 151.110.



(Ord., passed 9-5-85; Am. Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87; Am. Ord. 1163, passed
12-19-91)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.004  CONDEMNATION AND REMOVAL OF DANGEROUS STRUCTURES.



   For provisions concerning condemnation and removal of dangerous
structures see § 152.150 through 152.159 of the minimum housing code of the
town and North Carolina General Statutes.



(Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87)



§ 151.005  (RESERVED).



§ 151.006  MOVING OF BUILDINGS WITHIN TOWN LIMITS.



   No person, firm, or corporation shall move any building, or part of any
building, through or across any sidewalk, street, alley, highway or other
publicly owned property within the limits of the town without first obtaining
a permit from the Building Inspector.



   (A)   Prior to issuing such a permit, the Building Inspector shall
require the person, firm or corporation desiring to move a building or part
of any building to pay a fee of $50.



   (B)   Prior to issuing such a permit, the Building Inspector shall
require the person, firm or corporation desiring to move a building or part
of any building to submit a written application setting forth the following
information:



      (1)   The type of building to be moved;



      (2)   The maximum length, height and width of the building to
be moved;



      (3)   The present location and proposed new location of the
building to be moved by lot, block, subdivision and street numbers;



      (4)   The date and approximate hours during which the building
will be moved;



      (5)   The planned route that will be taken from the present to
the new location of the building;



      (6)   Written approval, obtained by the applicant, from the
Police Chief, the Fire Chief, the Supervisors of the Street Department and
the Municipal Utilities Department, officials of the telephone company, the
electric utility company and cable television company;



      (7)   Owners of property of any side of the location from
which the building is to be moved and to which it is to be relocated,
including those owning property across the street from each location.



   (C)   The Building Inspector shall not issue the permit and the
building shall not be moved over the streets of the town if moving of any
building will cause serious injury to person or serious damage to private
property, or to the streets or other public improvements of the town, or
moving the building will violate any of the requirements of the town's zoning
regulations or the North Carolina State Building Code.  Any building being
moved for which a permit was granted shall not be allowed to be moved or to
remain in or on the streets of the town except during daylight hours.



   (D)   The person, firm or corporation moving a building through or
across any sidewalk, street or ally shall employ, at their expense, two
flagmen, one at each street intersection beyond the building.  Such flagmen
shall remain at theses intersections diverting or cautioning traffic during
the moving of the building.



   (E)   Upon the issuance of a moving permit, and no less than 48
hours before the moving is to begin, the Building Inspector shall furnish a
copy of the permit to the Fire Chief, Police Chief, telephone, electric and
cable television companies and owners of property identified in §
151.005(B)(7). The Building Inspector shall set forth in all such notices the
route over which the building will be moved, the date and time the moving
will be started and the approximate time of its completion.



   (F)   The person, firm or corporation requesting the permit shall be
responsible for:



      (1)   All damage caused to streets, curbs, sidewalks, trees,
highways and other public property by moving of such building;



      (2)   All extraordinary expenses incurred by the town in
connection with the moving of such building.  Such expenses shall include,
but not be limited to, overtime for police, fire or other municipal employees
directly caused by the move, use of town equipment in connection with the
move and costs of preparing the route, such as removing street signs or fire
hydrants. In the event such expenses are incurred, the town will notify the
person, firm or corporation requesting type permit within 90 days of the date
such expenses were incurred and such person, firm or corporation shall pay
the amount so due within 30 days of the date of such notification.



   (G)   The Building Inspector, as a condition precedent to the
issuance of a building moving permit, may require a bond to be executed by
the person, firm or corporation desiring the permit, with corporate surety to
the inspector's satisfaction.  Such bond shall be made payable to the town
in such amount as prescribed by the inspector and shall indemnify the town
against any damage caused to streets, curbs, sidewalks, trees, highways and
any other public property by moving of such building and extraordinary
expenses as described above.  The surety bond shall be conditioned upon and
liable for strict compliance with the terms of the permit as to the route to
be taken and the limit of time in which the building will be moved and the
time in which repair or compensation for the repair of damages resulting from
moving the building will be made, and to pay the town as liquidated damages
an amount not to exceed $50 as may be prescribed by the Building Inspector
for each day's delay in completing the moving of the building or in repairing
any damage resulting therefrom to property of the town, or for clearing any
sidewalk, street, alley, highway or other publicly owned property of all
debris resulting from moving the building.



(Ord. 1110, passed 3-8-9)



§ 151.007  REQUIREMENTS FOR PORTABLE TOILETS TO BE TIED DOWN.



   All portable toilets placed in the town pursuant to the requirements of
the North Carolina State Building Code or otherwise shall be secured and tied
down in a manner to prevent them from turning over as a result of high winds,
malicious activities or other causes.  The Town Building Inspector shall be
responsible for ensuring compliance with this section.  Methods utilized by
property owners and/or contractors to tie down portable toilets shall be
subject to the approval of the Building Inspector.



(Ord. 1318, passed 9-24-98)



§ 151.008  DEFINITION.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCE.” White goods or large electrical appliances
that are typically, but not necessarily, finished in white enamel.
“HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCE” includes, but shall not be limited to, a stove,
refrigerator, washing machine, clothes dryer and dishwasher.



(Ord. 1587, passed 12-11-08)



§ 151.009  RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCES.



   (A)   Household  appliances  prohibited  in  certain locations.



      (1)   This section is intended to regulate the outdoor
location and operation of household appliances in order to minimize noise
impacts on surrounding properties, to preserve the aesthetic value of
properties within the town and to protect and preserve property values within
the town.



      (2)   Household appliances shall only be located and operated
within the fully enclosed walls of residential or commercial structures
including but not limited to principal and accessory buildings. Location of a
household appliance on a porch or deck or within a carport that is not fully
enclosed shall not be considered “within the fully enclosed walls of
residential or commercial structures” and as such, is prohibited.



   (B)   Nonconformities.



      (1)   This section shall be effective immediately upon
adoption by the Board of Aldermen of the town.



      (2)   Any outdoor appliance not in conformity with the
requirements of this section and lawfully in place prior to the effective
date of this section shall be removed or rendered in compliance with this
section within one year of its effective date.



      (3)   After the effective date of this section, any outdoor
appliance that replaces an outdoor appliance not in conformity, or any
outdoor appliance that is moved to a location other than that in which it was
located on such effective date, shall comply with the provisions of this
section.



      (4)   Within 30 days of adoption of this section, all 
nonconforming  household  appliances  shall  be  fully screened to
prevent such household appliances from being visible from the ground level of
adjacent properties and from any public right-of-way.



   (C)   Enforcement; penalties.



      (1)   When the Code Enforcement Officer determines that
outdoor appliances are installed in a manner that is not in conformance with
the provisions of this section, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
immediately notify the property owner of the violation. The property owner
shall have 90 calendar days from the date of the notification to make the
changes required to bring the outdoor appliance into compliance.



      (2)   A violation of the provisions of this section shall
subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $50 per day to be
recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender
does not pay the penalty within 15 days after having been cited for a
violation of this chapter. Each day’s continuing violation shall be a
separate and distinct offense.



      (3)   The property owner may appeal the decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer to the Town Manager. The appeal must be in writing and
filed with the Town Clerk within ten days of the date of the notice of
violation. The decision of the Town Manager in such matters shall be final.



(Ord. 1587, passed 12-11-08)



NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS



§ 151.035  DISPLAY OF PROPERTY NUMBER.



   It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or occupant of any house or
building fronting on a street in the town to properly display a number which
has been assigned by the Building Inspector under the provisions of this
subchapter. The owner, agent or occupant of such house or building shall
place such number in a conspicuous place thereon so that it may be plainly
seen and observed from the street.  Numbers shall be not less than six
inches in height.



(Ord., passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87; Am. Ord. 1263, passed
11-16-95)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.036  DUTY OF INSPECTOR AS TO NUMBERING.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to prepare and
maintain house numbering maps of the town and when a new building is built,
or for any reason a number is required, to issue such number.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector from time to
time, and upon request, to review house number assignments, resolve conflicts
in numbers, reassign house numbers or propose any changes which, in his or
her opinion, are necessary.



   (C)   If the Building Inspector determines that a building or
structure is not in compliance with the numbering requirements as set forth
in this chapter, the Inspector shall notify the property owner in writing of
the requirement to comply with the provisions of this chapter.  The property
owner shall have 60 days from the date of such notification to comply in all
respects with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord., passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87; Am. Ord. 1263, passed
11-16-95)



§ 151.037  ANNEXATION.



   Upon annexation of any new areas to the town, it shall be the duty of
the Building Inspector, as soon as practical after such annexation, to
prepare house numbering maps for the new areas and to submit such maps to the
Board of Aldermen for their approval. Upon approval, it shall be the duty of
the Building Inspector to assign approved numbers to the owner and tenant of
each building within the new areas.



(Ord., passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87)



§ 151.038  CHANGE IN BLOCK.



   When due to conflicts, change in character or amount of occupancy of
any block it becomes necessary to assign and reassign house or building
numbers within that block, the Building Inspector shall prepare a map for the
proposed renumbering of such area and submit this map to the Board of
Aldermen for their approval. Upon approval, it shall be the duty of the
Building Inspector to assign approved numbers to the owners and tenants of
each building involved.



(Ord., passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87)



§ 151.039  ALTERNATIVE STREET NUMBERING PROVISIONS.



   When the location of a building or structure is such that the size
numbers required under the provisions of this chapter cannot be easily read
from the street, the Building Inspector may require the use of large numbers
or placement of the numbers in an alternate location.



(Ord. 1263, passed 11-16-95)



GENERAL BUILDING REQUIREMENTS AND FEDERAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM



§ 151.065  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has in Part 6, Article
21 of Chapter 143; Parts 3, 5 and 8 of Article 19 of Chapter 160A; and
Article 8 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes, delegated
to local governmental units the responsibility to adopt regulations designed
to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry.



(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06; Am. Ord. 1515, passed 8-24-06)



§ 151.066  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   The flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of the town are
subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services,  extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief,
and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities
and by the occupancy in flood prone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or
other hazards.



(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)



§ 151.067  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this subchapter to promote public health, safety,
and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions within flood prone areas by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in
damaging increases in erosion, flood heights, or velocities;



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the
accommodation of flood waters;



   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development
that may increase erosion or flood damage; and



   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands.



(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)



§ 151.068  OBJECTIVES.



   The objectives of this subchapter are:



   (A)   To protect human life and health;



   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood
control projects;



   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   To minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;



   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (that
is, water and gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets,
and bridges) that are located in flood prone areas;



   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound
use and development of flood prone areas; and



   (G)   To ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in
a special flood hazard area.



(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)



§ 151.069  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
subchapter shall be interpreted  so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this subchapter its most reasonable application.



   "ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE)."  A structure located on
the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which
is incidental to the use of the principal structure.  Garages, carports, and
storage sheds are common urban accessory structures.  Pole barns, hay sheds,
and the like qualify as accessory structures on farms and may or may not be
located on the same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.



   “ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING).”  An extension or increase in
the floor area or height of a building or structure.



   “APPEAL.”  A request for a review of the Floodplain
Administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this subchapter.



   “AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.”  A designated Zone AO on a
community’s flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths
determined to be from one to three feet.  These areas are located where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.



   “AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.”  See “SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA
(SFHA).”



   “BASEMENT.”  Any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.



   “BASE FLOOD.”  The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.



   "BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE)."  A determination of the water surface
elevations of the base flood as published in the flood insurance study. 
When the BFE has not been provided in a “SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA,” it
may be obtained from engineering studies available from a federal or state or
other source using FEMA approved engineering methodologies.  This elevation,
when combined with the “FREEBOARD,” establishes the “REGULATORY FLOOD
PROTECTION ELEVATION.”



   "BREAKAWAY WALL."  A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the
elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system.



   "BUILDING."  See “STRUCTURE.”



   "BUILDING PERMIT."  All land use, development, or building of any
sort, excluding agricultural uses, shall be required under this subchapter to
make application for, receive approval of, and obtain a permit for said land
use, development, or building.  This shall include but not be limited to any
land disturbing activities other than that stated above.



   "CAMA."  North Carolina’s Coastal Area Management Act.  This act,
along with the dredge and fill law and the federal Coastal Zone Management
Act, is managed through the North Carolina Department of Environment and
Natural Resources (NCDENR), Division of Coastal Management (DCM).



   "CBRS."  Coastal Barrier Resources System.



   "CHEMICAL STORAGE FACILITY."  A building, portion of a building, or
exterior area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or
chemically reactive products.



   "COASTAL BARRIER RESOURCES SYSTEM (CBRS)."  Undeveloped portions of
coastal and adjoining areas established by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act
(COBRA) of 1982, the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act (CBIA) of 1990, and
subsequent revisions, and includes areas owned by federal or state
governments or private conservation organizations identified as otherwise
protected areas (OPA).



   "COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA."  A special flood hazard area extending
from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open
coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or
seismic sources.  The area is designated on a FIRM, or other adopted flood
map as determined in § 151.071 of this subchapter, as Zone VE.



   "DEVELOPMENT."  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials.



   "DISPOSAL."  As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge,
deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste
into or on any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part
of the solid waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or
discharged into any waters, including groundwaters.



   "ELEVATED BUILDING."  A non-basement building which has its lowest
elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls,
posts, piers, pilings, or columns.



   "ENCROACHMENT."  The advance or infringement of uses, fill,
excavation, buildings, permanent structures, or development into a
floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.



   “FLOOD” or “FLOODING.”  A general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or



      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface
waters from any source.



   "FLOOD INSURANCE."    The insurance coverage provided under the
National Flood Insurance Program.



   "FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)."  An official map of a community,
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the special
flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are
delineated.



   "FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS)."  An examination, evaluation, and
determination of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if
appropriate), flood hazard risk zones, and other flood data in a community
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.  The flood insurance
study report includes flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs).



   "FLOOD PRONE AREA."  See “FLOODPLAIN.”



   "FLOODPLAIN." Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source.



   "FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR."  The individual appointed to administer
and enforce the floodplain management regulations.



   "FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT."  Any type of permit that is required
in conformance with the provisions of this subchapter prior to the
commencement of any development activity.



   "FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT."  The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works,
floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.



   "FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS."  This subchapter and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which
control development in flood- prone areas.  This term describes federal,
state, or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.



   "FLOOD PROOFING."  Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water, and sanitation
facilities, structures, and their contents.



   "FLOODWAY."  The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
one foot.



   "FLOOD ZONE."  A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary
map or flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of
flooding in the area.



   "FREEBOARD."  The height added to the base flood elevation (BFE) to
account for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater that the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway
conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect
of urbanization on the watershed.  The base flood elevation plus the
freeboard establishes the “REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.”



   "FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY."  A facility which cannot be used
for its intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water,
such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of
cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair.  The term does not
include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.



   "GARAGE."  An area used or capable of being used for normal automobile
storage with normal automobile access.



   "HABITABLE SPACE."  Suitable for habitation and/or housing with a
controlled physical environment in which people can live under surrounding
hospitable conditions.  Habitable space shall also include any space below
the 100-year base flood elevation which is finished and which enhances the
structural stability of the walls to exceed 20 pounds per square foot. 
Examples of finished space shall include but not be limited to furniture in
place, no floodway openings, and used in the manner described in this
definition.



   "HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITY."  As defined in G.S. § 130A, Art. 9, a
facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment, recycling,
recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste.



   "HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG)."  The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls
of the structure.



   "HISTORIC STRUCTURE."  Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;



      (3)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
landmarks in communities with a “Certified Local Government (CLG)
Program”; or



      (4)   Certified as contributing to the historical significance
of a historic district designated by a community with a “Certified Local
Government (CLG) Program.”  Certified Local Government (CLG) Programs are
approved by the U.S. Department of the Interior in cooperation with the North
Carolina Department of Cultural Resources through the State Historic
Preservation Officer as having met the requirements of the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966 as amended in 1980.



   "LEVEE."  A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment,
designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to
contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection
from temporary flooding.



   "LEVEE SYSTEM."  A flood protection system which consists of a levee,
or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices,
which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.



   "LEVEL OF 100-YEAR FLOOD."  The highest level of flooding that, on the
average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (or has a 1% chance of
occurring each year).  In no case, however, shall any structure have
habitable space below a minimum of three feet above the base flood elevation
as shown on the federal flood insurance rate maps in both the A and V Zones
and in both residential and non-residential structures.  Both new
construction and/or substantial improvement of existing structures shall
comply with the requirements of this subchapter at the lowest supporting
structural member in the V Zone and at the finished floor elevation in the Z
Zone.



   "LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG)."  The elevation of the ground, sidewalk,
or patio slab immediately next to the building, or deck support, after
completion of the building.



   "LOWEST FLOOR."  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement).  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an
area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest
floor, provided that such an enclosure is not built so as to render the
structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of
this subchapter.



   "MANUFACTURED HOME."  A structure transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. 
The term “MANUFACTURED HOME” does not include a “RECREATIONAL
VEHICLE”.



   “MANUFACTURED HOME PARK” or “SUBDIVISION.”  A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots
for rent or sale.



   "MARKET VALUE."  The building value, not including the land value and
that of any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot.  Market
value may be established by independent certified appraisal, replacement cost
depreciated for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash
value), or adjusted tax assessed values.



   "MEAN SEA LEVEL."  For purposes of this subchapter, the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988, or other vertical control datum
used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the
floodplain, to which base flood elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are
referenced.  Refer to each FIRM panel to determine datum used.



   "NEW CONSTRUCTION."  Structures for which the “START OF
CONSTRUCTION” commenced on or after the effective date of the original
version of the community’s flood damage prevention ordinance and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures.



   "NON-ENCROACHMENT AREA."  The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot as designated in the flood insurance study report.



   "OPA."  An Otherwise Protected Area.



   "POST-FIRM."  Construction or other development for which the “START
OF CONSTRUCTION” occurred on or after the effective date of the initial
flood insurance rate map for the area.



   "PRE-FIRM."  Construction or other development for which the “START
OF CONSTRUCTION” occurred before the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map for the area.



   "PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE."  A continuous or nearly continuous mound or
ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately
landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and over- topping
from high tides and waves during major coastal storms.  The inland limit of
the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change
from a relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope.



   "PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND."  At least 51% of the actual cash value of
the structure is above ground.



   “PUBLIC SAFETY” and/or “NUISANCE.”  Anything which is
injurious to the safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or
any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage
or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay,
stream, canal, or basin.



   "RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV)."  A vehicle, which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling,
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.



   "REFERENCE LEVEL."  The top of the lowest floor for structures within
special flood hazard areas designated as Zone A1—30, AE, A, A99, or AO. The
reference level is the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of
the lowest floor for structures within special flood hazard areas designated
as Zone VE.



   "REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION."  The “BASE FLOOD
ELEVATION” plus the “FREEBOARD.”  In “SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS”
where base flood elevations (BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall
be the BFE plus two feet of freeboard.



   "REMEDY A VIOLATION."  To bring the structure or other development
into compliance with state and community floodplain management regulations
or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. 
Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other
affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement
provisions of this subchapter, or otherwise deterring future similar
violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the
structure or other development.



   "SALVAGE YARD."  Any non-residential property used for the storage,
collection, and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and including but not
limited to vehicles, appliances, and related machinery.



   "SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY."  As defined in G.S. §
130A-290(a)(35), any facility involved in the disposal of solid waste.



   "SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE."  As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(36),
any place at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary
landfill, or any other method.



   "SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA)."  The land in the floodplain
subject to a 1% or greater chance of being flooded in any given year, as
determined in § 151.071 of this subchapter.



   "START OF CONSTRUCTION."  Includes substantial improvement, and means
the date the building permit was issued, provided that the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.  The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on
a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.  For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.



   "STRUCTURE."  Anything constructed or erected, the use of which
requires more or less permanent location on the ground, or attached to
something having more or less permanent location on the ground.



   "SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE."  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
during any one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.  See definition of “SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT.”



   "SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT."



      (1)   Any combination of repairs, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place
during any one-year period for which the cost equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the “START OF CONSTRUCTION” of the
improvement.  This term includes structures which have incurred SUBSTANTIAL
DAMAGE,” regardless of the actual repair work performed.  The term does
not, however, include either:



         (a)   Any correction of existing violations of state or
community health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the community code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or,



         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided
that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation
as a historic structure.



      (2)   The cost of repair from damage or destruction resulting
from a natural disaster shall be determined by the Building Inspector.  The
Building Inspector shall do so by comparing the insurance claim awarded for
repairs to the structure resulting from such damage or destruction with the
estimated cost of such repairs provided by the contractor or property
owner.  In such event, the larger of the two amounts shall be deemed the
cost of repair, subject to the provisions of this subdivision.  Insurance
claims awarded for contents coverage shall not be included in determining the
cost of repair.  In the event no insurance award is made in connection with
damage or destruction from a natural disaster, any property owner wishing to
make repairs to a damaged structure shall be required to fill out the
substantial improvement/substantial damage application forms available in the
office of the Building Inspector in order to determine the cost of repair
from damage or destruction.  In both circumstances (where there is or is not
an insurance claim awarded), the Building Inspector may also consider the
prevailing cost within the town for such repairs at the time the repairs are
undertaken.  In addition, the property owner may be required to provide
other information as required by the Building Inspector to substantiate the
cost of repair from damage or destruction.



      (3)   The cost of repairs, reconstruction, improvements, or
additions to a structure in situations other than those resulting from a
natural disaster will be determined by the Building Inspector.  Such
determination shall be based on the estimated cost provided by the contractor
or property owner, subject to the provisions of this subdivision.  The
Building Inspector may also consider the prevailing cost within the town for
such repairs, reconstruction, improvements, or additions at the time such
work is undertaken.  In addition, the property owner may be required to
provide other information as required by the Building Inspector to
substantiate the cost of such repairs, reconstruction, improvements, or
addition.



      (4)   Structures designated by the town as historic landmarks
are excluded from the provisions of this section, provided that the repairs,
reconstruction, improvements, or additions to such structure do not prevent
the structure’s continued designation as a historic landmark.



   "VARIANCE."    A grant of relief from the requirements of this
subchapter.



   "VIOLATION."  The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community’s flood plain management regulations. 
A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required under § 151.078
through § 151.088 of this subchapter is presumed to be in violation until
such time as that documentation is provided.



   "WATER SURFACE ELEVATION."  The height, in relation to mean sea level
of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal
or riverine areas.



   "WATERCOURSE."  A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel, or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. 
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.



(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06; Am. Ord. 1515, passed 8-24-06)



§ 151.070  LANDS TO WHICH THIS SUBCHAPTER APPLIES.



   This subchapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within
the jurisdiction, including extra-territorial jurisdictions (ETJs) of the
town and within the jurisdiction of any other community whose governing body
agrees, by resolution, to such applicability.



(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)



§ 151.071  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.



   The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the
cooperating technical state (CTS) agreement between the state and FEMA in its
flood insurance study (FIS) and its accompanying flood insurance rate maps
(FIRM) for New Hanover County, dated April 3, 2006, which are adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)



§ 151.072  ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with
the provisions of this subchapter prior to the commencement of any
development activities within special flood hazard areas determined in
accordance with § 151.071 of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)



§ 151.073  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of
this subchapter and other applicable regulations.



(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)



§ 151.074  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This subchapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this
subchapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.



(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)



§ 151.075  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this subchapter, all
provisions shall be:



   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)



§ 151.076  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this subchapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering consideration.  Larger floods can and will occur.  Actual flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.  This subchapter
does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. 
This subchapter shall not create liability on the part of the town or by any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance
on this subchapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.



(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)



§ 151.077  DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Building Code Administrator, or his/her designee, hereinafter
referred to as the “Floodplain Administrator,” is hereby appointed to
administer and implement the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)



§ 151.078  FLOODPLAIN  DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION, PERMIT, AND CERTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Application requirements.  Application for a floodplain
development permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any
development activities located within special flood hazard areas.  The
following items shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply
for a floodplain development permit:



      (1)   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include but shall
not be limited to the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:



         (a)   The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations
of the area of development/disturbance, existing and proposed structures,
utility systems, grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas,
drainage facilities, and other development;



         (b)   The boundary of the special flood hazard area as
delineated on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in § 151.071, or a
statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard area;



         (c)   Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed
development area as determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined
in § 151.071;



         (d)   The boundary of the floodway(s) or
non-encroachment area(s) as determined in § 151.071;



         (e)   The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as
set forth in § 151.071 or § 151.079(J) and (K);



         (f)   The old and new location of any watercourse that
will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;



         (g)   The boundary and designation date of the Coastal
Barrier Resource System (CBRS) area or Otherwise Protected Areas (OPA), if
applicable; and



         (h)   Certification of the plot plan by a registered
land surveyor or professional engineer.



      (2)   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all
development within a special flood hazard area, including but not limited to:



         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
proposed reference level (including basement) of all structures;



         (b)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which
any non-residential structure in Zone AE, A or AO will be floodproofed; and



         (c)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which
any proposed utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed.



      (3)   If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA form
81-65) with supporting data and an operational plan that includes but is not
limited to installation, exercise, and maintenance of floodproofing measures.



      (4)   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include
details of the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this
subchapter are met.  These details include but are not limited to:



         (a)   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable
(that is, fill, solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation,
open foundation on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls);



         (b)   Openings to facilitate equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces on walls in accordance with § 151.083(E), when solid foundation
perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AO, AE, and Al—30;



         (c)   The following, in coastal high hazard areas, in
accordance with §151.083(E)(4) and § 151.084:



            1.  V-Zone certification with accompanying plans and
specifications verifying the engineered structure and any breakaway wall
designs;



            2.  Plans for open wood latticework or insect
screening, if applicable;



            3.  Plans for non-structural  fill, if
applicable.  If non-structural fill is proposed, it must be demonstrated
through coastal engineering analysis that the proposed fill would not result
in any increase in the base flood elevation or otherwise cause adverse
impacts by wave ramping and deflection on to the subject structure or
adjacent properties.



      (5)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the regulatory
flood protection elevation.



      (6)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to
be located and constructed to minimize flood damage.



      (7)   Copies of all other local, state, and federal permits
required prior to floodplain development permit issuance (wetlands,
endangered species, erosion and sedimentation control, CAMA, riparian
buffers, mining, etc.)



      (8)   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles
and/or temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure § 151.083(G) and (H)
of this subchapter are met.



      (9)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation, when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects
of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and
the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if
not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation.



   (B)   Permit requirements.  The floodplain development permit shall
include but not be limited to:



      (1)   A description of the development to be permitted under
the floodplain development permit.



      (2)   The special flood hazard area determination for the
proposed development per available data specified in § 151.071.



      (3)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for
the reference level and all attendant utilities.



      (4)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for
the protection of all public utilities.



      (5)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines.



      (6)   A statement that no fill material or other development
shall encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any watercourse,
as applicable.



      (7)   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AO, AE,
or A1—30.



      (8)   Limitations of use of the enclosures below the lowest
floor (if applicable) (that is, parking, building access, and limited storage
only).



   (C)   Certification requirements.



      (1)   Elevation certificates.



         (a)   An elevation certificate (FEMA form 81-31) is
required prior to the actual start of any new construction.  It shall be the
duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean
sea level.  The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted.  Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder prior to the beginning of construction.  Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny
a floodplain development permit.



         (b)   An elevation certificate (FEMA form 81-31) is
required after the reference level is established.  Within 14 calendar days
of establishment of the reference level elevation, it shall be the duty of
the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification
of the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level.  Any
work done within the 14-day calendar period and prior to submission of the
certification shall be at the permit holder’s risk.  The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted.  Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately
and prior to further work being permitted to proceed.  Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to issue
a stop-work order for the project.



         (c)   A final as-built elevation certificate (FEMA form
81-31) is required after construction is completed and prior to certificate
of compliance/occupancy issuance.  It shall be the duty of the permit holder
to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as- built
construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant
utilities.  The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted.  Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy
issuance.  In some instances, another certification may be required to
certify corrected as-built construction.  Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to
withhold the issuance of a certificate of compliance/occupancy.



         (d)   All new or substantially improved structures shall
be certified by a registered engineer that the construction shall be securely
anchored to adequately anchored pilings or columns in order to withstand
velocity waters and hurricane wave wash as required.  All engineering
certification shall be in writing and bear the engineer’s seal and
signature.  All engineering certifications shall comply with standard ASTM
D-698.



      (2)   Floodproofing certificate.  If nonresidential
floodproofing is used to meet the regulatory flood protection elevation
requirements, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA form 81-65), with supporting
data and an operational plan, is required prior to the actual start of any
new construction.  It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to
the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the floodproofed design
elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to
mean sea level.  Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under
the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified
by same.  The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data and
plan.  Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
applicant prior to permit approval.  Failure to submit the certification or
failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain
development permit.  Failure to construct in accordance with the certified
design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate of
compliance/occupancy.



      (3)   If a manufactured home is placed within Zone A, AO, AE,
or Al—30 and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches in height
above grade, an engineered foundation certification is required per
§151.083(D).



      (4)   If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a
description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; a
professional engineer’s certified report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map showing the
location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation shall all be
submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain
development permit.



      (5)   Certification exemptions.  The following structures, if
located within Zone A, AO, AE, or A1—30, are exempt from the
elevation/floodproofing certification requirements specified in items (1) and
(2) of this subsection:



         (a)   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of
§151.083(G)(1);



         (b)   Temporary structures meeting requirements of
§151.083(H); and



         (c)   Accessory structures less than 150 square feet
meeting requirements of §151.083(I).



      (6)   A V-Zone certification with accompanying design plans
and specifications is required prior to issuance of a floodplain development
permit within coastal high hazard areas.  It shall be the duty of the permit
applicant to submit to the Floodplain Administrator said certification to
ensure the design standards of this subchapter are met.  A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop or review the structural
design, plans, and specifications for construction and certify that the
design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this subchapter.  This
certification is not a substitute for an elevation certificate.



(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)



§ 151.079  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Floodplain Administrator shall perform but not be limited to the
following duties:



   (A)   Review all floodplain development applications and issue
permits for all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to
assure that the requirements of this subchapter have been satisfied.



   (B)   Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits
(wetlands, endangered species, erosion and sedimentation control, CAMA,
riparian buffers, mining, etc.) may be required and require that copies of
such permits be provided and maintained on file with the floodplain
development permit.



   (C)   Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina Department
of Crime Control and Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State
Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program, prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).



   (D)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
not diminished.



   (E)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new
or substantially improved structures, in accordance with § 151.078(C).



   (F)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to
which all new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been
floodproofed, in accordance with § 151.078(C).



   (G)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all
public utilities in accordance with § 151.078(C).



   (H)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure,
obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with § 151.078(C) and § 151.083(C).



   (I)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the special flood hazard areas (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), make the necessary interpretation.  The person contesting the
location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal
the interpretation as provided in this article.



   (J)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with § 151.071, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation (BFE) data, along with floodway data or non-encroachment area
data available from a federal, state, or other source.



   (K)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no
floodway nor non- encroachment area data has been provided in accordance with
§ 151.071, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or
non-encroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other source
in order to administer the provisions of this subchapter.



   (L)   When the lowest ground elevation of a parcel or structure in a
special flood hazard area is above the base flood elevation, advise the
property owner of the option to apply for a letter of map amendment (LOMA)
from FEMA. Maintain a copy of the letter of map amendment (LOMA) issued by
FEMA in the floodplain development permit file.



   (M)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the
administration of this subchapter and make these records available for public
inspection.



   (N)   Make on-site inspections of work in progress.  As the work
pursuant to a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain
Administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary
to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of the
local ordinance and the terms of the permit.  In exercising this power, the
Floodplain Administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper
credentials, to enter on any premises within the jurisdiction of the
community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other
enforcement action.



   (O)   Issue stop-work orders as required.  Whenever a building or
part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in
violation of this subchapter, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work
to be immediately stopped.  The stop- work order shall be in writing and
directed to the person doing the work.  The stop-work order shall state the
specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the
condition(s) under which the work may be resumed.  Violation of a stop-work
order constitutes a misdemeanor.



   (P)   Revoke floodplain development permits as required.  The
Floodplain Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain
development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the
reason(s) for the revocation.  Permits shall be revoked for any substantial
departure from the approved application, plans, or specifications; for
refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or
for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit.  Any
floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable
state or local law may also be revoked.



   (Q)   Make periodic inspections throughout all special flood hazard
areas within the jurisdiction of the community.  The Floodplain
Administrator and each member of his or her inspection department shall have
a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour
for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.



   (R)   Follow through with corrective procedures § 151.080.



   (S)   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance
requests.



   (T)   Maintain a current map repository, to include but not be
limited to the FIS report, FIRM, and other official flood maps and studies
adopted in accordance with § 151.071 of this subchapter, including any
revisions thereto, including letters of map change, issued by FEMA.  Notify
state and FEMA of mapping needs.



   (U)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including
letters of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) and letters of map revision
(LOMR).



(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)



§ 151.080  CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Violations to be corrected.  When the Floodplain
Administrator finds violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall
be his or her duty to notify the owner or occupant of the building of the
violation. The owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the
violations of law cited in such notification.



   (B)   Actions in event of failure to take  corrective action.  If
the owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective
action, the Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by
certified or registered mail to the owner’s last known address or by
personal service, stating:



      (1)   That the building or property is in violation of the
flood damage prevention ordinance;



      (2)   That a hearing will be held before the Floodplain
Administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten days after
the date of the notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard
in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to
the matter; and



      (3)   That following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator
may issue an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove
fill as appears appropriate.



   (C)   Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held
pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall
find that the building or development is in violation of the flood damage
prevention ordinance, he or she shall issue an order in writing to the owner,
requiring the owner to remedy the violation within a specified time period,
not less than 60 calendar days, nor more than 90 calendar days.  Where the
Floodplain Administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other
property, he or she may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser
period as may be feasible.



   (D)   Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective
action may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving
notice of appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the clerk
within ten days following issuance of the final order.  In the absence of an
appeal, the order of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final.  The local
governing body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm,
modify and affirm, or revoke the order.



   (E)   Failure to comply with order.  If the owner of a building or
property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no
appeal has been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body
following an appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished at the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)



§ 151.081  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Board of Adjustment as established by the town,
hereinafter referred to as the “Appeal Board,” shall hear and decide
requests for variances from the requirements of this subchapter.



   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may
appeal such decision to the Court, as provided in G.S. Ch. 7A.



   (C)   Fees.  A fee, as established from time to time by the Board
of Aldermen, shall be paid to the town for each application for a variance or
appeal to cover the necessary administration costs and advertising.



   (D)   Variances may be issued for:



      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon
the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not
preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and
that the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure.



      (2)   Functionally dependant facilities if determined to meet
the definition as stated in § 151.069 of this subchapter, provided that
provisions § 151.081(M)(2), (3), and (5) have been satisfied, and such
facilities are protected by methods that minimize flood damages.



      (3)   Any other type of development, provided that it meets
the requirements stated in this section.



   (E)   In passing upon variances, the Appeal Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this subchapter, and:



      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
to the injury of others;



      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;



      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location
as defined in § 151.069 of this subchapter as a functionally dependant
facility, where applicable;



      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject
to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;



      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;



      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise,
and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and



      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities
and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets
and bridges.



   (F)   A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be
submitted with the application for a variance.



   (G)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the
purposes of this subchapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this subchapter.



   (H)   Ruling. In exercising the above- mentioned powers, the Board
may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such
order, requirement, decision or, determination that in its opinion ought to
be made, and to that end shall have the power of the official from whom the
appeal is taken.



   (I)   Voting.  The concurring vote of four-fifths of the members of
the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the administrative official or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
subchapter, or to effect any variation in the application of this subchapter.



   (J)   Oaths of witnesses.  The Mayor, or any member temporarily
acting as Mayor, is authorized in his or her official capacity to administer
oaths to witnesses in any matter coming before the Board of Adjustment.



   (K)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation
(BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such
construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and
property, and that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below
the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to $25 per $100 of insurance coverage.  Such notification shall
be maintained with a record of all variance actions, including justification
for their issuance.



   (L)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and the state upon request.



   (M)   Conditions for variances:



      (1)   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will
make the structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws,
regulations, or ordinances.



      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated
floodway or non- encroachment area if the variance would result in any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge.



      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.



      (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship; and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



   (N)   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities,
hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage
facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas, provided that all
of the following conditions are met.



      (1)   The use serves a critical need in the community.



      (2)   No feasible location exists for the use outside the
special flood hazard area.



      (3)   The reference level of any structure is elevated or
floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood protection elevation.



      (4)   The use complies with all other applicable federal,
state, and local laws.



      (5)   The town has notified the Secretary of the North
Carolina Department of Crime Control and Public Safety of its intention to
grant a variance at least 30 calendar days prior to granting the variance.



(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06; Am. Ord. 1605, passed 6-18-09)



§ 151.082  GENERAL STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.



   In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required:



   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement of the structure.



   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.



   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.



      (1)   A maximum of 30% of the first floor square footage may
be enclosed for means of egress and storage facilities in the A Zones.  In
no case shall this area be greater than 300 square feet, and no finished wall
may be longer in any direction than 20 feet.  No plumbing fixtures,
electrical outlets, condensing units, etc. shall be allowed below the base
flood elevation.  All construction of this nature which is located in V and
A Zones shall be breakaway type enclosures limited to insect screening, open
wood latticework, or breakaway walls that have a design safe loading
resistance of not less than ten and no more than 20 pounds per square foot.



      (2)   In addition, enclosed garages may be allowed in the A
Zones designated on the flood maps, provided that they have no interior
finish that enhances the structural stability of the wall to exceed 20 pounds
per square foot and have working garage doors on the enclosed area.  Garages
may not be designed or constructed as habitable space.



   (D)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so
as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of flooding.  These include but are not limited to HVAC
equipment, water softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork,
electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes, appliances (washers,
dryers, refrigerators, freezers, etc.), hot water heaters, and electric
outlets/switches.



   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.



   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.



   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.



   (H)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a
structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter,
shall meet the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this
subchapter.



   (I)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent the repair,
reconstruction, or replacement of a building or structure existing on the
effective date of this subchapter and located totally or partially within the
floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback, provided that there is no
additional encroachment below the regulatory flood protection elevation in
the floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback, and provided that
such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other
requirements of this subchapter.



   (J)   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall
not be permitted, except by variance as specified in § 151.081(N).  A
structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an allowed use
or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater treatment
facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the structure
or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood
protection elevation and certified according to § 151.078(C) of this
subchapter.



   (K)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.



   (L)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.



   (M)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



   (N)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall have received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies
for which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404
of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.



(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)



§ 151.083  SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.



   In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data
has been provided, as set forth in § 151.071, or § 151.079(J) and (K), the
following provisions, in addition to § 151.082, are required:



   (A)   Residential construction.  New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall
have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in § 151.069 of this
subchapter.



   (B)   Coastal high hazard areas; nonconforming  uses; development.



      (1)   Within those areas designated as coastal high hazard
areas by the flood maps, all nonconforming uses on land below the 100-year
flood level shall not be expanded.



      (2)   Within those areas designated as coastal high hazard
areas by the flood maps, no land below the level of the 100-year flood
elevation shall be developed unless the new construction or substantial
improvement shall:



         (a)   Be located landward of the reach of the mean high
tide.  No man-made alteration of sand dunes and mangrove stands shall be
permitted within the V Zones as shown on the town’s flood insurance rate
map which would increase potential flood damage.



         (b)   Be elevated on adequately anchored piles or
columns and must be protected from hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.  The bottom of the lowest supporting
structural member, exclusive of piles, is at or above the applicable 100-year
flood level which shall be adjusted for wave height in appropriate zones. 
The use of fill material for structural support of buildings shall be
prohibited within the V zones as shown on the town’s flood insurance rate
map.



         (c)   Have no basement and have the space below the
lowest floor free of obstructions so that the impact of abnormally high tides
or wind driven water is minimized except as described in § 151.083(A).



   (C)   Non-residential construction.  New construction and
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-
residential structure shall have the reference level, including basement,
elevated no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined
in § 151.069 of this subchapter.  Structures located in A, AE and A1—30
Zones may be floodproofed to the regulatory flood protection elevation in
lieu of elevation, provided that all areas of the structure, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the regulatory flood
protection elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water, using structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. 
For AO Zones, the floodproofing elevation shall be in accordance with §
151.085(A).  A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify
that the standards of this subsection are satisfied.  Such certification
shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in §
151.078(C), along with the operational and maintenance plans.



   (D)   Manufactured homes.



      (1)   New or replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated
so that the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in § 151.069 of this
subchapter.



      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement, either by engineer certification, or in accordance with the most
current edition of the State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured
Homes, adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to G.S. §
143-143.15 or a certified engineered foundation.  Additionally, when the
elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36 inches or less above
the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or
engineered foundation.  When the elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches
in height, an engineering certification is required.



      (3)   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall
meet the requirements of § 151.083(E)(1), (2), and (3).



      (4)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of
all residents of all new, substantially improved, or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. 
This plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator
and the local emergency management coordinator.



   (E)   Elevated buildings.  Fully enclosed areas of new construction
and substantially improved structures, which are below the lowest floor:



      (1)   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but
shall only be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited
storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. 
Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for
parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment
(standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or
elevator).  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished
or partitioned into separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas;



      (2)   Shall be constructed entirely of flood resistant
materials, up to the regulatory flood protection elevation;



      (3)   Shall include, in Zones A, AO, AE, and A1—30, flood
openings to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.  To meet this requirement,
the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum design criteria:



         (a)   A minimum of two flood openings on different sides
of each enclosed area subject to flooding;



         (b)   The total net area of all flood openings must be
at least one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;



         (c)   If a building has more than one enclosed area,
each enclosed area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to enter and
exit automatically;



         (d)   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be
no higher than one foot above the adjacent grade;



         (e)   Flood openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; and



         (f)   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not
considered enclosures for regulatory purposes and, therefore, do not require
flood openings.  Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural
status, is considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined
above.



      (4)   Shall allow, in coastal high hazard areas (Zones VE and
V1—30), breakaway walls, open wood latticework, or insect screening,
provided that it is not part of the structural support of the building and is
designed so as to breakaway, under abnormally high tides or wave action,
without causing damage to the structural integrity of the building, provided
that the following design specifications are met:



         (a)   Material shall consist of open wood latticework or
insect screening; or



         (b)   Breakaway walls shall meet the following design
specifications:



            1.   Design safe loading resistance of each wall
shall be not less than ten nor more than 20 pounds per square foot; or



            2.   Breakaway walls that exceed a design safe
loading resistance of 20 pounds per square foot (either by design or when so
required by state or local codes) shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect that the breakaway wall will collapse from
a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood event,
and the elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system
shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural damage
due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all
building components (structural and non-structural).  The water loading
values used shall be those associated with the base flood. The wind loading
values used shall be those required by the North Carolina State Building Code.



   (F)   Additions/improvements.



      (1)   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures
when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior
modifications to the existing structure are:



         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any
more nonconforming than the existing structure.



         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing
structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards
for new construction.



      (2)   Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications
to the existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall shall
require only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.



      (3)   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures
when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior
modifications to the existing structure are:



         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements only must comply with the standards for new construction.



         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing
structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards
for new construction.



      (4)   Where an independent perimeter load-bearing wall is
provided between the addition and the existing building, the addition(s)
shall be considered a separate building and only the addition must comply
with the standards for new construction.



   (G)   Recreational vehicles.  Recreational vehicles shall either:



      (1)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be
fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently attached
additions); or



      (2)   Meet all the requirements for new construction.



   (H)   Temporary non-residential structures.  Prior to the issuance
of a floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant
must submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such
structure(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash flood, or other type of flood
warning notification.  The following information shall be submitted in
writing to the Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:



      (1)   A specified time period for which the temporary use will
be permitted.  Time specified should not exceed three months, renewable up
to one year;



      (2)   The name, address, and phone number of the individual
responsible for the removal of the temporary structure;



      (3)   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure
will be removed (that is, minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane
or immediately upon flood warning notification);



      (4)   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with
the entity responsible for physical removal of the structure; and



      (5)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location
outside the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will
be moved.



   (I)   Accessory structures.



      (1)   When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages,
etc.) are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, the following
criteria shall be met:



         (a)   Accessory structures shall not be used for human
habitation (including working, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas);



         (b)   Accessory structures shall not be
temperature-controlled;



         (c)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low
flood damage potential;



         (d)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and
placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow
of floodwaters;



         (e)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with § 151.082(A);



         (f)   All service facilities such as electrical shall be
installed in accordance with § 151.082(D); and



         (g)   Flood openings to facilitate automatic
equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below regulatory
flood protection elevation in conformance with § 151.083(E)(3).



      (2)   An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150
square feet that satisfies the criteria outlined above does not require an
elevation or floodproofing certificate.  Elevation or floodproofing
certifications are required for all other accessory structures in accordance
with § 151.078(C).



   (J)   New or replacement water and sewer  systems.  Within those
areas designated as special flood hazard areas by the flood maps, all new or
replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems, including
on-site systems shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges
from the systems into flood waters.  If in the opinion of town officials the
conditions warrant such action, certification may be required from a
professional engineer who is registered in the state that the systems
mentioned are so designed.



   (K)   Water to air heat pumps.



      (1)   Any property owner may make application for construction
of wells, not for the purpose of or to be used for human consumption, to
supply water for and dispose of water from water to air heat pumps.  Such
wells shall have a maximum depth of 40 feet.  The property owner shall
acquire a building permit before commencing construction of the wells and
shall submit all supporting documents required by the Building Inspector.



      (2)   The line supplying water to the heat pump shall be
equipped with a filter and be capable of supplying 125% of the rated capacity
of the system. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to
dispose of all water from water to air heat pumps by means of a separate well
of a depth not to exceed 40 feet. This disposal system shall consist of a
disposal line the minimum size of which shall be two inches in diameter. 
The disposal line shall contain a strainer. In no case may water from the
heat pump be disposed of in sewer lines, storm drains, or estuarine waters.



(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06; Am. Ord. 1515, passed 8-24-06)



§ 151.084  COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREAS (ZONES VE).



   Coastal high hazard areas are special flood hazard areas established in
§ 151.071, and designated as Zones VE.  These areas have special flood
hazards associated with high velocity waters from storm surges or seismic
activity and, therefore, in addition to meeting all requirements of this
subchapter, the following provisions shall apply:



   (A)   All development shall:



      (1)   Be located landward of the reach of mean high tide;



      (2)   Be located landward of the first line of stable natural
vegetation; and



      (3)   Comply with all applicable CAMA setback requirements.



   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
elevated so that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the
lowest floor (excluding pilings or columns) is no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation.  Floodproofing shall not be utilized on any
structures in coastal high hazard areas to satisfy the regulatory flood
protection elevation requirements.



   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall have
the space below the lowest floor free of obstruction so as not to impede the
flow of flood waters, with the following exceptions:



      (1)   Open wood latticework or insect screening may be
permitted below the regulatory flood protection elevation for aesthetic
purposes only and must be designed to wash away in the event of abnormal wave
action and in accordance with § 151.083(E)(4)(a).  Design plans shall be
submitted in accordance with § 151.078(A)(4)(C)(2); or



      (2)   Breakaway walls may be permitted, provided that they
meet the criteria set forth in § 151.083(E)(4).  Design plans shall be
submitted in accordance with § 151.078(A)(4)(c)(1).



   (D)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
securely anchored to pile or column foundations.  All pilings and columns
and the structures attached thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement due to the effect of wind and water loads
acting simultaneously on all building components.



      (1)   Water loading values used shall be those associated with
the base flood.



      (2)   Wind loading values used shall be those required by the
current edition of the North Carolina State Building Code.



   (E)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify
that the design, specifications, and plans for construction are in compliance
with the provisions contained in § 151.083, § 151.084(C)(1) and (2), §
151.084(D) and § 151.084(F) of this subchapter on the current version of the
North Carolina “National Flood Insurance Program V-Zone Certification”
form.



   (F)   Fill shall not be used for structural support.  Limited
non-compacted and non-stabilized fill may be used around the perimeter of a
building for landscaping/aesthetic purposes, provided that it is demonstrated
through coastal engineering analysis that the proposed fill would not result
in any increase in the base flood elevation and not cause any adverse impacts
by wave ramping and deflection to the subject structure or adjacent
properties.



   (G)   There shall be no alteration of sand dunes which would
increase potential flood damage.



   (H)   No manufactured homes shall be permitted except in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision.  A replacement manufactured home may
be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision,
provided that the anchoring and elevation standards of this section have been
satisfied.



   (I)   Recreational vehicles may be permitted in coastal high hazard
areas, provided that they meet the recreational vehicle criteria of §
151.083(G)(1) and the temporary structure provisions of § 151.083(H).



(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06; Am. Ord. 1515, passed 8-24-06)



§ 151.085  STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (ZONE AO).



   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in § 151.071
are areas designated as shallow flooding areas.  These areas have special
flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate.  In addition to § 151.082, all new
construction and substantial improvements shall meet the following
requirements:



   (A)   The reference level shall be elevated at least as high as the
depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), in feet, plus
a freeboard of two feet, above the highest adjacent grade; or at least two
feet above the highest adjacent grade plus a freeboard of two feet if no
depth number is specified.



   (B)   Non-residential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be
floodproofed to the same level as required in § 151.085(A) so that the
structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below
that level shall be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water and with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
Certification is required as per § 151.078(C) and § 151.083(C).



   (C)   Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on
slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.



(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)



§ 151.086  EFFECT ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES UNDER THE EXISTING FLOOD DAMAGE
PREVENTION ORDINANCE.



   This subchapter in part comes forward by reenactment of some of the
provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance enacted November 21, 1974
as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re- enact and
continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that
all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may
be enforced.  The enactment of this subchapter shall not affect any action,
suit, or proceeding instituted or pending.  All provisions of the flood
damage prevention ordinance of the town enacted on November 21, 1974 as
amended, which are not reenacted herein are repealed.



(Ord., passed 11-21-74; Am. Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87; Am. Ord. 1152, passed
8-22-91; Am. Ord. 1263, passed 11-16-95; Am. Ord. 1282, passed 10-23-96; Am.
Ord. 1354, passed 2-24-00; Am. Ord. 1355, passed 3-9-00; Am. Ord. 1367,
passed 8-24-00; Am. Ord. 1368, passed 11-16-00; Am. Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)



§ 151.087  CONFLICTING LAWS; SUBCHAPTER TO PREVAIL.



   The provisions and requirements of this subchapter shall take
precedence over any conflicting ordinances, regulations, or codes or parts
thereof as they apply to the jurisdiction of the town.



(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)



§ 151.088  EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.



   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size, or designated use of any development or any part thereof
for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain
Administrator or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of
this ordinance, provided, however, that when construction is not begun under
such outstanding permit within a period of six months subsequent to the date
of issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.



(Ord. 1503, passed 3-23-06)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 151.110  BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   (A)   This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Municipal Building Inspector. If the Building Inspector shall find that any
of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, he shall notify in
writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of
the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order
discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of
illegal buildings or of additions, alterations, or structural changes
thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any
other action authorized by this chapter to insure compliance with or to
prevent violation of its provisions.



   (B)   (1)   The Building Inspector and the Division of Land Use
and Building shall be a part of the Public Works Department.



      (2)   The Inspector shall possess all the powers conferred and
shall perform all the duties prescribed by G.S. § 160A-412 and other
statutes applicable thereto. He shall possess such further power and perform
such further duties as prescribed by the fire prevention regulations, zoning
ordinances, pier and dock ordinances, the Coastal Area Management Act, and
the minimum housing code of the town, and the like.



      (3)   The Building Inspector or his deputy shall have the
right to enter, at all reasonable times, any building or premises within the
town, without molestation, for the purpose of inspecting or in the
performance of his duties. He shall inspect or cause to be inspected
frequently all chimneys, flues, steam and fire openings within the town and
may, when occasion requires, appoint deputies to perform any part of his
duties.



(Ord. 1043, passed 3-26-87)



Statutory reference:



   Authorizing the creation of Inspection Department, see G.S. § 160A-411



§ 151.111  BUILDING PERMIT FEES.



   At the time any person acquires a permit issued under the provisions of
this chapter or G.S. § 160A-417, the person shall pay a fee as set out in
the Official Building Permit Fee Schedule as approved by the Board of
Aldermen and amended from time to time, a copy of which shall be retained
permanently in the office of the Building Inspector.



(Ord. 1164, passed 1-9-92)



§ 151.112  INSPECTION BOXES REQUIRED.



   The owner of real property upon which new construction or substantial
improvement (as defined in § 151.066) is undertaken shall provide on the
site on which such construction or improvement is undertaken a weather tight
inspection box approved by the Building Inspector and containing all
applicable permits, stamped plans and inspection cards issued by the Building
Inspector.  No inspections shall be made by the Building Inspector until the
inspection box has been erected on site and the permits, plans and cards as
described hereinabove are placed in the inspection box.



(Ord. 1299, passed 1-22-98)



§ 151.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable in
accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 14-4.



   (B)   Except as provided otherwise herein, a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in
the amount of $50 per day to be recovered by the town in a civil action in
the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within 15 days
after having been cited for a violation of this chapter.  Each day's
continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct offense.



   (C)   A violation of §§ 151.035 through 151.039 of this chapter
shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $10 per day to
be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the
offender does not pay the penalty within 15 days after having been cited for
a violation of this chapter.  Each day's continuing violation shall be a
separate and distinct offense.



(Ord. 1263, passed 11-16-95)



CHAPTER 152:  MINIMUM HOUSING CODE




Section




General Provisions



   152.001   Findings and purpose



   152.002   Scope



   152.003   Definitions



   152.004   Reports by employees of fire and police departments



   152.005   Application of state building code



   152.006   Approval of rules and regulations



   152.007   Frame structures in fire district; restrictions



Minimum Standards for Dwellings or Dwelling Units



   152.020   Compliance required



   152.021   Structural conditions



   152.022   Basic equipment and facilities



   152.023   Light and ventilation



   152.024   Electrical systems



   152.025   Space and use



   152.026   Sanitation



Residential Construction; Technical Guidelines



   152.040   General requirements



   152.041   Piles required



   152.042   Floor system



   152.043   Other exterior construction



   152.044   Walls



   152.045   Roofs



   152.046   Wood to masonry



Technical Minimum Standards For All Buildings



   152.060   Structural standards



   152.061   Plumbing standards



   152.062   Heating standards



   152.063   Electrical standards



   152.064   Commercial property



Rooming Houses and Units



   152.075   Compliance required



   152.076   Registration, permits, and inspection



   152.077   Permit required



   152.078   Water closet, lavatory, and bath facilities



   152.079   Water heater required



   152.080   Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes



   152.081   Exit requirement



   152.082   Sanitary conditions



   152.083   Smoke detectors



   152.084   Violations



Access System and Structures



   152.095   Permit required; application



   152.096   Applications to be accompanied by agreement



   152.097   Removable or permanent structures



   152.098   Stairs, ramps, or walkways



   152.099   Extension of structures



   152.100   Structures located eastwardly to be removed when owner
notified by town



   152.101   Removable units and structures; specifications



   152.102   Electrical circuits; water or sewer lines and fixtures



   152.103   Display of name and address on rail of removable structure



   152.104   Suggested sketches and structural systems to be provided
for construction by owner



Sand Dunes



   152.115   Short title



   152.116   Purpose



   152.117   Exemptions



   152.118   Damaging sand dunes prohibited



   152.119   Shore line protection officers



   152.120   Permits affecting sand dunes



   152.121   Appeals procedure



   152.122   Inspection and permit fees



Unsafe Buildings



   152.135   Residential buildings unfit for human habitation



   152.136   Unsafe dilapidated buildings



Administration and Enforcement



   152.150   Housing inspector; powers



   152.151   Inspections; right of entry



   152.152   Abatement; hearings



   152.153   Service of order; contents



   152.154   Methods of service of complaints or orders



   152.155   Enforcement procedure



   152.156   Right of appeal



   152.157   Lien on premises; contract for repairs



   152.158   Alternative remedies



   152.159   Conflict with other provisions



 



   152.999   Penalty



   Appendix:   Forms



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.001  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-441, it is hereby found and declared
that there exists in the town dwellings which are unfit for human habitation
and dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people
of the town due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire,
accidents or other calamities; lack of ventilation, light or sanitary
facilities, and other conditions rendering such dwellings unsafe, unsanitary,
dangerous, or detrimental to the welfare of the residents of the town.



   (B)   There also exist certain conditions peculiar  to  the 
coastal  regions  that require erection, alteration, and/or repair
procedures that are more stringent than in other areas which may not be
subject to the hazards of the elements of this area. Thus we have set forth
minimum requirements for erection, alteration, or repair which we believe
will be for the safety, welfare, and benefit of all concerned within the town.



   (C)   Furthermore, all projects concerning construction (erection,
alteration, and/or repair) are areas of environmental concern and shall be
treated as such. All of the concerns of the minimum housing code and
technical guidelines shall be considered as to their impact on the
environment and every effort shall be made by all concerned to preserve and
maintain the environment for our own protection, safety, and welfare, and for
those generations yet unborn.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)



§ 152.002  SCOPE.



   (A)   This code is hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be
construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof through
structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation,
and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards incidental to the
construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of
dwellings, apartment houses, rooming houses or buildings, structures, or
premises used as such.



   (B)   The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing
housing and to all housing hereafter constructed within the town. Portable,
mobile, or demountable buildings or structures, including trailers, when used
or intended to be used for housing within the town shall be subject to the
provisions of this code.



   (C)   This chapter establishes minimum requirements for the initial
and continued occupancy of all buildings used for human habitation within the
town.



   (D)   The construction or repair or alteration in any way of
buildings within the bounds and jurisdiction of the town comes under the
codes and standards of the following regulatory agencies: North Carolina
State Building Code (all volumes most recent edition and amendments), Fire
Prevention Code (most recent edition), Coastal Area Management Act, Federal
Flood Insurance Program, and the following additions or more stringent
requirements adopted by the town and approved as a part of the minimum
housing code. No building may be occupied without a proper occupancy permit.



   (E)   Plans and specifications for all structures not within the
scope of this code shall be submitted simultaneously to the North Carolina
Department of Insurance, Raleigh, N.C., to the Building Inspector of the
town, and to any other environmentally concerned agencies. Permits for these
structures will not be issued until approval has been received from all
concerned agencies.



   (F)   Building permits for structures estimated to cost in excess of
$30,000 will be issued only to contractors licensed by the state and only
when plans and specifications for such bear the seal of a registered
architect or engineer. The seal is not a requirement for plans for one- and
two-family dwellings regardless of their estimated cost. In all construction
special attention should be paid to the North Carolina Uniform Residential
Building Code Appendix D: "Windstorm Resistive Construction".



   (G)   A building permit is valid for a period of time stated on said
permit or according to the State Building Code. Renewals or extensions of
this time limit shall be at the discretion of the Building Inspector, not to
alter or change those standards set by the North Carolina State Building Code.



   (H)   A building permit is required to erect, alter, repair, or
demolish any structure within the town. No building permit will be issued
without a proper and complete application.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)



§ 152.003  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   "ALTERATION."  As applied to a building, means any change or
modification in construction exit facilities, building equipment, or
permanent fixtures which does not include an addition to the building.



   "APPROVED."  Approved by the Building Inspector.



   "BASEMENT."  A portion of a building which is located partly
underground, having direct access to light and air from windows located above
the level of the adjoining ground.



   "BUILDING."  Any structure built or used for the support, shelter, or
enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. The term
"BUILDING" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof".



   "CELLAR."  A portion of a building located partly or wholly
underground having an inadequate access to light and air from windows located
partly or wholly below the level of the adjoining ground.



   "DETERIORATED."  That a dwelling is unfit for human habitation and can
be repaired, altered, or improved to comply with all the minimum standards
established by this chapter, at a cost not in excess of 60% of its value, as
determined by findings of the Inspector.



   "DILAPIDATED."  That a dwelling is unfit for human habitation and
cannot be repaired, altered, or improved to comply with all the minimum
standards established by this chapter at a cost not in excess of 60% of its
value, as determined by findings of the Inspector.



   "DWELLING."  Any building which is wholly used or intended to be used
for living or sleeping by human occupants whether or not such building is
occupied or vacant; provided that temporary housing as hereinafter defined
shall not be regarded as a dwelling.



   "DWELLING UNITS."  Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used
or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating whether or
not such unit is occupied or vacant.



   "EXTERMINATION."  The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, trapping or by other recognized and legal pest elimination
methods approved by the Inspector.



   "FAMILY."  One or more persons living together, whether related to
each other by birth or not, and having common housekeeping facilities.



   "FLOOR AREA."  The total area of all habitable rooms in a
building/structure.



   "GARBAGE."  The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



   "HABITABLE ROOM."  A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding
bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, heater rooms, foyers or
communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.



   "INFESTATION."  The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents, or other pests in such numbers as to constitute a menace to
the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants or to the public.



   "INSPECTOR."  A Building Inspector of the town or other person charged
with the administration and enforcement of this chapter or his duly
authorized representative.



   "MULTIPLE DWELLING."  Any building, or portion thereof, which is
designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or which is
occupied as the home or residence of two families or more, living
independently of each other and doing their own cooking in the said building
and shall include flats and apartments.



   "OCCUPANT."  Any person over one year of age, living, sleeping,
cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or
rooming unit.



   "OCCUPANCY."  The purpose for which a building is used or intended to
be used. Change of occupancy is not intended to include change of tenants or
proprietors.



   "OPENABLE AREA."  That part of a window or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.



   "OPERATOR."  Any person who has charge, care or control of a building,
or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.



   "OWNER."  The holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of
record.



   "PARTIES IN INTEREST."  All individuals, associations, and
corporations who have interests of record in a dwelling or any who are in
possession thereof; or shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or
dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the
owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to
comply with the provisions of this chapter, and of rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner.



   "PERSON."  Any individual, firm, corporation, association, or
partnership.



   "PLUMBING."  The labor, materials, and fixtures used in the
installation, maintenance, extension, and alteration of all piping, fixtures,
appliances, and appurtenances in connection with any of the following:
sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, the venting system and public
or private water-supply system, within or adjacent to any building,
structure, or conveyance; also the labor and material used in the
installation, maintenance, extension, or alteration of storm water, liquid
waste, or sewage, and water supply systems on any premises to their
connection with any point of public disposal.



   "PREMISES."  A lot, plot, or parcel of land including the buildings or
structures thereon.



   "PUBLIC EASEMENT."  As used in this code, means an unoccupied open
space adjoining a building and on the same property, that is permanently
maintained accessible to the Fire Department and free of all incumbrances
that might interfere with its use by the Fire Department.



   "REPAIR."  The replacement of existing work with the same kind of
material used in the existing work, not including additional work that would
change the structural safety of the building, or that would affect or change
required exit facilities, a vital element of an elevator, plumbing, gas
piping, wiring or heating installations, or that would be a violation of a
provision of law or ordinance. The term "REPAIR" or "REPAIRS" shall not apply
to any change of construction.



   "REQUIRED."  Required by some provision of this code.



   "RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY."  Buildings in which families or other
households live or in which sleeping accommodations are provided. Such
buildings include, among others, the following: dwellings, multiple
dwellings, and lodging houses, and all dormitories.



   "ROOMING HOUSE."  Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling
containing one or more rooming unit, in which space is let by the owner or
operator to three or more persons who are not members of the family of the
owner or operator.



   "ROOMING UNIT/RENTAL UNIT."  Any room or group of rooms forming a
single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping,
but not for cooking or eating purposes.



   "RUBBISH." Combustible and non-combustible waste materials except
garbage, and the term shall include ashes, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust.



   "STAIRWAY."  One or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings
and  platforms connecting them, to form a continuous and uninterrupted
passage from one story to another in a building or structure. (See also means
of egress in § 152.021(D)).



   "STORY."  That portion of a building included between the upper
surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except
that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between
the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.



   "STRUCTURE." That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building
of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts
joined together in some definite manner. The term "STRUCTURE" shall be
construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof."



   "SUPPLIED." Paid for, furnished, or provided by, or under control of
the owner or operator.



   "TEMPORARY HOUSING."  Any trailer or other structure used for
construction or display purposes.



   "UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION." Defined by § 152.135 herein.



   "VENTILATION." The process of supplying and removing air by natural or
mechanical means to or from any space.



   "YARD." An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building
extending along the entire length of a street, or rear, or interior lot line.



   (B)   When the words "DWELLINGS", "DWELLING UNIT", "ROOMING HOUSE",
"ROOMING UNIT", or "PREMISES" are used in this chapter, they shall be
construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof
including land."



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)



§ 152.004  REPORTS BY EMPLOYEES OF FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS.



   The employees of the Fire and Police Departments of the town shall make
a report to the Director of Public Works (who in turn shall provide such
report to the Building Inspector) of each building or structure which such
employees know or suspect may be unfit for human habitation or dangerous
within the scope of this chapter. Any such report shall be delivered to the
Director of Public Works within 72 hours of the discovery of the building or
structure by said employees of the Fire and Police Departments of the town.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord. 1163, passed 12-19-91)



§ 152.005  APPLICATION OF STATE BUILDING CODE.



   The North Carolina Building Code and Uniform Residential Building Code,
most recent edition and amendments, shall govern all repairs, alterations,
and/or additions to any existing structure in addition to those requirements
set forth in the minimum housing code and technical guidelines.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)



§ 152.006  APPROVAL OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   All rules and regulations pursuant to this code shall originate from
the Building Inspector's office and shall be subject to the approval of at
least four members of the Board of Aldermen.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord., passed 2-11-82)



§ 152.007  FRAME STRUCTURES IN FIRE DISTRICT; RESTRICTIONS.



   A frame structure may be erected in a number two fire district if there
is provided a minimum of 15 feet of setbacks on the side yards, rear yard,
and front yard and a two-hour fire wall is provided for those walls of the
structure which may face the wall of another structure or adjoin a lot where
another structure may be built.  In the case where a property owner can
provide a 30 foot setback from all property lines so that no structure may
ever be erected within 30 feet of the proposed or existing structure, then
the two-hour fire wall may not be required.



((Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord., passed



2-11-82)  Penalty, see § 152.999



MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR DWELLINGS OR DWELLING UNITS



§ 152.020  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let or sublet to another
for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit designed or intended to be used
for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein, nor shall
any vacant dwelling be permitted to exist which does not comply with the
requirements of this subchapter.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.021  STRUCTURAL CONDITIONS.



   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let or sublet to another
for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit designed or intended to be used
for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein, nor shall
any dwelling building be permitted to exist which does not comply with the
following requirements.



   (A)   Foundation. The building foundation walls, piers, or other
elements shall be maintained in a safe manner and capable of supporting the
load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. All pilings shall have
adequate ground penetration (100% below the ground penetration in relation to
above ground extension, the minimum depth shall be eight feet or equal as
approved by the Building Inspector) and shall be free from appreciable decay
and shall be properly braced.



   (B)   Exterior walls.  The exterior walls shall be substantially
weather-tight, water-tight, and shall be made reasonably impervious to the
adverse effects of weather and be maintained in sound condition and good
repair.



   (C)   Roofs. Roofs shall be maintained in a safe manner and have no
defects which might admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or interior
portion of the building. A double thickness of exterior roofing materials
shall not be allowed.



   (D)   Means of egress.  Every dwelling unit shall have two safe,
unobstructed means of egress remote]y located with minimum ceiling height of
seven feet and minimum clear width of three feet leading to a safe and open
space at ground level.



   (E)   Stairs. Every inside and outside stair shall be safe to use
and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed
thereon; and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. (Minimum
dimensions as listed in division (D) of this section).



   (F)   Porches and appurtenances. Every outside porch and any
appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load
that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair.



   (G)   Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door and basement or
cellar door and hatchway shall be substantially weather-tight, water-tight,
and rodent proof; and shall be kept in sound working condition and good
repair. No hollow core uninsulated exterior doors will be allowed.



   (H)   Windows to be glazed. Window panes or an approved substitute
shall be maintained without cracks or holes which allow passage of air.



   (I)   Hardware. Every exterior door shall be provided with proper
hardware and maintained in good condition.



   (J)   Door frames. Every exterior door shall fit reasonably well
within its frame so as to substantially exclude rain and wind from entering
the dwelling building.



   (K)   Accessory structures. Garages, storage buildings, and other
accessory structures shall be maintained and kept in good repair and sound
structural condition, and shall conform to all other applicable standards.



   (L)   Interior floors, walls, and partitions. Every floor, wall, or
partition shall be substantially rodent proof; shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting
the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.



   (M)   Ceilings. Every interior ceiling shall be substantially rodent
proof; shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; and shall be safe to
use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be
placed thereon.



   (N)   Structural supports. Every structural element of the dwelling
shall be structurally sound and show no evidence of deterioration which would
render it incapable of carrying loads or preventing uplift.



   (O)   Protective railings. Protective railings shall be required on
any unenclosed structure over three inches above adjacent finished grade or
on any steps containing two risers or more. Interior stairs and stairwells
more than two risers high shall have handrails located in accordance with
requirements of the building code. Handrails or protective railings shall be
capable of bearing normally imposed loads and be maintained in good condition.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.022  BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.



   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let or sublet to another
for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit designed or intended to be used
for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, and eating therein, nor shall
any vacant dwelling be permitted to exist which does not comply with the
following requirements.



   (A)   Sanitary facilities required. Every dwelling unit shall
contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, and a water
closet, all in good working condition and properly connected to an approved
water and sewer system. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall
be correctly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition,
free from defects, leaks, and obstructions. All new water closets shall be of
the three gallon conservation type.



   (B)   Location of sanitary facilities. All required sanitary
facilities shall be located within the dwelling unit and be accessible to the
occupants of same. The water closet, tub, shower, and lavatory in at least
one bathroom shall be located in a room affording privacy to the user and
such rooms shall have minimum floor space of 30 square feet.



   (C)   Hot and cold water supply. Every dwelling unit shall have
connected to the kitchen sink, lavatory, and tub or shower an adequate supply
of both cold and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved
pipe distribution system connected to a potable water supply.



   (D)   Heating facilities. Dwellings that are closed completely
during winter (December 21 through March 21) shall not be required to comply
with minimum heating facilities in division (D)(1) and (2) of this section.



      (1)   Every dwelling unit shall have heating facilities which
are properly installed, maintained in safe and good working condition, and
are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms
and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit therein to a temperature
of at least 68° F. measured at a distance of three feet above the floor
during ordinary winter conditions.



      (2)   Where a gas or electric central heating system is not
provided, each dwelling unit shall be provided with sufficient fireplaces,
chimneys, flues, or gas vents, whereby heating appliances may be connected so
as to furnish a minimum temperature of 68° F. measured at a point three feet
above the floor during ordinary winter conditions, and in safe and proper
working order.



      (3)   Any cooking or heating units suspected of being
defective or dangerous shall be checked by a qualified technician and
certified is safe and in good working order if deemed necessary by the
Building Inspector. Such certification shall be in writing.



   (E)   Cooking and heating equipment. All cooking and heating
equipment and facilities shall be installed in accordance with the
appropriate building, gas, or electrical code and shall be maintained in a
safe and good working condition.



   (F)   Garbage disposal facilities. Every dwelling shall be equipped
with means of adequate garbage disposal in accordance with the town code.



   (G)   Approved smoke detectors. Every building that contains a
dwelling unit shall install an approved smoke detector within ten feet of any
bedroom door as set forth in the North Carolina Building Code. This division
shall be remedial and all dwelling units shall comply within one year of the
date of adoption or by May 27, 1983.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.023  LIGHT AND VENTILATION.



   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let of sublet to another
for occupancy any dwelling unit designed or intended to be used for the
purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, and eating therein, nor shall any
vacant dwelling be permitted to exist therein, nor shall any vacant dwelling
be permitted to exist which does not comply with the following requirements:



   (A)   Light. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or
skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area,
measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of the floor
area of such room. Whenever the only light in a room is a skylight in the top
of such room, the total window area of the skylight shall be equal to at
least 10% of the total area of such room, minimum three inches by 30 inches.



   (B)   Ventilation and egress. Every habitable room shall have at
least one window which can safely be opened, or such other device as can be
opened and will adequately ventilate the room. The total of operable window
area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least 50% of the minimum
window area size as required. Emergency egress minimum size is considered to
be 30 inches by 30 inches.



   (C)   Bathroom. Every bathroom shall comply with the light and
ventilation-requirements for habitable rooms except that no window or
skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms equipped with
an approved ventilation system.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.024  ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS.



   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let or sublet to another
for occupancy any dwelling, or dwelling unit designed or intended to be used
for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein, nor shall
any vacant dwelling be permitted to exist which does not comply with the
following requirements.



   (A)   All fixtures, receptacles, equipment, and wiring shall be
maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used and
installed and connected to the source of electric power in accordance with
the National Electrical Code and special requirements of the town.



   (B)   The minimum capacity of the service supply and main disconnect
switch shall be sufficient to adequately carry the total load required.



   (C)   Every dwelling shall be adequately and safely wired for
electric lights and convenience receptacles. Every habitable room and hallway
shall have provision for adequate lighting and other necessary electrical
service.



   (D)   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling
containing five or more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all
times. Every public hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to
dwelling occupancy and containing not more than four dwelling units may be
supplied with conveniently located light switches, controlling an adequate
lighting system which may be turned on when needed, instead of full-time
lighting.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.025  SPACE AND USE.



   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let or sublet to another
for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit designed or intended to be used
for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein, nor shall
any vacant dwelling building be permitted to exist which does not comply with
the following requirements.



   (A)   Required space in dwelling unit. Every dwelling unit shall
contain at least 250 square feet of floor space for the first two occupants
thereof, and at least 100 additional square feet of floor area per each
additional occupant.



   (B)   Required space in sleeping rooms. In every dwelling unit of
two or more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one or two
occupants shall contain at least 100 square feet of floor space, and every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than two occupants shall contain
at least 70 square feet of floor space for each additional occupant.



   (C)   Minimum ceiling height.  At least one-half of the floor area
of every habitable room, foyer, hall, or corridor shall have a ceiling height
of at least seven feet six inches; and the floor area of that part of any
room where the ceiling height is less than seven feet six inches shall not be
considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the
room for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.



   (D)   Occupancy of dwelling unit below grade.  No basement or
cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord., passed



3-27-80)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.026  SANITATION.



   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let or sublet to another
for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit designed or intended to be used
for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein, nor shall
any vacant dwelling building be permitted to exist which does not comply with
the following requirements.



   (A)   Sanitation. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more
dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary
condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.



   (B)   Cleanliness. Every owner or occupant of a dwelling unit shall
keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling
unit and premises thereof which he occupies or controls or which is provided
for his particular use.



   (C)   Garbage disposal. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling
unit sha11 dispose of all his garbage and any other organic waste which might
provide food for rodents and all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by
placing it in the garbage disposal facilities or garbage or rubbish storage
containers, as required by town code.



   (D)   Extermination. Every occupant of a single dwelling and every
owner of a building containing two or more dwelling units shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests
within the building or premises.



   (E)   Use and operation of supplied plumbing fixtures. Every
occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a
clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION; TECHNICAL GUIDELINES



§ 152.040  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All applications for a building permit must be accompanied by
a plat in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing accurate dimensions and
elevations of the lot to be built upon; accurate dimensions and elevation 
of  the  building to be erected, its location on the lot, and such other
information as may be necessary to determine the requirements of the
construction.  Nothing in this building code shall be interpreted as
nullifying or invalidating the zoning ordinances and regulations of the town.



   (B)   All structures within the limits of the municipality shall
have a minimum of one inch wood material covering the exterior walls of the
building and such material shall be nailed securely to the studs, plates, and
sills if material extends to such.  In lieu of 1/2-inch of wood on the
walls, a Class A siding may be used.  All roofs shall be covered with Class
A (flame spread rating of 25 or less) fire resistant material.



   (C)   No main dwelling or living unit shall be erected which shall
contain less than one thousand square feet (1,000 square feet).  The maximum
allowable square footage for multi-family buildings shall be four thousand
square feet (4,000 square feet) per floor.  A minimum of 20 feet of
separation shall be required between each allowable building located on the
same building site.



   (D)   Where and when any structure is damaged or altered to the
extent of 60% or more of its value, all repairs or alterations shall be made
so as to bring the structure into complete conformity with this code.



   (E)   No structure shall be erected which is of such unusual design
as to materially depreciate the value of other structures nearby.  In the
event of an application for  a building permit for a structure which, in the
opinion of the Building Inspector, does not conform with this chapter, the
plans shall be submitted to the Board of Aldermen for a ruling.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.041  PILES REQUIRED.



   (A)   Height.  All piles shall be placed so that 100% of the pile
above ground level shall be compensated by an equal amount below ground
level.  In no case shall the pile be less than eight feet below ground level
and a minimum of two feet below mean sea level.  All piles shall be placed
so that the bottom of the  lowest supporting structural member, exclusive of
piles, of the first habitable floor level of the structure shall be 14.7 feet
above mean sea level.  This determination being made by obtaining reference
points from the bench mark map in the Building Inspector's office.  Longer
piles may be required if the Building Inspector deems such necessary.



   (B)   Type.  Wood piles, reinforced concrete, or steel piles may be
used. All wood piles shall be of acceptable grade, a minimum of nine inches
across on round piles and eight inches by eight inches for square piles. They
shall be treated with a minimum of 18 pounds creosote per square foot or .6
cca per cubic foot. Concrete and steel piles shall be certified as to stress
and bearing capacities.



   (C)   Spacing and bracing.  The maximum center to center spacing of
wood piles shall not be more than eight feet on centers under load bearing
sills. However, on two story or larger structures the Building Inspector may
require the piles to be spaced closer. Variation on spacing may be allowed
where plans are prepared by a registered architect or engineer and said party
will supply a certificate stating that the design is based upon adequate
stability under storm conditions both in bearing and uplift. When bracing is
required it shall be a minimum of two-inch by six-inch bracing X'd and double
bolted.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.042  FLOOR SYSTEM.



   (A)   Sills.  Sills shall be minimum two-inch by 12-inch double or
equal and double bolted to notched pilings with minimum two hot dipped
galvanized bolts not less than 1/2-inch diameter accompanied by washers of
not less than 1-1/2-inch of similar material at head and nut.



   (B)   Joists.  Joists shall be a minimum of two-inch by eight-inch,
16 inches on center with span not to exceed 13 feet. Joists shall be a
minimum of two-inch by ten-inch, 16 inches on center not to exceed 16 feet.
When floor joists are placed on ledger strips and nailed directly into sills
at ends no additional fasteners are required. If joists are placed on top of
sills each joist must be secured with a hot dipped galvanized hurricane clip
and fastener. Such systems may require additional fastening if such is deemed
necessary by the Building Inspector. All joists shall have adequate bridging.
All lumber shall be of a grade satisfactory to the Building Inspector. All
floor systems shall be properly insulated with not less than six inches of
approved insulation material and underneath shall be enclosed so as to
contain insulation.



   (C)   Nails and fasteners.  All nails, bolts, clips, straps,
staples, or other fastening devices shall be of hot dipped galvanized of
equally suitable corrosion resistant material. This includes all fasteners
except those on the interior finish. No washer shall be less than 1-1/2-inch
diameter.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.043  OTHER EXTERIOR CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Porches and decks. Porches and decks shall be constructed of
treated material equal to piling material standards. However, pilings may be
reduced to six-inch by six-inch, eight feet on center. Sills reduced to
two-inch by ten-inch doubled or equal and joists may be placed on two feet
centers as per the state code. All decking material shall be of a minimum
1-1/2-inch thickness pressure treated to .6 cca per cubic foot or equal.
(Equal is considered to be cedar, cypress, or redwood material of minimum
grade cedar and redwood 85% or better heartwood, cypress grade C or below.)
Markings or certificates may be required. No deck or porch or pier shall be
constructed without adequate guard rails, as specified in § 52.021(O).



   (B)   Stairways exterior.  All stairways shall be of treated
material equal to balance of exterior construction and shall be at least
three feet wide clear, equipped with handrails on both sides no less than 30
inches high and nothing greater than a seven-inch rise and nothing less than
an 11-inch tread.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.044  WALLS.



   Framing of wood walls shall be not less than two-inch by four-inch
construction 16 inches on center with single floor plate and double top plate
nailed securely with not less than 16 penny hot dipped galvanized nails.
Walls shall be plumb and secure before sheathing is attached. Sheathing shall
be not less than 1/2-inch thickness and shall be minimum exterior grade
plywood. Sheathing is to extend from bottom of the joist or sill to the top
of the top plate. A through bolt is required not less than 1/2-inch diameter
with 1-1/2-inch washer at heat and nut. Bolt is to extend through sill upward
through top plate. Bolts shall be installed not less than two feet from each
corner and middleway the structure or if deemed advisable by the Building
Inspector eight feet on center. Not less than 3-1/2-inch of approved
insulation material shall be installed properly in all walls. All exterior
wall sheathing shall be covered with minimum 15 pounds felt.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.045  ROOFS.



   Rafters shall not be less than two-inch by six-inch grade marked
material placed 16 inches on center. Every rafter shall be securely anchored
with hurricane clips or in a manner suitable to the Building Inspector. All
two-inch by six-inch rafters shall be braced with not less than a two-inch by
six-inch board to the ceiling joists at the approximate mid-point or every
ten feet. If desired, ladder bracing may be used. When a truss roof is used
the spacing shall not be more than 16 inches on center. Every truss shall be
anchored with hurricane clips or in a manner suitable to the Building
Inspector. Sheathing shall be of not less than 5/8-inch exterior grade
plywood or equal. Not less than six inches of approved insulation material or
equal shall be installed in all roof systems. No ceiling joists shall be less
than 1-1/2 inches by six inches directly connected to rafter. Minimum 30
pound felt shall be placed on all exterior roof sheathing as underlayment.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.046  WOOD TO MASONRY.



   (A)   Roof trusses, girders, and plates shall be securely anchored
to solid masonry walls with not less than 1/2-inch bolts imbedded at least 18
inches in the concrete every eight feet. Hollow masonry walls shall be
solidly filled with concrete in the two adjoining hollows under point of
bearing. All hollow masonry walls shall have a bar running through the wall
(filled as above) connecting the pile to the roof.



   (B)   Where wood partitions and masonry walls join, the stud
abutting the masonry walls shall be doubled and bolted to the masonry with
three 1/2-inch galvanized bolts, one to be imbedded in the tie beam, one in
mid-section, and one near the base. The end of the partition plate shall also
be anchored to the stud abutting the wall and to the wall plate in an
approved manner. All wood abutting masonry shall be treated with .6 cca
treatment.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



TECHNICAL MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR ALL BUILDINGS



§ 152.060  STRUCTURAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   Foundation.  The following standards shall apply:



      (1)   Beneath the building there shall be firm ground,
reasonably dry, no soggy ground, no water standing, or  no water running
under building.



      (2)   Sound footing, adequate bearing.



      (3)   Sound piers, no loose mortar or building materials.



      (4)   There shall be no piers in which plumb line from top
center falls outside middle one-third of pier base.



      (5)   There shall be no isolated solid masonry piers exceeding
in height ten times least dimension of pier.



      (6)   No wood stiff-knees or other improper piers.



      (7)   All pilings structurally sound and free of appreciable
decay.



   (B)   Exterior walls.  The following standards shall apply:



      (1)   There shall be no wall in which plumb line from top
center of studs falls outside base plate at any point along wall.



      (2)   There shall be no studs spaced excessively, minimum: two
inches by four inches, 16 inches on center, 1/2-inch solid sheathing of
exterior grade plywood or equal.



      (3)   No studs shall be rotted, fire-damaged, or termite
damaged.



      (4)   No broken or cracked structural members.



      (5)   All siding weathertight with no holes, excessive cracks,
or rotted boards which permit air to penetrate rooms.



      (6)   No loose siding.



      (7)   Wood shingles shall not be used as wall covering unless
three feet separation between buildings is obtained.



   (C)   Roofs.  The following standards shall apply:



      (1)   No rafters rotted, broken, sagging, or improperly
supported ends. All eaves shall be in proper structural condition.



      (2)   No rafters shall be seriously fire damaged.



      (3)   Rafters shall be properly braced and tied.



      (4)   Attic shall be properly ventilated.



      (5)   No rotted, loose, fire-damaged, or sagging sheating.



      (6)   No loose roof covering, no holes, no leaks causing
damage to structure or rooms.



      (7)   The minimum weight of UL Class A fiberglass shingles
shall be 240 pounds with a wind load resistance of 54 mph in accordance with
Beaufort Scale #9. The minimum weight of Class C asphalt shingles shall be
300 pounds and there shall be a minimum separation of 30 feet between
structures before its use will be approved.



      (8)   Proper flashing at walls or chimneys.



      (9)   There shall be no roof with two coverings.



      (10)   There shall be no metal, plexiglass or similar material
used as roof covering on any building except when such building is certified
properly by a licensed registered architect or engineer. When this is the
case the Building Inspector may accept such roofing material.



      (11)  Split wood shingles shall not be used on roofs where there
is less than 30 feet separation between buildings. No wood shingles shall be
allowed on multi-family dwellings. All wood shingles shall be flame treated
and carry a U.L. label.



   (D)   Means of egress.  The following standards shall apply:



      (1)   Two main exits, each at least 36 inches wide and six
feet, eight inches high, easily accessible to the occupants of each dwelling
unit. All existing doors easily operable and remotely located.



      (2)   Platforms, steps, or handrails provided to serve exits
and maintained in safe condition.



      (3)   Safe, continuous, and unobstructed exit from interior of
building to the exterior at street or grade level.



      (4)   A smoke detector shall be required within ten feet of
each bedroom door on the exterior side. There shall be no baffles to obstruct
the sound of the smoke detector. Smoke detectors shall also be required in
any assembly occupancy.



   (E)   Stairs.  The following standards shall apply:



      (1)   Free of holes, grooves, and cracks large enough to
constitute accident hazards.



      (2)   Stairwells and flights of stairs more than two risers
high shall have rails not less than 30 inches measured vertically from the
nose of the treads to the top of the rail.



      (3)   Every rail firmly fastened and maintained in good
condition.



      (4)   No flight of stairs shall be more than one inch out of
its intended position or pulled away from supporting or adjacent structures.



      (5)   Every stair tread uniform in height, sound, and securely
fastened in position and strong enough to bear a concentrated load of at
least 600 pounds without danger of breaking through. All stringers shall have
a minimum of four inches direct bearing.



   (F)   Porches and appurtenances.  The following standards shall
apply:



      (1)   Foundation, floor, ceiling, and roof equal to standards
as set forth except: sills and joists need not be level if providing drainage
of floor; floors need not be level if providing for drainage; floors need not
be weathertight; ceiling height may be seven feet and an attic need not be
vented if left open.



      (2)   Adequate posts and railings, not rotted, broken, or
termite damaged. Railings are required as set forth in § 152.021(O).



   (G)   Interior floors.  The following standards shall apply:



      (1)   No rotted or termite damaged sills.



      (2)   No broken, overloaded or sagging sills.



      (3)   Sills reasonably level.



      (4)   Sills properly and sufficiently supported.



      (5)   No rotted, fire damaged, or termite damaged joists.



      (6)   No broken or sagging joists.



      (7)   Maximum spans floor joists, see State Code, Table no.
1705.3 - 16 inches on center portion only.



      (8)   Flooring shall be reasonably weathertight, solid, level,
and there shall be no loose flooring.



   (H)   Interior walls.  The following standards shall apply:



      (1)   Interior finish free of holes and excessive cracks which
permit air to penetrate rooms.



      (2)   There shall be no walls in which plumb lines from top
center of studs fall outside base plate at any point along wall.



      (3)   No loose plaster, loose boards, or other loose wall
materials.



      (4)   No cardboard, newspaper, or other highly combustible or
unsafe wall finish.



      (5)   There shall be no studs excessively spaced: spacing
shall be two-inch by four-inch, 16 inches on center or equal.



      (6)   No studs shall be rotted or termite damaged.



      (7)   No broken or cracked studs or other structural members.



   (I)   Ceilings.  The following standards shall apply:



      (1)   No joists rotted, broken, sagging, or improperly
supported ends.



      (2)   Maximum spacing for ceiling joists, provided they show
signs of sagging and being weak are as follows:



      16 inches o.c. where plaster, solid wood, 3/8 inch plywood or 1/2
inch gypsum wallboard is used.



      (3)   Maximum span for ceiling joists, provided they show
signs of being weak or overloaded (only attic space above) are as follows:



      16'2" for 2" x 8" at 16" o.c.



      12'3" for 2" x 6" at 16" o.c.



      8'7" for 2" x 4" at 16" o.c.



Proper grade markings are required.



      (4)   There shall be no holes or excessive cracks which permit
air to penetrate room.



      (5)   No loose plaster, boards, sheetrock, or other ceiling
finish.



      (6)   There shall be no ceiling joists seriously damaged by
fire.



      (7)   No cardboard or other highly combustible finishes.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77; Am. Ord., passed 3-27-80; Am. Ord., passed 6-26-80;
Am. Ord. 1104, passed 10-12-89)  Penalty, see § 152.999 



§ 152.061  PLUMBING STANDARDS.



   The following shall be the minimum standards for plumbing:



   (A)   Connection to the town sanitary system.



   (B)   All fixtures operable.



   (C)   No broken water closet bowls.



   (D)   Water closet not loose or leaking.



   (E)   No leaks in shower stall floor.



   (F)   No hopper or vogel bowl toilets.



   (G)   Adequate facilities for furnishing hot water to each tub or
shower, lavatory, and kitchen sink.



   (H)   Installed water supply inside building for each dwelling unit.



   (I)   Installed water closet, tub or shower, lavatory and sink for
each dwelling unit. Kitchen sink at least 12 inches x 16 inches x 6 inches
deep.



   (J)   Separate toilet facilities for each dwelling unit.



   (K)   Toilet and bathing facilities protected from the weather.



   (L)   All water piping protected from freezing by proper
installation in protected space.



   (M)    At least three-inch minimum size main vent properly installed
for each building.



   (N)   Soil and water lines properly supported with no broken or
leaking lines.



   (O)   Every water closet compartment, floor surface, bathroom floor
surface so constructed or finished as not to permit the entrance or passage
of water.



   (P)   All new water closets shall be of the three gallon
conservation type.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.062  HEATING STANDARDS.



   The following shall be the minimum standards for heating:



   (A)   All gas and oil heating equipment listed by Underwriters
Laboratories, National Warm Air Heating Code, or American Gas Association and
installed as approved.



   (B)   As to multi-family housing, liquid fuel to be stored in
outside tanks and piped to heating units.



   (C)   No loose bricks in chimney.



   (D)   No hanging masonry chimneys.



   (E)   No holes in flue.



   (F)   Thimbles grouted in tight.



   (G)   Thimbles high enough for stovepipe to rise 1/4-inch per foot
minimum.



   (H)   Combustible materials shall not be placed within six inches of
the edges of a fireplace opening. Combustible material above the face of the
fireplace opening shall have a minimum clearance of 12 inches above the
opening.



   (I)   Fireplace used only for supplemental heat and not for basic
heating.



   (J)   Masonry closure, if fireplace opening closed.



   (K)   Stove within six feet of thimble serving it.



   (L)   No combustible materials within 18 inches of stovepipe, 12
inches from lath and plaster surfaces.



   (M)   No stovepipe through combustible walls.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.063  ELECTRICAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   The following shall be the minimum standards for electrical
fixtures, wiring, and the like:



      (1)   No receptacles, ceiling fixtures, or other fixtures
hanging loose.



      (2)   All switches and fixtures safely operable.



      (3)   No unsafe wiring.



      (4)   No extension cords shall be spliced.



      (5)   No circuits shall be overloaded.



      (6)   Fuses sized correctly and not bridged out.



      (7)   All wiring to be installed shall be in accordance with
the National Electrical Code and the Electrical Code of the County of New
Hanover.



      (8)   All wiring shall be maintained in a safe condition.



      (9)   Sufficient outlets for existing usage shall be provided.



      (10)   No electrical connections below 14.7 feet mean sea
level.



   (B)   Where the determination is made, upon examination of the
existing electrical service supply, that such electrical service supply is
obsolete or is a hazard to the occupants or would otherwise constitute a
hazard to life and property, the following shall be used for determining the
adequacy of such service supply and main disconnect switch:



 

Total Number of Lighting and Electrical Outlets Only
 
Capacity of Main Service Supply and Main Disconnect Switch


0 - 24
 
100 amp service at 230 volts


25 - 50
 
200 amp service at 230 volts



 



   (C)   The minimum capacity of the service supply and the main
disconnect switch shall be sufficient to adequately carry the total load
required in accordance with the Electrical Code of the County of New Hanover.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.064  COMMERCIAL PROPERTY.



   All repairs, alterations, and the like to existing commercial property
shall be at least to the standards and specifications of the North Carolina
Building Code. However, in no case shall the standards be less than the
requirements of this code.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



ROOMING HOUSES AND UNITS



§ 152.075  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate a rooming house, or shall occupy or let to
another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except in
compliance with the provisions of every section of this Code. For the purpose
of this section the terms "ROOMING UNITS" and "RENTAL UNITS" shall be
construed as meaning the same.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.076  REGISTRATION, PERMITS, AND INSPECTION.



   Registration, permits, and periodic inspection of all rental units are
to be required.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.077  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall let a room or rooms for rent unless that person holds a
valid rooming/rental house permit issued by the town.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.078  WATER CLOSET, LAVATORY, AND BATH FACILITIES.



   (A)   At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub
or shower properly connected to a water and sewer system and in good working
condition, shall be supplied for each two rooms within a rooming house
wherever said facilities are to be shared.



   (B)   All such facilities shall be located on the floor they serve
within the dwelling so as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or
passageway to all persons sharing such facilities.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.079  WATER HEATER REQUIRED.



   Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with
adequate hot water at all times.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.080  MINIMUM FLOOR AREA FOR SLEEPING PURPOSES.



   Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one or two persons shall
contain at least 100 square feet of floor space and every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by more than two persons shall contain at least 70 square
feet for each additional occupant thereof.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.081  EXIT REQUIREMENT.



   Every rooming unit shall open into a corridor or passageway which shall
have two safe, unobstructed means of egress to safe and open space at ground
level, as required by all applicable building codes.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.082  SANITARY CONDITIONS.



   The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the
sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings, and for maintenance
of a sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming house; and he
shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire
premises where the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the
operator.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.083  SMOKE DETECTORS.



   Smoke detectors shall be required in all rental units, at least one
detector within 10 feet of each bedroom, and not to be separated by any
baffle.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.084  VIOLATIONS.



   Violations may result in closing or nonoperation of the rental units
for the entire structure, not just a particular single unit in a structure,
as well as being a misdemeanor.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)



ACCESS SYSTEM AND STRUCTURES



§ 152.095  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   Permission to construct and maintain an access  structure,  stair, 
ramp or walkway which is located eastwardly of the established building line
on the oceanfront on the town shall be obtained by filing an application with
the Building Inspector of the town and obtaining a building permit for the
structure.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.096  APPLICATIONS TO BE ACCOMPANIED BY AGREEMENT.



   (A)   Applications filed for permission to construct an access
structure, stair, ramp, or walkway as set out above shall be accompanied by a
properly executed agreement, which agreement form may be obtained from the
Building Inspector of the town.



   (B)   The form of agreement shall provide assurances by the
applicant to construct a temporary and removable access structure, stair,
ramp, or walkway eastward of the building  line which shall be subject to
removal by applicant or owner upon proper notice and request by the
authorities of the town as set out in this subchapter.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)



§ 152.097  REMOVABLE OR PERMANENT STRUCTURES.



   (A)   All structures which are westward of the building line and
which are a part of an access system are not required to be removable;
however, they may be removable at the owner's option.  All such structures
which are a permanent structural type shall be in conformity with all
regulations of the building code of the town and the North Carolina State
Building Code as amended by supplements and addenda for coastal exposure.



   (B)   Removable structures constructed eastwardly of the building
line shall conform to all regulations of the North Carolina State Building
Code for such structures as amended by supplements and addenda for coastal
exposure and the additional requirements as set out hereinafter and shall be
designed to support a uniform floor load of 100 pounds per square foot
applied over all deck areas, live load, and shall be capable of resisting in
lateral stability loads applied evenly along said structure in a horizontal
direction of not less than one-fourth of the total live load for particular
increment.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.098  STAIRS, RAMPS, OR WALKWAYS.



   Access structures located eastwardly of the building line shall be in
the nature of stairs, ramps, or walkways as may be desired and required for
access to the tops of the dune and berm section.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)



§ 152.099  EXTENSION OF STRUCTURES.



   Any structure eastwardly of the building line shall not extend further
eastwardly than a point 25 feet from the western top edge of the dune or
berm, whichever is applicable and in existence at the time the structure is
constructed and shall in no circumstances extend on the forward face slope
(eastern) of the dune or the berm.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.100  STRUCTURES LOCATED EASTWARDLY TO BE REMOVED WHEN OWNER NOTIFIED
BY TOWN.



   Any structure located eastwardly of the building line shall be
completely removable and the owner shall, upon written notice served by mail
or in person by an official of the town, remove the structure within 48 hours
of said notice for the purpose of maintenance and repair on the dune or berm
section.  Further, immediately upon notice in writing or in person by a
police officer of the town, the owner shall remove such structures eastward
of the building line during any emergency period or hurricane threat. 
Failure on the part of the owner to respond reasonably to such notice in
either condition shall result in the town removing such structures where
possible and assessing the cost thereof to the property owners or the
confiscation of said structures and their disposal as the town may see fit.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)



§ 152.101  REMOVABLE UNITS AND STRUCTURES; SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Each removable unit of access structures shall be demountable
and as a self-contained unit shall weigh not more than 200 pounds and have no
dimension greater than ten feet.



   (B)   The height of the deck of any removable unit, or floor,
walkway, stair, or ramp shall not be greater than six feet from the surface
of the ground at any supporting bent.



   (C)   Supporting bents shall be constructed of treated timber with a
top and bottom wale and cross bracing.  The bracing shall extend outside of
the vertical members at the bottom to meet and connect to the bottom wale at
a point not less than 30 inches beyond the vertical members.  Where proper
anchorage is not provided by pile structure westwardly of the building line
stability by cross bracing between bents shall be required as set out in §
152.097(B).  Vertical members of all bents shall be buried not less than 30
inches below the surface of the ground with the bottom wale being not less
than 18 inches below the surface of the ground at its lowest part; no part of
any bent shall be buried greater than 48 inches below grade.



   (D)   The connections of all removable units shall be by pin-type
connections using a minimum diameter 1-1/2-inch galvanized pipe or a minimum
diameter one-inch galvanized bolt having large galvanized washers with
suitable bolts or pipe caps as the case may be.  All other fasteners shall
be hot dipped galvanized nails, spikes, drifts, bolts, lags, or other
acceptable fasteners as may be suitable or required to properly connect
members.



   (E)   All removable structures, stairs, ramps, or walkways shall
have hand railing in good condition in accordance with the building code on
each side and at all terminations where proper access is not provided.  The
width of all stairs, ramps, or walkways and the number of risers in any
flight of stairs shall be in conformity with the requirements of the building
code in § 152.097(A).



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.102  ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS; WATER OR SEWER LINES AND FIXTURES.



   There shall be no electric circuits connected to commercial power
sources and no water or sewer lines or fixtures located beyond the building
line or on any removable structure, stair, ramp, or walkway which may extend
westwardly of the building line.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.103  DISPLAY OF NAME AND ADDRESS ON RAIL OF REMOVABLE STRUCTURE.



   Each owner shall display on the eastern limit of the rail of any
removable structure which extends eastwardly of the building line his full
name and the address of the structure to which the removable access is an
appurtenance.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.104  SUGGESTED SKETCHES AND STRUCTURAL SYSTEMS TO BE PROVIDED FOR
CONSTRUCTION BY OWNER.



   Suggested sketches and structural systems are provided for the guidance
of all applicants and owners desiring to construct such structures; however,
individual tastes and aesthetic appearance and finish shall be a matter of
choice to the applicant insofar as it is acceptable within the aforementioned
building codes and ordinances of the town.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)



SAND DUNES



§ 152.115  SHORT TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be and is referred to and cited as "The Sand Dune
Protection Regulations of Wrightsville Beach and Environs."



(Ord., passed 2-22-73; Am. Ord., passed 1-11-78)



§ 152.116  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter is adopted to preserve and promote the protection of
the shore line of the town and environs within one mile of the corporate
limits of the town by maintaining the existence of natural or constructed
dunes which provide a protective barrier from the actions of the Atlantic
Ocean and other surrounding waters and storms for adjacent lands against the
actions of sand, wind, water, and people.  The past practice of destroying
the dunes constitutes a serious threat to the safety of adjacent properties
and people.  This subchapter is therefore adopted for the health, safety,
and welfare of persons living, visiting, or sojourning in the town and its
environs within one mile of the corporate limits of the town, and for the
protection of public and private property in those areas.



(Ord., passed 2-22-73; Am. Ord., passed l-11-78)



§ 152.117  EXEMPTIONS.



   Exempted from this subchapter is the removal of sand, sea shells, or
similar materials for souvenir value in amounts as may be carried upon the
person.



(Ord., passed 2-22-73; Am. Ord., passed l-11-78)



§ 152.118  DAMAGING SAND DUNES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation in any manner
to damage, destroy, or remove any sand dune or part thereof lying within the
area defined by § 152.116 of this subchapter, or to kill, destroy, or remove
any trees, shrubbery, or other vegetation growing on the dunes without having
first obtained a permit from the Building Inspector as specified in this
subchapter proposing the proposed damage, destruction, or removal.



(Ord., passed 2-22-73; Am. Ord., passed 1-11-78)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.119  SHORE LINE PROTECTION OFFICERS.



   (A)  The Director of Public Works, the Building Inspector, the Chief
of Police and the various policemen are designated to perform the functions
of shore line protection officers under the provisions of this subchapter in
addition to their other duties.



   (B)  It is the intent of the Board of Aldermen in adopting this
subchapter that the function of the shore line protection officer shall
ordinarily be allocated among the officials designated in division (A) of
this section as follows:



      (1)  To the Building Inspector shall be allocated all functions
relating to the issuing of permits and making inspections incidental thereto.



      (2)  The Director of Public Works shall assist the Inspector as
required in determining whether any proposed use shall be detrimental to the
dunes herein thought to be protected.



      (3)  The Chief of Police and the various policemen shall be
allocated all law enforcement functions as may be necessary to enforce
provisions of this subchapter.



   (C)  All fees collected by a shore line protection officer shall be
paid to the Town Clerk within 48 hours of the receipt of the fees.



   (D)  Every shore line protection officer shall report quarterly to the
Board of Aldermen concerning his activities, together with is
recommendations, if any.



(Ord., passed 2-22-73; Am. Ord., passed 1-11-78)



§ 152.120  PERMITS AFFECTING SAND DUNES.



   (A)  No permit to damage, destroy, or to remove any sand dune (or any
part thereof or vegetation thereon) shall be granted by a shore line
protection officer unless the action will not materially weaken the dune or
reduce its effectiveness as a means of protection from the effects of high
wind and water, taking into consideration the height, width, and slope of the
dune and the type of vegetation thereon.



   (B)  Every application for a permit under this subchapter shall be
made upon a standard form as set forth in the appendix following this
chapter.  Compliance with the requirements prescribed in the appendix shall
be a condition to the issuance of a permit.



   (C)  With respect to every application for a permit under this section
the shore line protection officer shall take the following steps:



      (1)  He shall make a prompt inspection of the affected area.



      (2)  He shall post a notice of the application on the premises
that are the subject of the application and also at the Town Hall.



      (3)  He shall notify the applicant (in person or by certified
mail) of the proposed findings concerning the application.  In the
notification the applicant shall be informed that his objections, if any, to
the proposed findings will be heard by the shore line protection officer at a
time and place to be set by the shore line protection officer, if the
applicant requests a hearing within seven days of the mailing or giving of
the notification.



   (D)  If upon the basis of his original inspection, the shore line
protection officer believes that a proposed project may materially weaken a
protective dune or reduce its effectiveness as a means of protection from the
effects of high wind and water, he shall publish notice of the application
and of his tentative findings for two successive calendar weeks, by posting a
copy of the notice of application and findings at the Town Hall and three
other public places in the town.  Together with the notice shall be
published a statement that the application and attachments will be available
at his office every weekday until at least five days following the second
publication, and preceding final action upon the application.



   (E)  The shore line protection officer shall inspect every project
approved under this section at least one time after completion of the work
and completion of any restoration of protection or vegetation which he may
prescribe.



   (F)  The shore line protection officer shall notify the applicant (in
person or by certified mail) of the final action upon the application for a
permit, and shall post a notice of the final action upon the premises that
are the subject of the application.  The shore line protection officer shall
also give notification to any other person who has asked to be notified or
who appeared at a hearing upon the permit application.



(Ord., passed 2-22-73; Am. Ord., passed 1-11-78)



§ 152.121  APPEALS PROCEDURE.



   (A)  In the event that the shore line protection officer denies a
permit under this subchapter or prescribes conditions to which a permit
applicant objects, the permit applicant may within 30 days of the denial or
issuance of the permit (as the case may be) file an appeal with the Board of
Aldermen.  In the event that a shore line protection officer grants a permit
under this subchapter any property owner whose property is damaged by action
taken under this permit, or any other aggrieved person, may within 30 days
from the issuance of the permit file an appeal with the Board.  On receipt
of any appeal the Board shall be entitled to consider the matter ab initio
and may take any action which a shore line protection officer could have
taken under this subchapter.



   (B)  Upon an appeal to the Board, the Board may provide for oral or
written presentations, or both, as it may deem appropriate.  The Board may
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the action appealed from,
and shall make an order, requirement, decision, or determination as in its
opinion ought to be made in the premises.



   (C)  The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal, and shall notify all parties to the appeal (in person or by certified
mail):



      (1)  Of the date of the appeal hearing, at least seven days in
advance thereof, and



      (2)  Of the final disposition of the appeal.



   (D)  The Board may issue subpoena to compel the attendance before the
Board of persons, and the production of books and paper, for the purpose of
examination in connection with any appeal to the Board under this subchapter.



   (E)  Following the hearing of any appeal, the Board shall afford the
parties thereto a reasonable opportunity to submit within the time as
prescribed by the Board proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law. 
The record in the proceeding shall show the Board's ruling with respect to
each requested finding and conclusion.  All orders and decisions of the
Board shall set forth separately the Board's findings of fact and conclusions
of law.



   (F)  As provided by general law every decision of the Board on an
appeal shall be subject to review by the Superior Court of New Hanover County
by proceedings in the nature of certiorari.  However, the appeal or petition
for certiorari shall be made within 30 days after the Board's findings of
fact and conclusions of law are made and signed by the Mayor, or Mayor pro
tem as the case may be.  Pending the final disposition of the appeal, no
action shall be taken which would be unlawful in the absence of a permit
issued under this subchapter.



(Ord., passed 2-22-73; Am. Ord., passed 1-11-78)



§ 152.122  INSPECTION AND PERMIT FEES.



   The following fees shall be charged under the provisions of this
subchapter:



   (A)  For the filing of a permit and initial inspection in connection
with a permit application, a fee of $5 shall be charged.



   (B)  For every and all inspections subsequent to the initial
inspection in connection with a permit application, a fee of $2.50 shall be
charged.



   (C)  Total inspection fee will in no case exceed $10.



(Ord., passed 2-22-73; Am. Ord., passed 1-11-78)



UNSAFE BUILDINGS



§ 152.135  RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION.



   (A)   The Inspector shall determine that a residential building is
unfit for human habitation if he finds that any of the following conditions
exist in such building:



      (1)   Interior walls or vertical studs which seriously list,
lean, or buckle to such an extent as to render the building unsafe.



      (2)   Supporting members or members which show 33% or more
damage or deterioration, or nonsupporting, enclosing or outside walls or
covering which show 50% or more damage or deterioration.



      (3)   Floors or roofs which have improperly distributed loads,
which are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably
safe for the purpose used.



      (4)   Such damage by fire, wind, or other causes as to render
the building unsafe.



      (5)   Dilapidation, decay, unsanitary conditions, or disrepair
which is dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants or
other people in the town.



      (6)   Inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or
panic.



      (7)   Defects significantly increasing the hazards of fire,
accident, or other calamities.



      (8)   Lack of adequate ventilation, light, heating, or
sanitary facilities to such extent as to endanger the health, safety, or
general welfare of the occupants or other residents of the town.



      (9)   Lack of proper electrical, heating or plumbing
facilities required by this chapter which constitutes a health or a definite
safety hazard.



      (10)   Pilings that are decayed or improperly located or are
not properly fastened to sills and/or joists.



   (B)   Irrespective of the above, a residential dwelling unit shall
be construed by the Inspector to be unfit for human habitation, and he shall
so find if such dwelling unit contains more than seven separate types of
violations of any of the minimum standards set forth in this chapter.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.136  UNSAFE DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS.



   Unsafe dilapidated buildings as defined in the code of the town shall
be repaired, removed, renovated, or demolished as provided in this chapter.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 152.150  HOUSING INSPECTOR; POWERS.



   (A)   The office of Housing Inspector is hereby created. Until
otherwise provided by the Town Board of Aldermen, the Building Inspector
shall be the Housing Inspector.



   (B)   The Housing Inspector shall have such powers as may be
necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and
provisions of this subchapter, including without limiting the generality of
the foregoing, in addition to others herein granted, the following powers:



      (1)   Investigations. To investigate dwelling and building
conditions in the town in order to determine which dwellings therein are
unfit for human habitation, and which buildings are dangerous, being guided
in such examination of dwellings and buildings by the requirements set forth
in this subchapter.



      (2)   Oaths, witnesses, and the like. To administer oaths,
affirmations, and to examine witnesses and receive evidence.



      (3)   Right of entry. To enter upon and within premises,
dwellings and buildings for the purpose of making examinations and
investigations; provided, that such entries shall be made in such a manner as
to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.



      (4)   Delegation of functions. To delegate any of his
functions and powers under this subchapter to such officers and agents as he
may designate, with the approval of the Board of Aldermen.



      (5)   Permits. To issue rooming/rental permits to those
qualified for such. (Ord., passed 1-22-77)



§ 152.151  INSPECTIONS; RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   (A)   The Inspector is hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections in compliance with a plan approved by the Town Board of Aldermen,
to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, room units and
premises located within the town in order that he may perform his duty of
safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of dwellings and of the
general public.



   (B)   For the purpose of making such inspections, the Inspector is
hereby authorized to enter, examine, and survey at all reasonable times all
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises. The owner or occupant
of every dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit, or the person in charge
thereof, shall give the Inspector free access to such dwelling, dwelling
unit, or rooming unit and its premises at all reasonable times for the
purpose of such inspection, examination, and survey. Every occupant of a
dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or
employee, access to any part of such dwelling and dwelling unit, or its
premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting such repairs
or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of
this subchapter, or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions
of this subchapter.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)



§ 152.152  ABATEMENT; HEARINGS.



   Whenever a petition is filed with the Building Inspector by at least
five residents of the town charging that any dwelling is unfit for human
habitation or whenever it appears to the Inspector (on his own motion) that
any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, the Inspector may, if his
preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause
to be served upon the owner of and parties having an interest in such
dwelling, including lien holders and tenants, if any, as shown by the records
of the Register of Deeds of New Hanover County, a complaint stating the
charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held
before the Inspector (or his designated agent) at a place within the county
in which the property is located therein fixed not less than ten days nor
more than 30 days after the serving of such complaint.  The owner and
parties in interest shall be given a right to file an answer to the complaint
and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and
time fixed in the complaint; and that rules of evidence prevailing in courts
of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Inspector.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)



§ 152.153  SERVICE OF ORDER; CONTENTS.



   If, after such notice and hearing, the Inspector determines that the
building under consideration is unfit for human habitation in accordance with
the standards herein set forth, he shall state in writing his finding of fact
in support of such determination, stating whether said building is
deteriorated or dilapidated, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the
owner thereof an order:



   (A)   Deteriorated. If the repair, alteration, or improvement of
said building bringing it up to the standards described herein, can be made
at a cost less than 60% of the present value of the building, the order shall
require the owner, within a specified period of time, not to exceed 90 days,
to repair, alter, or improve such building so as to render it fit for human
habitation, or it shall require the owner within the specified time therein,
not to exceed ninety 90 days, to repair, alter, or improve such building so
as to render it safe. Such order may also direct and require the owner to
vacate and close the building until the repairs, alterations, and
improvements have been made and/or the unsafe and dangerous character of such
building has been corrected.



   (B)   Dilapidated. If the repair, alteration, or improvement of said
building, bringing it up to the standards described herein cannot be made at
a cost of less than 60% of the present value of the building, the order shall
require the owner, within a specified period of time, not to exceed 90 days,
to repair, alter, and improve such building so as to bring it into compliance
with the standards described herein, or to demolish and remove such building.
When repair, alteration, and improvement is the case the building shall meet
all applicable codes, regulations, and ordinances.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)



§ 152.154  METHODS OF SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS OR ORDERS.



   (A)   Complaints or orders issued by an Inspector shall be served
upon persons either personally or by registered or certified mail; but if the
whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by
the Inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the Chief Inspector
shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or
order upon such person may be made by publishing the same once each week for
three successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the county. A
copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on
premises affected by the complaint or order.



   (B)   Failure on the part of any owner or party in interest to
receive or have served upon him any complaint, notice, or order herein
provided for shall not affect or invalidate the proceedings with respect to
any other owner or party in interest or any other person, firm, or
corporation.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)



§ 152.155  ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Deteriorated. If the owner of a building found to be
deteriorated fails to comply with an order to repair, or improve the
building, unless an appeal is taken from such order in accordance with §
152.156, the Inspector may:



      (1)   Secure the issuance of a warrant charging such owner
with a violation of the standards of fitness established by this code.



      (2)   Cause such building to be repaired, altered, or
improved, and pending such repairs, alterations, or improvements, may order
such building vacated and closed; and



      (3)   Cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building
so closed, a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for
human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation
is prohibited and unlawful."



   (B)   Dilapidated. If the owner of a building found to be
dilapidated fails to comply with an order to vacate and close, remove or
demolish, the building unless an appeal is taken from such order in
accordance with § 152.156, the Inspector may:



      (1)   Secure the issuance of a warrant charging such owner
with a violation of the standards of fitness established by this code.



      (2)   Cause such building to be vacated and closed and removed
or demolished; and



      (3)   Cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building
so closed a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for
human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation
is prohibited and unlawful".



   (C)   The Inspector shall not cause the demolition and removal of
any building until the Town Board of Aldermen shall have by ordinance ordered
the Inspector to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this code with respect
to the particular property or properties which the Inspector shall have found
to be unfit for human habitation or dangerous, and which property or
properties shall be described in the ordinance. Such ordinances shall be
recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds of New Hanover County and
shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index.



   (D)   The amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations, or
improvements or vacating and closing, or demolition and removal by the
Inspector shall be a lien against the real property upon which cost was
incurred; which lien shall be filed, have the same priority and be collected
as provided by G.S. Ch. 160A, Article 10. If the building is demolished and
removed by the Inspector, he shall sell the materials of such building and
demolition and removal and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the
Superior Court by the Inspector, shall be secured in such manner as may be
directed by the court, and shall be disbursed by the court to the persons
found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the court (in a
special proceeding brought before the Clerk of Superior Court for said
purpose).



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)



§ 152.156  RIGHT OF APPEAL.



   (A)   Any owner or person who is aggrieved with the ruling or
decision of the Inspector in any matter relative to the interpretation or
enforcement of any of the provisions of the minimum housing code and
technical guidelines may appeal from any such decision.



   (B)   An appeal from any decision or order of the Inspector may be
taken by any person aggrieved thereby or by any officer, board or commission
of the town. Any appeal from the Inspector shall be taken within ten days
from the rendering of the decision or service of the order, and shall be
taken by filing with the Inspector and with the Board of Aldermen a notice of
appeal, which shall specify in detail the grounds upon which the appeal is
based. Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the Inspector shall forthwith
transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the
decision appealed from was made. When an appeal is from a decision of the
Inspector refusing to allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any act, his
decision shall remain in force until modified or reversed. When any appeal is
from a decision of the Inspector requiring the person aggrieved to do any
act, the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the
hearing by the Board, unless the Inspector certifies to the Board, after the
notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of the facts stated in the
certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished the appellant), a suspension
of his requirement would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which
case the order, which may be granted for due cause shown upon not less than
one day's written notice to the Inspector, by the Board, or by a court of
record upon petition made pursuant to division (E) of this section.



   (C)   The Board of Aldermen shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of all appeals, shall give due notice to all the parties, and shall
render its decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person
or by agent or attorney. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly,
or may modify the decision or order appealed from, and may make such decision
and order as in its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end
it shall have all the powers of the Inspector, but the concurring vote of a
simple majority of the Board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any
decision or order of the Inspector. The Board shall have the power also in
passing upon appeals, in any case where there are practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the
ordinance, to adapt the application of the ordinance to the necessities of
the case to the end that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed,
public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done.



   (D)   Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review by
proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days of the
decision of the Board but not otherwise.



   (E)   Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Inspector or a
decision rendered by the Board may petition the Superior Court for an
injunction restraining the Inspector from carrying out the order or decision
and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction
restraining the Inspector pending a final disposition of the order; provided,
however, that such petition shall be filed within 30 days after issuance of
the order or rendering of the decision. Hearings shall be held by the court
on any such petition within 20 days, and shall be given preference over other
matters on the court's calendar. The court shall hear and determine the
issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice
may require; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond
in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under this division.



   (F)   In case any dwelling is erected, constructed, altered,
repaired, converted, maintained, or used in violation of this chapter or any
valid order or decision of the Inspector or Board made pursuant to this
chapter, the Inspector or Board may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, or use, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to prevent
the occupancy of the dwelling, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct or use
in or about the premises of the dwelling.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)



§ 152.157  LIEN ON PREMISES; CONTRACT FOR REPAIRS.



   The amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations, or improvements,
or vacating or closing, or removal or demolition by the Inspector shall be a
lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. If the
dwelling is removed or demolished by the Inspector, he shall sell the
materials of such dwellings and shall credit the proceeds of the sale against
the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be
deposited in the Superior Court by the Inspector, shall be secured in such
manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by the court
to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order of decree of the
court. Repairs, alterations, improvements, or demolitions may be made under
the supervision of the Building Inspector or he may let the same to contract
on competitive bids or by private contract if no bids are received. Vacating
and closing buildings shall be done under the supervision of the Building
Inspector.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)



§ 152.158  ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.



   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to impair or limit in any
way the power of the town to define and declare nuisances and to cause their
abatement by summary action or otherwise nor shall enforcement of one remedy
provided herein prevent the enforcement of the other remedies provided.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)



§ 152.159  CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.



   In any case where a provision of this subchapter is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health
provisions of this code or ordinances or codes of the town, the provision
which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the
health and safety of the people shall prevail.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)



§ 152.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building to
fail, neglect, or refuse to repair, alter or improve the same, or to vacate
and close and demolish and remove same, upon order of the Inspector duly made
and served as herein provided, within the time specified in such order, and
each day that any such failure, neglect, or refusal to comply with such order
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.



      (2)   When the Inspector finds that a building is unfit for
human habitation or dangerous within the meaning of this chapter and has
notified the owner to such effect and the time limit set by the Inspector for
the correction of defects or vacating same has expired, no person shall
receive rentals, offers for rent, or occupy such building unfit as a human
habitation, and each day such offense continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.



      (3)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction such offender shall be
punished by fine of not more than $50 for each separate violation.



      (4)   The violation of any provision of this code shall
constitute a misdemeanor, as provided by G.S. § 14-4.



   (B)   Failure to comply with the provisions of §§ 152.115 through
152.122 is a misdemeanor and is punishable upon conviction thereof by a fine
of $50.



(Ord., passed 1-22-77)



APPENDIX:  FORMS



Section



   1.   Form for application for permit affecting sand dunes



§ 1.  FORM FOR APPLICATION FOR PERMIT AFFECTING SAND DUNES.




FORM FOR APPLICATION FOR PERMIT AFFECTING SAND DUNES




NAME OF APPLICANT:                                       
                                   



LOCAL ADDRESS:                                         
                                     



LOCAL PHONE NUMBER:                                      
                                   



DESCRIPTION OF WORK TO BE PERFORMED AFFECTING SAND DUNES:



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
       



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
       



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
       



LOCATION OF PROPOSED WORK:                                  
                                                   
             



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
         



      I agree that, as a condition to the issuance of this permit for
which application is herein made:  (a)  all restoration requirements
specified in the permit or directed by the shore line protection officer will
be complied with; (b)  the work proposed, and all restoration required will
be completed on or before                         ; and I will
pay any damages to sand dunes or vegetation thereon, as assessed by the Board
of Aldermen of the Town of Wrightsville Beach.



                        Signed              
                   



                                                
                  (Applicant)



NOTE:  There must accompany this application, a map or sketch of the tract
of land involved (showing boundaries, approximate present elevations,
proposed changes in elevations, and vegetation)



(Ord., passed 2-22-73; Am. Ord., passed 1-11-78)



CHAPTER 153:  [RESERVED]



CHAPTER 154:  [RESERVED]



CHAPTER 155:  UNIFORM DEVELOPMENT



Section



   155.01   Unified Development Ordinance adopted by reference



   Appendix A:   Unified Development Ordinance



§ 155.01  UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The Unified Development Ordinance, as set out as Appendix A attached to
Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12, is adopted by reference as if fully set forth
herein. Such Unified Development Ordinance is set forth as Appendix A
following this chapter.



(Ord. 1695, 11-8-12)



UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE



ARTICLE 155.1  PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY



   Section 155.1.1   Title



   Section 155.1.2   Authority



   Section 155.1.3   Purpose



   Section 155.1.4   Applicability



      155.1.4.1   Jurisdiction



      155.1.4.2   Exemptions



   Section 155.1.5   Conflicts with Other Regulations



   Section 155.1.6   Deed Restrictions



   Section 155.1.7   Severability



   Section 155.1.8   Interpretation and Administration



      155.1.8.1   Generally



      155.1.8.2   Responsibility



      155.1.8.3   Delegation of Authority



      155.1.8.4   Computation of Time



   Section 155.1.9   Identification of Official Zoning Map



   Section 155.1.10   Zoning Map Interpretation



   Section 155.1.11   Interpreting Permitting Uses



   Section 155.1.12   Enforcement



      155.1.12.1   Building Permit Required



      155.1.12.2   Application for Building Permit



      155.1.12.3   Certificate of Zoning Compliance



      155.1.12.4   Application for Certificate of Zoning Compliance



      155.1.12.5   Certificate of Occupancy Required



      155.1.12.6   Complaints Regarding Violations



      155.1.12.7   Persons Liable



      155.1.12.8   Procedures Upon Discovery of Violations



      155.1.12.9   Penalties and Remedies for Violations



      155.1.12.10   Permit Revocation



      155.1.12.11   Judicial Review



   Section 155.1.13   Effective Date



ARTICLE 155.2  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Section 155.2.1   Applicability of General Regulations



   Section 155.2.2   Reduction of Lot and Yard Areas Prohibited



   Section 155.2.3   Public Access to Property



   Section 155.2.4   One Principal Building or Use



   Section 155.2.5   Projections into Public Streets and Street
Right-of-Way



   Section 155.2.6   Site Visibility Triangle



   Section 155.2.7   No Use or Sale of Land or Buildings Except in
Conformity with Ordinance Provisions



   Section 155.2.8   Height Limitation Exceptions



   Section 155.2.9   Fees



   Section 155.2.10   Open Space Requirements



   Section 155.2.11   Fire Districts



   Section 155.2.12   Property Owners’ Association



   Section 155.2.13   Temporary Buildings



   Section 155.2.14   Permit to Construct Driveway Required



   Section 155.2.15   Building Design



ARTICLE 155.3  ADMINISTRATIVE/LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY



   PART I.   UDO ADMINISTRATOR



   Section 155.3.1   Powers and Duties



   PART II.   TECHNICAL REVIEW PROCEDURE



   Section 155.3.2   Purpose



   Section 155.3.3   Procedures; Composition



   PART III.   CONFLICTS OF INTEREST



   Section 155.3.4   Conflicts of Interest



   PART IV.   BOARD OF ALDERMEN



   Section 155.3.5   Powers and Duties



   PART V.   PLANNING BOARD



   Section 155.3.6   Creation



   Section 155.3.7   Composition; Filling Vacancies



   Section 155.3.8   Organization, Meetings, Records



   Section 155.3.9   Powers and Duties



   PART VI.   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT



   Section 155.3.10   Establishment of Board of Adjustment



   Section 155.3.11   Powers of the Board of Adjustment



   Section 155.3.12   Organization; Meetings



   Section 155. 3.13   Quorum and Voting



ARTICLE 155.4  LEGISLATIVE/QUASI-JUDICIAL PROCEDURES



   Section 155.4.1   Amendment/Rezoning Procedures



      155.4.1.1   Procedure



      155.4.1.2   Action by Applicant



      155.4.1.3   Action by the Planning Board



      155.4.1.4   Action by the Board of Aldermen



      155.4.1.5   Withdrawal of Application



   Section 155.4.2   Establishment of Vested Rights



      155.4.2.1   Purpose



      155.4.2.2   Establishment of a Vested Right



      155.4.2.3   Approval Procedures



      155.4.2.4   Duration



      155.4.2.5   Termination



      155.4.2.6   Voluntary Annexation



      155.4.2.7   Limitations



   Section 155.4.3   Moratorium



      155.4.3.1   Temporary Moratorium



      155.4.3.2   Ordinance Establishing a Development Moratorium



      155.4.3.3   Renewal or Extension of Moratorium



      155.4.3.4   Persons Aggrieved by Imposition of Moratorium



   Section 155.4.4   Appeals, Variances, and Interpretations



      155.4.4.1   Appeals



      155.4.4.2   Variances



      155.4.4.3   Interpretations



      155.4.4.4   Requests to Be Heard Expeditiously



      155.4.4.5   Hearing Required on Appeals. Variances, and
Interpretations



      155.4.4.6   Notice of Hearing



      155.4.4.7   Burden of Proof in Appeals and Variances



      155.4.4.8   Board of Adjustment Action of Appeals and Variances



      155.4.4.9   Evidence/Presentation of Evidence



      155.4.4.10   Modification of Application at Hearing



      155.4.4.11   Record



      155.4.4.12   Written Decision



   Section 155.4.5   Conditional Use Permits



      155.4.5.1   Purpose and Applicability



      155.4.5.2   Application Process/Completeness



      155.4.5.3   Technical Review Procedure/Planning Board Review
and Comment



      155.4.5.4   Board of Aldermen Action



      155.4.5.5   Effect of Approval



      155.4.5.6   Binding Effect



      155.4.5.7   Certificate of Occupancy



      155.4.5.8   Change in Conditional Use Permit



      155.4.5.9   Implementation of Conditional Use Permit



   Section 155.4.6   Rehearings



   Section 155.4.7   Appeals of Quasi-Judicial Decisions



ARTICLE 155.5  SITE PLAN DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCESS



   Section 155.5.1   Purpose and Applicability



   Section 155.5.2   Site Plan Procedures



      155.5.2.1   Engineering Drawing Review and Approval Procedures



      155.5.2.2   Minor Site Plans



      155.5.2.3   Major Site Plans



   Section 155.5.3   Site Plan Requirements



      155.5.3.1   Information to be Shown on Site Plan



      155.5.3.2   Performance Standards



   Section 155.5.4   Administrative Approval



      155.5.4.1   Administrative Approval Flowchart



      155.5.4.2   Application for Review



      155.5.4.3   Planning Staff and Technical Review Procedure



      155.5.4.4   Permit Issued or Final Plat Approved



      155.5.4.5   Zoning Inspections and Certificates of Occupancy



   Section 155.5.5   Planning Board Review and Board of Aldermen
Approval



      155.5.5.1   Planning Board Review and Board of Aldermen
Approval Flowchart



      155.5.5.2   Application for Review



      155.5.5.3   Planning Staff and Technical Review Procedure



      155.5.5.4   Review and Recommendation by the Planning Board



      155.5.5.5   Consideration by the Board of Aldermen



      155.5.5.6   Permit Issued



      155.5.5.7   Zoning Inspections and Certificates of Occupancy



ARTICLE 155.6  ZONING DISTRICTS



   Section 155.6.1   Purpose Statement



   Section 155.6.2   Interpretation



   Section 155.6.3   Primary Zoning Districts



   Section 155.6.4   Table of Permitted/Conditional Uses



   Section 155.6.5   Zoning District Development Standards



      155.6.5.1   R-1 Residential District



      155.6.5.2   R-2 Residential District



      155.6.5.3   C-1 Commercial District I



      155.6.5.4   C-2 Commercial District II



      155.6.5.5   C-3 Commercial District III



      155.6.5.6   C-4 Commercial District IV



      155.6.5.7   C-5 Commercial District V



      155.6.5.8   G-1 Public and Semipublic District



      155.6.5.9   PC Private Club District



      155.6.5.10   P-1 Conservation Zone



      155.6.5.11   S-1 Shore Zone



ARTICLE 155.7  SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS



   Section 155.7.1   Introduction



   Section 155.7.2   Accessory Buildings/Structures



   Section 155.7.3   Activities Operated Exclusively for Pleasure,
Recreation, Etc.



   Section 155.7.4   Health Care Facilities



   Section 155.7.5   Assembly Halls, Gymnasiums, and Other Similar
Structures



   Section 155.7.6   Mixed Use Commercial-Residential



   Section 155.7.7   Car Wash



   Section 155.7.8   Child Care Centers



   Section 155.7.9   Detached Garages



   Section 155.7.10   Fences and Walls



   Section 155.7.11   Financial Institutions/Banks



   Section 155.7.12   Floating Homes



   Section 155.7.13   Home Occupations



   Section 155.7.14   Nursing Home



   Section 155.7.15   Ocean-Related Business Activities



   Section 155.7.16   Private Club



   Section 155.7.17   Floor Area Ratio



   Section 155.7.18   Telecommunication Facilities and Support Towers



      155.7.18.1   Purpose and Intent



      155.7.18.2   Approvals Required for Telecommunications
Facilities and Support Structures



      155.7.18.3   Telecommunications Facilities and Support
Structures Permitted by CUP



      155.7.18.4   General Standards and Design Requirements



      155.7.18.5   Miscellaneous Provisions



      155.7.18.6   Telecommunications Facilities and Support
Structures in Existence on the Date of Adoption of this Ordinance



   Section 155.7.19   Temporary Storage Containers



   Section 155.7.20   Coffee Shops, No Food Prepared On Site



   Section 155.7.21   Private Access Easement



   Section 155.7.22   Boat Rental Facilities



   Section 155.7.23   Massage and Bodywork Therapy



ARTICLE 155.8  NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS



   PART I.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Section 155.8.1   Minimum Single Lot Requirements



   Section 155.8.2   Minimum Multi-Lot Requirements



   Section 155.8.3   Extension or Enlargement of Nonconforming
Situations Prohibited



   Section 155.8.4   Elevation of Nonconforming Structures in Order to
Comply with Flood Ordinances



   Section 155.8.5   Change in Nonconforming Situation



   Section 155.8.6   Discontinuance or Abandonment



   Section 155.8.7   Compliance with Flood Ordinance



   PART II.   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES



   Section 155.8.8   Repairs and Maintenance



   PART III.   SINGLE-FAMILY AND DUPLEX STRUCTURES



   Section 155.8.9   Expansion or Enlargement



   PART IV.   MULTI-FAMILY STRUCTURES



   Section 155.8.10   Expansion or Enlargement



   PART V.   OCEANFRONT FISHING PIERS



   Section 155.8.11   Expansion or Enlargement



   PART VI.   COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES IN THE C-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT II,
C-3 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT III AND C-5 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT V ZONING DISTRICTS



   Section 155.8.12   Expansion or Enlargement



   PART VII.   NON-CONFORMING USES



   Section 155.8.13   Expansion or Enlargement



   Section 155.8.14   Relocation of Nonconforming Use



   Section 155.8.15   Change in Use



   PART VIII.   DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION



   Section 155.8.16   Reconstruction Damage Less Than 50%



   Section 155.8.17   Reconstruction Damage More Than 50%



   Section 155.8.18   Increase in Extent of Nonconformity



   Section 155.8.19   Time for Carrying Out Reconstruction



ARTICLE 155.9  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS



   PART I.   OFF-STREET PARKING AND OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS



   Section 155.9.1   Off-Street Parking Requirements



      155.9.1.1   Certification of Minimum Parking Requirements



      155.9.1.2   Combination of Required Parking Space



      155.9.1.3   Bicycle Rack Requirements



      155.9.1.4   Parking Standards



      155.9.1.5   Off-Street Parking Requirements Per Land Use



      155.9.1.6   Exception in Parking Requirements



      155.9.1.7   Off-Street Parking Access to Paved Street



      155.9.1.8   Parking Space Arrangements and Dimensions



   Section 155.9.2   Off-Street Loading for Commercial and Industrial
Uses



      155.9.2.1   Use of Church Parking Lots at Commercial Parking
Lots



   PART II.   DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION



   Section 155.9.3   Permit to Construct Driveway Required



   Section 155.9.4   Conformity of Surrounding Areas of Abutting
Property Owners; Refusal to Make Improvements



   Section 155.9.5   Costs Assessed Against Property Abutting Sidewalk



   Section 155.9.6   Specifications for Driveway Construction



   PART III.   OUTDOOR LIGHTING



   Section 155.9.7   Purpose



   Section 155.9.8   Commercial Exterior Lighting



   Section 155.9.9   Residential Exterior Lighting



   Section 155.9.10   Private Piers and Docks Including Residential



   Section 155.9.11   Signs



   Section 155.9.12   Other Requirements



   Section 155.9.13   Nonconformities



   Section 155.9.14   Maximum Illumination Standards



   PART IV.   LANDSCAPE, BUFFERING, AND SCREENING



   Section 155.9.15   Purpose



   Section 155.9.16   Applicability



   Section 155.9.17   Landscaping Requirements



   Section 155.9.18   Bufferyards



   Section 155.9.19   Additional Requirements for Buffers and for Yards
in Which Buffers are Required



   Section 155.9.20   Installation



   Section 155.9.21   Maintenance



   Section 155.9.22   Landscape Plan



   Section 155.9.23   Tree Preservation



   Section 155.9.24   Recommended Plant List



ARTICLE 155.10  SIGN REGULATIONS



   Section 155.10.1   Prohibited Signs



   Section 155.10.2   Exempt Signs



   Section 155.10.3   Marquee Signs



   Section 155.10.4   Shore Zone Signs Permitted



   Section 155.10.5   Signs Permitted in All Districts



   Section 155.10.6   Business and Name Signs



   Section 155.10.7   Permits



   Section 155.10.8   Unsafe Signs



   Section 155.10.9   Maintenance



   Section 155.10.10   Removal of Unlawful Signs



   Section 155.10.11   Location Restriction



   Section 155.10.12   Structural Requirements



   Section 155.10.13   Construction of Freestanding Signs



   Section 155.10.14   Exterior Lights and Signs



   Section 155.10.15   Nonconforming Signs



ARTICLE 155.11  ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS



   PART I.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE



   Section 155.11.1   Statutory Authorization



   Section 155.11.2   Findings of Fact



   Section 155.11.3   Statement of Purpose



   Section 155.11.4   Objectives



   Section 155.11.5   Lands to Which this Section Applies



   Section 155.11.6   Basis for Establishing the Special Flood Hazard
Areas



   Section 155.11.7   Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit



   Section 155.11.8   Compliance



   Section 155.11.9   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions



   Section 155.11.10   Interpretation



   Section 155.11.11   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability



   Section 155.11.12   Designation of Floodplain Administrator



   Section 155.11.13   Floodplain Development
Application/Permit/Certification Requirements



   Section 155.11.14   Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain
Administrator



   Section 155.11.15   Corrective Procedures



   Section 155.11.16   Variance Procedures



   Section 155.11.17   General Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction



   Section 155.11.18   Specific Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction



   Section 155.11.19   Standards for Floodplains without Established
Base Flood Elevation



   Section 155.11.20   Standards for Riverine Floodplains with BFE but
without Established Floodways or Non-Encroachment Areas



   Section 155.11.21   Floodways and Non-Encroachment Areas



   Section 155.11.22   Coastal High Hazard Areas (Zones VE)



   Section 155.11.23   Effect on Rights and Liabilities under the
Existing Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance



   Section 155.11.24   Effect Upon Outstanding Floodplain Development
Permits



   PART II.  SEDIMENTATION AND SOIL EROSION CONTROL



   Section 155.11.25   General Regulations



   PART III.  OCEANFRONT PROPERTY



   Section 155.11.26   Oceanfront Policies



   Section 155.11.27   Shoreline Development Boundary General
Requirements



   Section 155.11.28   Procedures for Development East of the Shoreline
Development Boundary



   Section 155.11.29   Access Structure Specifications



   Section 155.11.30   Removable Structures



   Section 155.11.31   Maintenance of Oceanfront Systems and Structures



   Section 155.11.32   Authority to Remove Structures



   Section 155.11.33   Damaging Dunes or Vegetation



   Section 155.11.34   Compliance, Non-Conformities, Exceptions, and
Exemptions



   Section 155.11.35   Enforcement Provisions



ARTICLE 155.12  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



   PART I.   SUBDIVISION PLATS



   Section 155.12.1   Plat Required for Land Subdivision



   Section 155.12.2   Approval of Subdivision Plats Required



   Section 155.12.3   Plat Approval Required for Building Permit



   Section 155.12.4   Plat Approval Not to Constitute Acceptance of
Dedication



   Section 155.12.5   Transfer of Lots in Unapproved Subdivision Plats



   Section 155.12.6   Plat Approval Required Before Extension of Service



   Section 155.12.7   Coordination of Street System



   Section 155.12.8   Parcels of Land to Consist of Multiples of Normal
Blocks



   Section 155.12.9   Preliminary Plats



   Section 155.12.10   Contents of Preliminary Plats



   Section 155.12.11   Conformity of Plat to Requirements



   Section 155.12.12   Approved Plats to be Kept on File



   Section 155.12.13   Service Facilities Required Prior to Final
Approval



   Section 155.12.14   Final Plat



   Section 155.12.15   Contents of Final Plat



   PART II.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



   Section 155.12.16   Minimum Requirements



   Section 155.12.17   Street Plans, Rights-of-Way, and Blocks



   Section 155.12.18   Requirements for Streets



   Section 155.12.19   Lot Sizes and Side Lines



   Section 155.12.20   Setback Lines, Unusable Lots, and Land Elevation



   Section 155.12.21   Modification of Certain Requirements



   PART III.  GROUP HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS



   Section 155.12.22   Commonly Owned Areas



   Section 155.12.23   Density



   Section 155.12.24   Unit Ownership and Condominiums



   Section 155.12.25   Site Plans



   Section 155.12.26   Public Access, Easements, and Private Party Walls



   Section 155.12.27   Utilities and Improvements Required



EXHIBITS



   EXHIBIT A.   DEFINITIONS



   EXHIBIT B.   INSTALLATION DETAIL



ARTICLE 155.1
PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY



Section 155.1.1  Title.



   This Ordinance is officially titled as Unified Development Ordinance of
Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina, and shall be known as the Unified
Development Ordinance (UDO). The official map designating the various zoning
districts shall be titled, Town of Wrightsville Beach Zoning Map, and shall
be known as the Zoning Map.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.1.2  Authority.



   Zoning provisions enacted herein are under the authority of North
Carolina General Statutes (NCGS) 160A-381 to 160A-392, which extends to
towns/cities the authority to enact regulations which promote the health,
safety, morals, or the general welfare of the community. It is further
authorized under NCGS 160A-382, which authorizes cities to regulate and
restrict the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or
use of buildings, structures, or land. This section further authorizes the
establishment of overlay districts in which additional regulations may be
imposed upon properties that lie within the boundary of the district. The
statutes also require that all such regulations shall be uniform for each
class or type of building throughout each district, but that the regulations
in one district may differ from those in other districts.



   Subdivision provisions enacted herein are under the authority of NCGS
160A-372 which provide for the coordination of streets within proposed
subdivisions with existing or planned streets and with other public
facilities, the dedication or reservation or recreation areas serving
residents of the immediate neighborhood within the subdivision, or
alternatively, for the provision of funds to be used to acquire recreation
areas serving residents of more than one neighborhood in the immediate area,
and for the distribution of population and traffic in a manner that will
avoid congestion and overcrowding.



   This UDO, which combines zoning and subdivision authority, is further
enacted under Section 1 of SL 2005-418, a revision to NCGS 160A-363.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.1.3  Purpose.



   This Unified Development Ordinance and Zoning Map are made in
accordance with a comprehensive plan and is designed to lessen congestion in
the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote
health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent
the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to
facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, parks
and other public requirements; to control development of flood prone areas
and regulate stormwater runoff/discharge; to regulate signs; and to establish
proceedings for the subdivision of land. The regulations have been made with
reasonable consideration, among other things, as to the character of the
jurisdiction and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a
view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most
appropriate use of land throughout the jurisdiction. Furthermore, the UDO
will aim to:



   •   Continue utilization of the established mixed-use pattern of
certain portions of the community;



   •   Acknowledge and protect a character that is unique to
Wrightsville Beach;



   •   Protect existing housing and lodging opportunities;



   •   Protect the existing uses, densities, and intensities;



   •   Provide new investment and reinvestment opportunities;



   •   Ensure new development and redevelopment compliments and
enhances community character; and



   •   Implement thoughtful controlled growth.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.1.4  Applicability.



   155.1.4.1  Jurisdiction.



   (A)   The regulations set forth in this Ordinance shall apply to all
property within the town limits, extraterritorial jurisdiction, and within
the various zoning districts as designated on the official zoning map, as
established in Article 155.6, Zoning Districts.



   (B)   Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure shall
be erected, moved, altered, or extended, and no land, building, or structure
or part thereof shall be occupied or used unless in conformity with the
regulations specified for the district in which it is located.



   155.1.4.2  Exemptions.



   (A)   These regulations shall not apply to any land or structure for
which, prior to the effective date hereof, there is a properly approved site
specific plan as required by the requirements previously adopted or
previously approved vested rights (Article 155.4, Section 155.4.2). Any
preliminary or final subdivision plat approvals required for such approved or
exempted site specific plans shall be conducted in accordance with the
requirements of the previous Zoning Ordinance or Subdivision Ordinance.



   (B)   In accordance with NC General Statutes 160A-392, the Town of
Wrightsville Beach UDO applies to state-owned lands only when a building is
involved.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.1.5  Conflicts with Other Regulations.



   It is not intended by this Ordinance to interfere with, abrogate, or
annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties. However,
where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings
or premises or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces
than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations, or by
easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
govern.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.1.6  Deed Restrictions.



   The enforcement and interpretation of the UDO shall not be affected by
deed restrictions, covenants, or easements, other than those made as a
condition of approval of a development application under the UDO or any
predecessor ordinance.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.1.7  Severability.



   If any section or specific provision or standard of this Ordinance or
any regulating district boundary arising from it is found by a court to be
invalid for any reason, the decision of the court shall not affect the
validity of any other section, provision, standard, or district boundary of
these regulations except the provision in question. The other portions of
these regulations not affected by the decision of the court shall remain in
full force and effect.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.1.8  Interpretation and Administration.



   155.1.8.1  Generally. Regulations of this Ordinance shall be enforced
and interpreted according to the following rules:



   (A)   Permitted Uses. Uses not designated as permitted or
conditional uses shall be prohibited.



   (B)   Building Restrictions. Every building hereafter erected or
structurally altered shall be located on a lot.



   (C)   Minimum Requirements. The provisions of this Ordinance shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
safety, health, convenience, prosperity, or the general welfare.



   155.1.8.2  Responsibility. In the event that any question arises
concerning the application of regulations, performance standards,
definitions, development criteria, or any other provision of the UDO, the UDO
Administrator shall be responsible for interpretation and shall look to the
Ordinance for guidance. Responsibility for interpretation by the UDO
Administrator shall be limited to standards, regulations and requirements of
the UDO, but shall not be construed to include interpretation of any
technical codes adopted by reference in the UDO, and shall not be construed
as overriding the responsibilities given to any commission, board, or
official names in other sections or articles of the UDO.



   155.1.8.3  Delegation of Authority. Unless otherwise specified in the
UDO, the identification of certain officials, including the Town Manager,
Planning & Parks Director, City Attorney, or any other Department Director or
Town Official to perform a task or carry out a specific responsibility, shall
also include the designee of such official. Unless otherwise specified in the
UDO, the term "Director" shall mean the Planning & Parks Director and the
term “Department” shall mean the Planning Department.



   155.1.8.4  Computation of Time.



   (A)   Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which
an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including
the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, that
day shall be excluded. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven
days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays shall be excluded.



   (B)   Unless otherwise specifically provided, whenever a person has
the right or is required to do some act within a prescribed period after the
service of a notice and the notice or paper is served by mail (Certified
Mail/Return Receipt Requested), three days shall be added to the prescribed
period.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.1.9  Identification of Official Zoning Map.



   (A)   The Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the
Mayor attested by the Town Clerk and bearing the seal of the Town under the
following words: “This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map
of the Unified Development Ordinance, Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina,”
together with the date of the adoption of this Ordinance.



   (B)   If, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance,
changes are made in district boundaries or other items portrayed on the
Zoning Map, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map promptly
after the amendment has been approved by the Board of Aldermen, with an entry
on the official zoning map denoting the date of amendment, description of
amendment, and signed by the Town Clerk. No amendment to this Ordinance which
involves matter portrayed on the official zoning map shall become effective
until after such change and entry has been made on said map.



   (C)   No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zoning
map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set
forth in this Ordinance and state law. Any unauthorized change of whatever
kind by any person shall be considered a violation of this Ordinance and
punishable as provided under Section 155.1.12.



   (D)   Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the
official zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the
official zoning map, which shall be located in the office of the Town Clerk,
shall be the final authority as to the zoning status of land and water areas,
buildings, and other structures in the town.



   (E)   In the event the official zoning map becomes damaged,
destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret, the Board of Aldermen may by
resolution adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior
zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting errors or other
errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no correction shall
have the effect of amending the original official zoning map, or any
subsequent amendment thereof. The new official zoning map shall be identified
by the signature of the Mayor attested by the Town Clerk, and bearing the
seal of the town under the following words: “This is to certify that this
Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted
(date of adoption of map being replaced), as part of the Unified Development
Ordinance, Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina.”



   (F)   Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost, or has
been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof
remaining, shall be preserved together with all available records pertaining
to its adoption or amendment.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.1.10  Zoning Map Interpretation.



   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district shown on
the Official Zoning Map, the UDO Administrator shall employ the following
rules of interpretation.



   (A)   Centerline. Where a boundary line lies within and follows a
street or alley right-of-way or utility easement, the boundary shall be
construed to be in the center of such street or alley right-of-way or utility
easement. If the boundary between two separate zoning districts is abandoned
or removed from dedication, the district boundaries shall be construed as
following the centerline of the abandoned or vacated road bed or utility
easement.



   (B)   Edge Line. Where a boundary line follows the edge of a street
or alley right-of-way, a railroad right-of-way, or utility easement, the
boundary shall be construed to be on the edge of such street or alley
right-of-way, railroad right-of-way, or utility easement. If such a street or
alley right-of-way, railroad right-of-way, or utility easement forming the
boundary between two separate zoning districts is abandoned or removed from
dedication, the district boundaries shall be construed as following the edge
of the abandoned or vacated road bed or utility easement.



   (C)   Lot Line. Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot
lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. In the event that a
district boundary line divides a lot or tract, each part of the lot or tract
so divided shall be used in conformity with the regulations established by
this Ordinance for the district in which said part is located.



   (D)   Town Limits. Boundaries indicated as approximately following
town limits shall be construed as following the town limits.



   (E)   Watercourses. Boundaries indicated as approximately following
the centerlines of streams, estuarine shorelines, oceanfront shorelines,
canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such
centerlines.



   (F)   Extensions. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions
of street or alley rights-of-way, utility easements, lot lines, city limits,
county lines, or extraterritorial boundaries shall be so construed.



   (G)   Scaling. In the case where a district boundary does not
coincide with any boundary lines as above and no distances are described by
specific ordinance; the boundary shall be determined by the use of the scale
appearing on the map.



   (H)   Where the UDO Administrator determines that physical features
existing on the ground or actual property lines or other man-made boundary
lines used to depict zoning district boundaries, are at variance with those
shown on the Official Zoning Map, the Board of Adjustment shall have the
authority to interpret zoning district boundaries.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.1.11  Interpreting Permitted Uses.



   (A)   If a use is not specifically listed in any of the districts
listed in this Ordinance, then the UDO Administrator shall have the authority
to interpret in which district the use, if any, should be permitted.



   (B)   If the UDO Administrator rejects a proposal for a use that is
not clearly disallowed in a particular district, then the UDO Administrator
shall:



      (1)   Ensure that the citizen is provided with a copy of the
interpretation in writing.



      (2)   Inform the citizen of the right to appeal the decision
to the Board of Adjustment.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.1.12  Enforcement.



   155.1.12.1  Building Permit Required. No building or other structure
shall be erected, moved, added to, demolished, or structurally altered
without building and zoning permits therefor issued by the Planning and
Inspections Department. No building permit shall be issued by the Department
except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance and the NC State
Building Code unless he or she receives a written order from the Board of
Aldermen in the form of a variance as provided by this Ordinance.



   155.1.12.2  Application for Building Permit.



   (A)   All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by
plans in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape of
the lot to be built upon, the exact sizes and locations on the lot of
buildings already existing (if any), and the location and dimensions of the
proposed buildings or alteration. The application shall include other
information as lawfully may be required by the UDO Administrator, including
existing or proposed building or alteration; existing or proposed uses of the
building and land; the number of families, housekeeping units or rental units
the building is designed to accommodate; conditions existing on the lot;
floodplain development permit; and any other matters as may be necessary to
determine conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of this Ordinance.



   (B)   One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by
the UDO Administrator, after he shall have marked the copy either as approved
or disapproved and attested to same by his signature on the copy. One copy of
the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the UDO Administrator.



   155.1.12.3  Certificate of Zoning Compliance.



   (A)   No land shall be used or occupied and no building hereafter
structurally altered, erected, or moved, shall be used, or its use changed
until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the UDO
Administrator stating that the building or the proposed use thereof complies
with the provisions of this Ordinance.



   (B)   A certificate of zoning compliance, either for the whole or a
part of a building, shall be applied for coincident with the application for
a building permit and shall be issued together with the building permit.



   (C)   A record of all preliminary and final certificates shall be
kept on file in the office of the UDO Administrator.



   (D)   No preliminary certificate of zoning compliance shall be
issued until the applicant has filed a written statement with the UDO
Administrator describing the intended use of the property.



   155.1.12.4  Application for Certificate of Zoning Compliance.



   (A)   Each application for a preliminary certificate of zoning
compliance shall be accompanied by a plan in duplicate, drawn to scale, one
copy of which shall be returned to the owner upon approval. The plan shall
show the following:



      (1)   The shape and dimensions of the lot on which the
proposed building or use is to be erected or conducted.



      (2)   The location of the lot with respect to adjacent
rights-of-way.



      (3)   The shape, dimensions, and location of all buildings,
existing and proposed, on the lot.



      (4)   The nature of the proposed use of the building or land,
including the extent and location of the use on the lot.



      (5)   The location and dimensions of off-street parking and
the means of ingress and egress to the space.



      (6)   Any other information which the UDO Administrator may
deem necessary for consideration in enforcing the provisions of this
Ordinance.



   (B)   Upon completion of all final inspections of work for which a
building permit was issued and prior to the issuance of a certificate of
compliance as required by NCGS 160A-423, the UDO Administrator shall issue a
final certificate of zoning compliance indicating that the completed repairs
or construction comply with the provisions of this Ordinance. All new
structures, substantially improved structures (as defined in Exhibit A), all
structures that have been elevated and all structures which have been added
to shall be required to provide verification of building height and setbacks
before a final certificate of zoning compliance is issued. Such verification
shall be in the form of a survey or other documentation acceptable to the UDO
Administrator and prepared by a registered land surveyor. The height and
elevation of the structure may be provided on the “Elevation Certificate”
under “Comments”.



   155.1.12.5  Certificate of Occupancy Required. A certificate of
occupancy issued by the UDO Administrator is required in advance of



   •   Occupancy or use of a building hereafter erected, altered, or
moved.



   •   Change of use of any building or land.



   A certificate of occupancy, either for the whole or a part of a
building, shall be applied for coincident with or subsequent to the
application for a certificate of zoning compliance and shall be issued within
ten (10) business days after the erection or structural alteration of such
building or part shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions
of this Ordinance. Additionally, a certificate of occupancy shall be applied
for and must be granted before any person occupies a building for which a
change in use is proposed. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued
unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable
provisions of this Ordinance. If the certificate of occupancy is denied, the
UDO Administrator shall state in writing the reasons for refusal and the
applicant shall be notified of the refusal. A record of all certificates
shall be kept on file in the office of the UDO Administrator for a period of
five (5) years and copies shall be furnished on request to any persons having
a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved.



   A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion or
portions of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion
and occupancy of the entire building or for other temporary uses.



   An as-built survey and elevation certificate for any project involving
development, redevelopment, expansion, or renovation which results in an
expansion of the existing structure footprint must be submitted to the UDO
Administrator prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The
as-built survey must be prepared by a registered land surveyor licensed in
the State of North Carolina.



   155.1.12.6  Complaints Regarding Violations. Whenever the UDO
Administrator receives a written, signed complaint alleging a violation of
the Ordinance, he/she shall investigate the complaint, take whatever action
is warranted, and inform the complainant in writing what actions will be
taken.



   155.1.12.7  Persons Liable. The owner, tenant, or occupant of any
building or land or part thereof and any architect, builder, contractor,
agent, or other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or
maintains any situation that is contrary to the requirements of this
Ordinance may jointly and/or independently be held responsible for the
violation and suffer the penalties and be subject to the remedies herein
provided.



   155.1.12.8  Procedures Upon Discovery of Violations.



   (A)   If the UDO Administrator finds that any provision of this
Ordinance is being violated, he/she may either (1) send a written notice to
the person responsible for such violation indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it or (2) immediately
initiate enforcement action without sending any prior notice. If the UDO
Administrator elects to send a written notice, he/she may send additional
written notices before initiating enforcement action.



   (B)   If the UDO Administrator elects to send a written notice, such
notice shall indicate the nature of the violation and describe the action
required to correct it. The notice shall also indicate what action the UDO
Administrator intends to take if the violation is not corrected and advise
the person responsible for such violation that the UDO Administrator’s
decision or order may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment in accordance
with subsection 155.4.4.1.



   (C)   Any enforcement action undertaken by the UDO Administrator
shall be in accordance with the provisions of subsection 155.1.12.9.



   155.1.12.9  Penalties and Remedies for Violations.



   (A)   A violation of any provision of this ordinance is a
misdemeanor or infraction as provided by NCGS 14-4 and punishable upon
conviction by a fine not exceeding $500.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided herein and except as provided in
Section 155.9.23, Tree Preservation, a violation of any provision of this
ordinance shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $50
to be recovered by the town in a civil action an the nature of debt if the
offender does not pay the penalty within 10 days after being cited for a
violation of the ordinance.



   (B1)   A violation of any provision of this chapter prohibiting the
use of private property as a public parking lot shall subject the offender to
a civil penalty in the amount of $250 to be recovered by the town in a civil
action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within
10 days after being cited for a violation of the ordinance.



   (C)   The provisions of this Ordinance may be enforced by an
appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (D)   Each day’s continuing violation of any provisions of this
ordinance shall be a separate and distinct offense.



   (E)   The provisions of this ordinance may be enforced by any one,
all, or a combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed by NCGS
160A-175 and this section.



   155.1.12.10  Permit Revocation.



   (A)   Any permit issued under this Ordinance may be revoked by the
permit-issuing authority (in accordance with the provisions of this
subsection) if the permit recipient fails to (1) develop or maintain the
property in accordance with the plans submitted, the requirements of this
Ordinance, or any additional requirements lawfully imposed by the
permit-issuing board, or (2) the permit was issued based on erroneous
information.



   (B)   Before a conditional use permit may be revoked, all of the
notice and hearing and other requirements of Article 155.4 shall be complied
with. The notice shall inform the permit recipient of the alleged grounds for
the revocation.



   (C)   Before permits other than conditional use may be revoked, the
UDO Administrator shall give the permit recipient ten (10) days notice of
intent to revoke the permit and shall inform the recipient of the alleged
reasons for the revocation and of his right to obtain an informal hearing on
the allegations. If the permit is revoked, the UDO Administrator shall
provide to the permittee a written statement of the decision and the reasons
therefor. Appeals may be made to the Board of Adjustment as provided for in
subsection 155.4.4.1.



   (D)   No person may continue to make use of land or building in the
manner authorized by any permit issued under this Ordinance after such permit
has been revoked in accordance with this Ordinance.



   155.1.12.11  Judicial Review.



   (A)   Every decision of the Board of Aldermen granting or denying a
conditional use permit and every final decision of the Board of Adjustment
shall be subject to review by the Superior Court of New Hanover County by
proceedings in the nature of certiorari.



   (B)   The petition for the writ of certiorari must be filed with the
New Hanover County Clerk of Court within 30 days after the later of the
following occurrences:



      (1)   A written copy of the board’s decision has been filed
in the office of the planning department, and



      (2)   A written copy of the board’s decision has been
delivered by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the applicant or appellant and every other aggrieved party who has filed a
written request for such copy at the hearing of the case.



   (C)   A copy of the writ of certiorari shall be served upon the Town
of Wrightsville Beach.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1747, passed 10-13-15)



Section 155.1.13  Effective Date.



   These regulations shall become effective on November 8, 2012. Upon such
date, these regulations shall supersede, repeal, and replace: Chapters 151,
153, 154, and 155 of the Town Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



ARTICLE 155.2
GENERAL REGULATIONS



Section 155.2.1  Applicability of General Regulations.



   The following general regulations of this Article shall apply in all
situations unless otherwise indicated.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.2.2  Reduction of Lot and Yard Areas Prohibited.



   No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall
be reduced in size or area below the minimum requirements set forth in this
Ordinance. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Ordinance
shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this Ordinance.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.2.3  Public Access to Property.



   Every building or structure hereafter erected shall be located on a lot
and the lot shall:



      (1)   Abut a public street; or



      (2)   Abut an approved private street; or



      (3)   Abut a common area properly restricted through deed
restrictions and/or a property owners’ association and which is at least
partly owned by the owner of the building, structure, or portion thereof; or



      (4)   Abut a private access easement as defined herein and
subject to the restrictions set forth in Section 155.7.21.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1728, passed 5-13-14)



Section 155.2.4  One Principal Building or Use.



   (A)   Only one principal building and one use shall be permitted on
lots located in the R-1 and R-2 Residential Zoning Districts except as
otherwise permitted by this section.



   (B)   Two principal buildings and only one use shall be permitted on
lots located in the R-2 Residential Zoning District subject to the following
requirements:



      (1)   The lot on which such buildings are located shall be no
less than 100 feet wide at the lot frontage and no less than 100 feet wide at
the rear property line of the lot where the rear yard exists.



      (2)   The lot on which such buildings are located shall be no
less than 16,000 square feet in size.



      (3)   There shall be a minimum separation of 30 feet between
the two principal buildings. No part of either principal building of any kind
whatsoever shall be permitted to encroach into this required 30-foot
separation.



   (C)   Only one principal building and one or more uses shall be
permitted on lots located in the C-1 Commercial District I, C-2 Commercial
District II, C-3 Commercial District III and C-4 Commercial District IV
Zoning Districts.



   (D)   Multiple buildings and one or more uses shall be permitted on
lots located in the C-5 Commercial District V Zoning District.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1724, passed 3-19-14; Am. Ord. 1737,
passed 1-8-15)



Section 155.2.5  Projections into Public Streets and Street Right-of-Way.



   (A)   No signs, canopies, wooden or metal marquees, or other similar
structures shall project beyond any street right-of-way line, except where
accessory to and on the same premises as used within the five business
districts designated by this Ordinance. Billboards are prohibited in all
districts. Any of the above structures within the five designated business
districts must be positioned so that the farthest extended part of such
structures shall be at least 7-1/2 feet from the existing right-of-way line
measured from the building side of the right-of-way line. All signs,
canopies, wooden or metal marquees, or other similar structures shall be
placed so that the lowest part is no closer to the sidewalk or ground than
eight feet. A flexible valance may extend one additional foot toward the
sidewalk or ground for a clear height of seven feet above the sidewalk. No
sign, canopy, wooden or metal marquee or similar structure shall be higher
than 20 feet, nor allowed to project above any roof line.



   (B)   Canopies, awnings, and other similar type structures may be
used only if:



      (1)   The canopies and awning provide nothing other than
identification and street numbers.



      (2)   They will not obstruct the view with support and
enclosing walls.



      (3)   They can be removed or secured during time of foul
weather.



      (4)   They conform to the structural and construction
standards of the NC state building code.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.2.6  Sight Visibility Triangle.



   The land adjoining a street intersection or egress to a street from
off-street parking areas shall be kept clear of obstructions to protect the
visibility and safety of motorists and pedestrians.



   (A)   Corner Lot Intersections. On a corner lot, nothing shall be
erected, placed, or allowed to grow in a manner so as materially to impede
vision between a height of three feet and ten feet in a triangular area
formed by a diagonal line between two points on the right-of-way lines, 20
feet from where they intersect. A clear view shall be maintained on corner
lots from 3 to 10 feet in vertical distance.







 



   (B)   Driveways. At all points of egress from off-street parking
areas to a road, unobstructed visibility shall be maintained at an elevation
of between three (3) and ten (10) feet of the centerline pavement level,
within the two areas formed by two right angle triangles, on the sides of the
driveway. Each triangle shall have a base measuring five (5) feet along the
edge of the driveway and a height measuring 30 feet along the edge of the
road right-of-way.







 



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.2.7  No Use or Sale of Land or Buildings Except in Conformity
with Ordinance Provisions.



   (A)   Subject to Article 155.8 of this Ordinance (Nonconforming
Situations), no person may use, occupy, or sell any land or buildings or
authorize or permit the use, occupancy, or sale of land or buildings under
his control except in accordance with all of the applicable provisions of
this Ordinance.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, the “use” or “occupancy”
of a building or land relates to anything and everything that is done to, on,
or in that building or land.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.2.8  Height Limitation Exceptions.



   The height limitations of this Ordinance shall not apply to church
spires, antennas, elevators, HVAC equipment, and similar accessories to
buildings.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.2.9  Fees.



   (A)   Reasonable fees sufficient to cover the costs of
administration, inspection, publication of notice and similar matters may be
charged to applicants for zoning permits, sign permits, conditional use
permits, subdivision plat approval, site plan approval, zoning amendments,
variances, changes to Ordinance text and map, and other administrative
actions. The amount of the fees charged shall be as set forth in the town’s
budget or as established by resolution of the Board of Aldermen filed in the
office of the Town Clerk.



   (B)   Fees established in accordance with subsection 155.2.9(A)
shall be paid upon submission of a signed application or notice of appeal.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.2.10  Open Space Requirements.



   (A)   No structure or portion of a structure of any kind shall be
permitted in any part of a required yard, either below, at, or above ground
level, except as set forth in this section or elsewhere in this Ordinance.



   (B)   The following may encroach into the required yard so long as
such use complies with all other applicable provisions of this Ordinance:



      (1)   Roofs and gutters may encroach two feet into the
required yard.



      (2)   Utility/service equipment stands, as defined herein, may
encroach four feet into the required rear and side-yard setback area. These
stands shall be the minimum size required to accommodate the equipment
located thereon as determined by the UDO Administrator or his or her
designee. Utility/service equipment stands which encroach into the required
setback shall not be accessible by stairs unless required by Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations. Non-conforming utility
stands erected prior to adoption of this Ordinance may be repaired or
replaced notwithstanding the maximum encroachment as outlined hereinabove,
provided that they comply with this Ordinance to the extent possible, and are
the minimum size required to accommodate the equipment located thereon as
determined by the UDO Administrator or his or her designee.



      (3)   Fences may encroach into any required yard so long as
they are in conformance with the regulations set forth in Section 155.7.10.



      (4)   Driveways may encroach within the street frontage yards,
provided that they are in conformance with Section 155.2.14.



      (5)   Driveways, parking, and sidewalks may encroach into the
required yards in the P-C, C-2, C-3, C-4, and C-5 Districts in conformance
with the applicable district regulations found in Section 155.6.5.



      (6)   Landscaping, including but not limited to flower beds,
planters, tree, etc., may encroach into any required yard. This shall not
include gravel, pervious pavers, or impervious pavers, the primary purpose of
which is to provide parking. These materials shall be considered as driveways
and may encroach into the street frontage yards so long as they are in
conformance with Section 155.2.14.



      (7)   Accessory buildings as permitted by subsection 155.6.5.1
(R-1 Residential District) and subsection 155.6.5.2 (R-2 Residential
District).



      (8)   Walkways no more than 36 inches wide elevated no more
than six inches above grade composed of pervious materials, including but
limited to wood and pervious pavers, provided that they are erected for the
sole purpose of providing access to residences, piers, or permitted
establishments located on the same property or located adjacent to the same
property.



      (9)   Beach walkovers constructed in accordance with the
Wrightsville Beach Unified Development Ordinance, Article 155.11, Part III,
Oceanfront Property.



      (10)   Bulkheads as defined in this ordinance installed in
accordance with Division of Coastal Management Rules and Regulations.



      (11)   Retaining walls measuring no greater than 30 inches
above the lowest adjacent grade erected for landscaping, stormwater retention
or pedestrian safety.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.2.11  Fire Districts.



   (A)   Fire districts are to comply with the provisions of Appendix
D, Fire Districts, of the North Carolina State Building Code: Building Code,
2009 Edition, and as thereafter amended, and are established as follows:



      (1)   Fire District No I. Those areas shown as C-1 and C-4 on
the official zoning map of the town, as adopted March 13, 2008.



      (2)   Fire District No II. Those areas shown as C-2, C-3, C-5,
and all private club zones on the official zoning map of the town, as adopted
March 13, 2008.



   (B)   The limit boundaries of both Fire Districts Nos. I and II
shall change with, and conform to any official changes in the official zoning
map with respect to the zones set forth in this section.



   (C)   After May 27,1982, all buildings erected in the primary and
secondary fire districts shall be required to install an approved fire alarm
system and an approved sprinkler system.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.2.12 Property Owners’ Association.



   (A)   No preliminary plat, site plan, or conditional use permit for
which a property owners’ association will exist shall be approved until all
required legal instruments have been reviewed by the Town Attorney as to
legal form and effect and approved by the Town.



   (B)   If common open space is deeded to a property owners’
association, the owner or developer shall file with the New Hanover County
Register of Deeds and the Town of Wrightsville Beach a declaration of
covenants, conditions, and restrictions that will govern such association.
The provisions of such declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:



      (1)   The property owners’ association must be set up before
any property is sold in the development.



      (2)   Membership must be mandatory and automatic when property
is purchased in the development.



      (3)   The open space requirement must be permanent, not just
for a period of years.



      (4)   The association must be responsible for liability
insurance, local taxes, and maintenance of recreational and other common
facilities including private streets.



      (5)   Property owners must pay their pro rata share of the
cost; the assessment levied by the association can become a lien on the
property.



      (6)   The association must be able to adjust the assessment to
meet changed needs.



      (7)   Covenants for maintenance assessments shall run with the
land.



      (8)   Provision insuring that control of such association will
gradually be vested in the property owners’ association.



      (9)   All lands so conveyed shall be subject to the right of
the grantee or grantees to enforce maintenance and improvement of the common
facilities.



      (10)   Stormwater management system maintenance schedule.



   (C)   All POA documents submitted as part of a development or site
plan approval must be reviewed and approved by the Town of Wrightsville Beach
Attorney prior to the issuance of building permits for the project.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.2.13  Temporary Buildings.



   Temporary buildings, including mobile structures, incidental to a
construction project may be permitted to be used concurrent with the permit
for permanent building(s) or construction. Such temporary building shall be
removed within fourteen (14) days following completion of construction. No
such building shall be used for dwelling purposes. Refer to Section
155.11.18(H) for additional regulations regarding temporary structures in a
floodplain.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.2.14  Permit to Construct Driveway Required.



   No person shall construct, reconstruct, or repair any driveway within
the town without first obtaining from the UDO Administrator a zoning permit
to do so. Such person shall construct, reconstruct, and repair such driveway
under the supervision of the UDO Administrator, and in accordance with
Article 155.9, Part II of this ordinance.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.2.15  Building Design.



   (A)   In all zoning districts, roofing materials shall have
non-reflective/non-glare finishes.



   (B)   For buildings in non-residential zoning districts, exterior
metal finishes shall not be allowed on the front facade of the building.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



ARTICLE 155.3
ADMINISTRATIVE/LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY



PART I.
UDO ADMINISTRATOR



Section 155.3.1  Powers and Duties.



   (A)   The UDO Administrator, to be designated by the Town Manager,
is hereby authorized and it shall be his/her duty to enforce the provisions
of this Ordinance. This official shall have the right to enter upon the
premises at any reasonable time necessary to carry out his/her duties. It is
the intention of this Ordinance that all questions arising in connection with
enforcement and interpretation shall be presented first to the UDO
Administrator and/or designated agent. Appeal from his/her decision may be
made to the Board of Adjustment.



   (B)   In administering the provisions of this Ordinance, the UDO
Administrator and/or designated agent shall:



      (1)   Make and maintain records of all applications for
permits, conditional uses, special uses, and requests listed herein, and
records of all permits issued or denied, with notations of all special
conditions or modifications involved.



      (2)   File and safely keep copies of all plans submitted, and
the same shall form a part of the records of his/her office and shall be
available for inspection at reasonable times by any interested party.



      (3)   Transmit to the Planning Board, Board of Aldermen,
and/or the Board of Adjustment all applications and plans for which their
review and approval is required.



      (4)   Conduct inspections of premises and, upon finding that
any of the provisions of this Ordinance are being violated, notify in writing
the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. The UDO
Administrator shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or
structures; removal of illegal buildings or of additions, alterations, or
structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or
shall take any other action authorized by this Ordinance to insure compliance
with or to prevent violation of its provisions.



   (C)   In addition, the UDO Administrator shall have the following
duties:



      (1)   Prepare a report of the technical review procedure and
recommendations for the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment, or Board of
Aldermen as may be required.



      (2)   Provide administrative interpretations of the UDO.



      (3)   Provide nonconformity determinations, including
expansions of nonconforming uses and structures.



      (4)   Review and approve zoning compliance applications.



      (5)   Review and approve applications for temporary uses,
including special events.



      (6)   Review and approve certificates of occupancy.



      (7)   Conduct concept meetings with applicants for development
approval as necessary or appropriate.



      (8)   Maintain the official zoning map and the public records
of the Planning Department, Planning Board, and Board of Adjustment.



      (9)   Perform site inspections.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



PART II.
TECHNICAL REVIEW PROCEDURE



Section 155.3.2  Purpose.



   The purpose of the Technical Review Procedure is to facilitate
communication and coordination between departments responsible for
development review.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.3.3  Procedures; Composition.



   (A)   The technical review procedure shall be used to review all
applications for site-specific development approval for all conditional use
permits, preliminary and final plat approvals and amendments, development
site plans, development agreements, landscaping plans, and any application
for development approval if requested by the UDO Administrator. The technical
review procedure shall result in the provision of recommendations, as
provided herein, regarding the application under its review.



   (B)   The technical review procedure may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, the following individuals/departments: UDO
Administrator (Planning & Parks Department), Town Manager, Fire Department,
Police Department, Public Works Department.



   (C)   The UDO Administrator may request the participation of
professional experts or a representative from county, regional or state
agencies if the UDO Administrator determines that such entities can provide
expertise concerning the proposed development.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



PART III.
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST



Section 155.3.4  Conflicts of Interest.



   (A)   Members of the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment must act
in the public interest and not to advance their own financial interests. A
member of a planning board or board of adjustment may not vote on an UDO
action where there is a potential financial conflict of interest. If the
outcome of the vote is “reasonably likely to have a direct, substantial,
and readily identifiable financial impact” on the member, the member must
not vote on it. If a Planning Board or Board of Adjustment makes special use,
conditional use, variance, appeal, or interpretation decisions, they must not
participate in the discussion or voting if they have a personal bias, a
predetermined opinion on the matter, a close family or business tie to a
party, or a financial interest in the outcome. When a member is disqualified
for a conflict of interest, that member must not participate in the hearing
in any way, neither asking questions, nor debating, nor voting on the case.
If an objection is raised to a member’s participation and that member does
not recuse himself or herself, the remaining members shall by majority vote
rule on the objection.



   (B)   The Board of Aldermen shall act in all matters in compliance
with the Town of Wrightsville Beach Code of Ethics for the Mayor and Board of
Aldermen adopted August 26, 2010.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



PART IV.
BOARD OF ALDERMEN



Section 155.3.5  Powers and Duties.



   (A)   The Wrightsville Beach Board of Aldermen has those powers and
duties as provided herein and by Article 5 of Chapter 160A of the North
Carolina General Statutes.



   (B)   In considering proposed changes in the text of this Ordinance
or in the zoning map, the Board of Aldermen acts in its legislative capacity
and must proceed in accordance with the requirements of Article 155.4.



   (C)   Unless otherwise specifically provided in this Ordinance, in
considering amendments to this Ordinance or the zoning map, the Board of
Aldermen shall follow the regular voting and other requirements as set forth
in other provisions of the Town code.



   (D)   To adopt temporary moratoria on any Town development approval
required by law (refer to Section 155.4.3).



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



PART V.
PLANNING BOARD



Section 155.3.6  Creation.



   The Wrightsville Beach Board of Aldermen hereby authorizes, reaffirms,
and establishes the Planning Board under the authority granted by the General
Statutes of the State of North Carolina, Chapter 160A-361. The Wrightsville
Beach Planning Board shall constitute, function, and may be referred to as
the Planning Board.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.3.7  Composition; Filling Vacancies.



   The Planning Board shall consist of seven members, all of whom shall be
residents of the Town and appointed by the Board of Aldermen. All members
shall be appointed for two-year terms or until a successor is appointed.
Members’ terms shall run from February 1 through January 31. No member of
the Planning Board shall serve more than three consecutive terms. Vacancies
occurring for reasons other than expiration of terms shall be filled as they
occur by the Board of Aldermen for the period of the unexpired term.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.3.8  Organization, Meetings, Records.



   (A)   There shall be a Chairman and Vice Chairman elected annually
by the Board members at the regular meeting in February. The Board shall
adopt Rules of Procedure which shall be effective following approval by the
Board of Aldermen. The Board shall keep minutes of meetings, records of the
members’ attendance and resolutions, discussions, findings and
recommendations, all of which minutes and such records shall be furnished to
the Board of Aldermen. The records shall be considered public records. The
Board shall hold at least one meeting each month and all meetings shall be
open to the public and subject to the provisions of NCGS 143A, Article 33C
regarding open meetings.



   (B)   The Board of Aldermen shall have the authority to remove any
member who misses three consecutive regular meetings or more than four total
meetings during his or her membership on the Planning Board. It shall be the
responsibility of the Chairman of the Planning Board to advise the Board of
Aldermen of any member who misses three consecutive regular meetings or more
than a total of four meetings. In the event the Board of Aldermen removes a
member because of his or her failure to comply with the attendance
requirements set forth herein, the Board of Aldermen shall notify the
Chairman of the Planning Board, in writing, that the member has been removed.
Each member shall notify the Chairman or the Planning staff at least 48 hours
before a regular meeting when an absence is anticipated.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.3.9  Powers and Duties.



   The Planning Board shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   Studies. To make careful studies of present conditions and the
probable future development of the town and its environs. Such studies may
include but are not limited to land use surveys; population studies; economic
base studies; schools, parks, and recreation studies; traffic studies; and
urban renewal studies.



   (B)   Comprehensive Plan. To formulate and maintain a comprehensive
plan of the Town and its environs for the purpose of achieving a coordinated,
adjusted, and harmonious development of the municipality which would promote,
in accordance with present and future needs, the safety, morals, order,
convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of its citizens; efficiency and
economy in the process of development; convenience of traffic; safety from
fire and other dangers; adequate light and air; healthful and convenience
distribution of population; provision of adequate open spaces; good civic
design and arrangement; wise and efficient expenditures of public funds;
adequate provision for public utilities; and other matters pertaining to
public requirements. The comprehensive plan shall consist of a number of
parts which may include but not be limited to the following: a land use plan,
a major thoroughfare plan, a utilities plan, a plan for economic development,
a recreation plan, a school plan, and a community facilities plan.



   (C)   Zoning Ordinances. To suggest revisions from time to time to
the existing zoning ordinances and to make other recommendations as the
Planning Board deems appropriate from time to time to the Board of Aldermen
regarding zoning ordinances.



   (D)   Subdivision Regulations. To suggest revisions from time to
time to the existing subdivision regulations and to make other
recommendations as the Planning Board deems appropriate from time to time to
the Board of Aldermen regarding subdivision ordinances.



   (E)   Powers of Review. To review and make recommendations to the
Board of Aldermen upon the extent, location, and design of all public
structures and facilities; on the acquisition and disposal of public
properties; on the opening, abandonment, widening, extension, narrowing, or
other change to streets and other public ways; and on the construction,
extension, expansion, or abandonment of utilities, whether publicly or
privately owned. However, in the absence of a recommendation from the
Planning Board after the expiration of 30 days from the date on which the
question has been submitted in writing to the Board, the Board of Aldermen
may if it deems wise, take final action.



   (F)   Annual Report. To submit, in April of each year, to the Board
of Aldermen, a report of its activities, for the preceding year.



   (G)   Prior Approval by the Board of Aldermen. In exercising the
powers and duties set forth herein, the Planning Board is authorized to
appoint committees made up in whole or in part of citizens of the Town who
are not members of the Planning Board. Provided, however, that the creation
of the committees and the appointments thereto shall be subject to the prior
approval of the Board of Aldermen.



   (H)   Staff Support. The Town Manager shall be responsible for
appointing staff personnel to support the activities of the Planning Board.
The Town Manager shall designate those staff members so appointed in writing
and shall provide a copy of the designation to the Planning Board Chairman.
The Planning Board shall not utilize the services of any staff personnel
other than those so designated without the prior approval of the Town Manager.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



PART VI.  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT



Section 155.3.10  Establishment of Board of Adjustment.



   (A)   The Board of Adjustment of the Town, herein called "Board," is
hereby established to fulfill the duties and powers described to it by this
Ordinance, other applicable provisions of the Town Code, and by NCGS 160A,
Article 19.



   (B)   The Board shall consist of five regular members and three
alternate members. All members shall be residents of the Town and shall be
appointed by the Board of Aldermen. Members of the Board of Aldermen may be
appointed as members of the Board. The alternate members shall assume all
rights, privileges, and duties of the regular Board members when serving in
the absence of regular Board members.



   (C)   The term of office of members of the Board shall be for three
years or until a successor is appointed. In the beginning, two regular
members shall be appointed for three years, two regular members shall be
appointed for two years, and one regular member shall be appointed for one
year. As the terms of office expire, all subsequent members shall be
appointed for terms of three years, or until a successor is appointed. The
term of office of a member of the Board of Adjustment shall not be reduced
except in accordance with applicable North Carolina law.



   (D)   The Board shall adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of
its affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this Ordinance. Such rules
of procedure shall not be effective until approved by the Board of Aldermen.
All meetings held by the Board shall be held in accordance with NCGS 143A,
Article 33B or as may be amended. The Board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings suitable for review in court showing:



      (1)   The factual evidence presented to the Board by all
parties concerned;



      (2)   The findings of fact and the reasons for the
determinations by the Board; and



      (3)   The vote of each member, or if absent or failing to
vote, indicating such fact, all of which shall be public record and be filed
with the office of the Town Clerk.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.3.11  Powers of the Board of Adjustment.



   (A)   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals from and
review any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by a public
official or employee charged with the enforcement of this Ordinance.



   (B)   When practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships would
result from carrying out the strict letter of this Ordinance, the Board of
Adjustment shall have the power, in passing upon appeals, to vary provisions
of this Ordinance relating to the use, construction, or alteration of
buildings or structures or the use of land, so that the spirit of this
Ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and
substantial justice done. Provided that no change in permitted uses may be
authorized by variance.



   (C)   In granting any variance permitted herein, the Board of
Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity
with this Ordinance. A variance from the requirements of this Ordinance as
permitted herein shall not be granted by the Board of Adjustment unless the
Board shall make findings of fact that the following requirements have been
met by the applicant and that the variance is the minimum variance that will
make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure:



      (1)   That special conditions and circumstances exist which
are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not
applicable under the then existing code to other lands, structures, or
buildings in the same district;



      (2)   That such special conditions and circumstances do not
result from the actions of the applicant;



      (3)   That a literal interpretation of the provisions of this
Ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other
properties in the same district under the then existing code;



      (4)   That granting of the variance requested will not confer
on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Ordinance to
other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district under the then
existing zoning code.



   (D)   In denying a variance, the Board of Adjustment shall make
findings of fact that one or more of the requirements specified hereinabove
do not exist.



   (E)   Findings of fact made by the Board of Adjustment under this
section shall be based upon only the evidence presented at the hearing at
which the variance is considered.



   (F)   In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board may
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order,
requirement, decision, or determination that in its opinion ought to be made,
and to that end shall have the power of the official from whom the appeal is
taken.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.3.12  Organization; Meetings.



   (A)   The Board shall elect one member to serve as Chair and preside
over its meetings and shall elect one member to serve as Vice-Chair to
fulfill the responsibilities of the Chair when the Chair cannot. The Board
shall appoint a clerk, who may be a Town officer or employee, a member of the
Board, or such other person who is qualified to fulfill the requirements of
the position. The Board may create and fill such offices and committees as it
may deem necessary. The term of the Chair and other offices shall be one year
with eligibility for reelection. The Chair, or any member temporarily acting
as Chair, is authorized to administer oaths to any witnesses in any matter
coming before the Board.



   (B)   The Board shall establish a regular meeting schedule and shall
meet frequently enough so that it may take action as expeditiously as
reasonably possible. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public,
and reasonable notice of the time and place thereof shall be given to the
public in accordance with the North Carolina General Statutes. The Board
shall keep a record of its meetings, including attendance of its members, the
vote of each member on every question, a complete summary of the evidence
submitted to it, documents submitted to it, and all official actions.



   (C)   Any member of the Board who misses more than three consecutive
regular meetings or more than half the regular meetings in a calendar year
shall lose his or her status as a member of the Board and shall be replaced
or reappointed by the Board of Aldermen. Absence due to sickness, death, or
other emergencies of like nature shall be recognized as excused absences, and
shall not affect the member's status on the Board, except that in the event
of a long illness or other such cause for prolonged absence, the member shall
be replaced.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.3.13  Quorum and Voting.



   The concurring vote of four-fifths of the members of the Board shall be
necessary to grant a variance from the provisions of this ordinance. A
majority of the members shall be required to decide any other quasi-judicial
matter or to determine an appeal made in the nature of certiorari. For the
purposes of this section, vacant positions on the Board and members who are
disqualified from voting on a quasi-judicial matter shall not be considered
“members of the Board” for calculation of the requisite supermajority if
there are no qualified alternates available to take the place of such members.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1727, passed 5-3-14)



ARTICLE 155.4
LEGISLATIVE/QUASI-JUDICIAL PROCEDURES



Section 155.4.1  Amendment/Rezoning Procedures.



   155.4.1.1  Procedure. The Board of Aldermen may amend, supplement, or
change the text of this Ordinance and zoning map following review and
recommendation of the Planning Board according to the procedures established
in this Article.



   155.4.1.2  Action by Applicant. The following action shall be taken by
the applicant:



   (A)   Proposed changes or amendments may be initiated by the Board
of Aldermen, Planning Board, or by one or more interested parties.



   (B)   An application for any change or amendment shall contain a
description and statement of the present and proposed zoning regulation or
district boundary to be applied, the names and addresses of the applicant,
the owner of the parcel of land involved in the change if different from the
applicant, and all adjacent property owners as shown on the New Hanover
County tax listing. Twenty copies of such application shall be filed with the
UDO Administrator not later than 30 days prior to the Planning Board meeting
at which the application is to be considered.



   (C)   When a proposed amendment is initiated by individuals or
parties other than the Board of Aldermen or Planning Board, a fee established
from time to time by the Board of Aldermen shall be paid to the Town for each
application for an amendment to cover the necessary administrative costs and
advertising.



   155.4.1.3  Action by the Planning Board.



   (A)   Zoning Map Amendment. In any case where the Planning Board
will consider a change in the zoning classification of a parcel of land,
notice of the proposed petition or application shall be mailed by first class
mail to the owner of the parcel of land involved in the change and all
abutting property owners as shown on the New Hanover County tax listing at
the addresses listed for such property owners on the New Hanover County tax
abstracts, at least ten days and not more than 25 days prior to the Planning
Board meeting at which the rezoning is to be considered. When multiple
parcels are included in a proposed zoning map amendment, a posting of each
individual site is not required, but the Town shall post sufficient notices
to provide reasonable notice to interested persons. The UDO Administrator or
his or her designee shall certify to the Planning Board that such notices
have been made.



   (B)   Zoning Text Amendment. In any case where the Planning Board
will consider an amendment to the zoning code text, notice of the amendment
to be considered shall be published once in a newspaper having general
circulation in the area. The notice shall be published not less than ten days
before the date of the Planning Board meeting at which the text amendment
will be considered.



   (C)   Planning Board Action on Zoning Map and/or Text Amendments.
The Planning Board shall advise and comment on whether the proposed text
amendment or map amendment is consistent with the adopted comprehensive plan
and any other applicable officially adopted plans. The Planning Board shall
provide a written recommendation to the Board of Aldermen that addresses plan
consistency and other matters as deemed appropriate by the Planning Board,
but a comment by the Planning Board that a proposed amendment is inconsistent
with the comprehensive plan shall not preclude consideration or approval of
the proposed amendment by the Board of Aldermen.



   155.4.1.4  Action by the Board of Aldermen.



   (A)   Notice and Public Hearings - Zoning Text Amendment. No
amendment shall be adopted by the Board of Aldermen until after public notice
and hearing. Notice of such a public hearing shall be published once a week
for two successive calendar weeks in a local newspaper of general circulation
in the Town.



   (B)   Notice and Public Hearings - Zoning Map Amendment.



      (1)   In any case where the Board of Aldermen will consider a
change in the zoning classification of a parcel of land, notice of the
proposed petition or application shall be mailed by first class mail to the
owner of that parcel of land and all abutting property owners as shown on the
New Hanover County tax listing at the last addresses listed for such property
owners on the New Hanover County tax abstracts. The party applying for the
change in zoning classification shall submit the following material with the
request for rezoning; the application shall be considered incomplete without
such material:



         (a)   A list of names of owners, their addresses and the
tax parcel numbers of the property involved in the change and the properties
immediately adjacent to the property of the request, including the property
owners directly opposite the proposed request but separated by a street
right-of-way, as shown on the New Hanover County tax listing.



         (b)   Two sets of plain, letter sized envelopes equal in
number to the above list of names shall be furnished by the applicant. Both
sets of envelopes are to be unsealed, stamped, and addressed for mailing to
the adjacent property owners as shown on the New Hanover County tax listing,
and bear the return address of the Town.



      (2)   At least ten but no more than 25 days prior to the date
of the meeting at which the Board of Aldermen will consider the request for
rezoning, the Town Clerk shall mail a letter of notification in the supplied
envelopes containing a description of the request and the time, date and
location of the public hearing. Additionally, the site proposed for rezoning
or an adjacent public right-of-way shall be posted with a notice of the
public hearing not less than ten days prior to the Board of Aldermen meeting
at which the rezoning is to be considered. When multiple parcels are included
in a proposed zoning map amendment, a posting of each individual site is not
required, but the Town shall post sufficient notices to provide reasonable
notice to interested persons. The Town Clerk shall certify to the Board of
Aldermen that such notices have been made and such certification shall be
deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud.



      (3)   The first class mail notice required under subsections
(1) and (2) of this section shall not be required if the zoning map amendment
directly affects more than 50 properties, owned by a total of at least 50
different property owners, and the town elects to use the expanded published
notice. In this instance, the town may elect to either make the mailed notice
provided for in this section or may as an alternative elect to publish a
notice of the hearing as required by NCGS 160A-364, but provided that each
advertisement shall not be less than one-half of a newspaper page in size.
The advertisement shall only be effective for property owners who reside in
the area of general circulation of the newspaper which publishes the notice.
Property owners who reside outside of the newspaper circulation area,
according to the address listed on the most recent New Hanover County
property tax listing for the affected property, shall be notified according
to the provisions of subsections (1) and (2).



      (4)   Except for a town-initiated zoning map amendment, when
an application is filed to request a zoning map amendment and that
application is not made by the owner of the parcel of land to which the
amendment would apply, the applicant shall certify to the Board of Aldermen
that the owner of the parcel of land as shown on the New Hanover County tax
listing has received actual notice of the proposed amendment and a copy of
the notice of public hearing. The person or persons required to provide
notice shall certify to the Board of Aldermen that proper notice has been
provided in fact, and such certificate shall be deemed conclusive in the
absence of fraud. Notice shall be made in any manner permitted under NCGS
1A-1, Rule 4(j).



   (C)   Recommendations of Planning Board. The Board of Aldermen shall
not hold its required public hearing or take action on any proposed zoning
amendment until it has received a recommendation regarding such ordinance
amendment from the Planning Board. If no recommendation is received from the
Planning Board within sixty days from the date when submitted to the Planning
Board, the Board of Aldermen may consider the proposal without a
recommendation from the Planning Board.



   (D)   Citizen Comments. If any resident or property owner submits a
written statement regarding a proposed amendment, modification or repeal to a
zoning ordinance to the Town Clerk at least two business days prior to the
proposed vote on such change, the Town Clerk shall deliver such written
statement to the Board of Aldermen.



   (E)   Statement of consistency. Prior to adopting or rejecting any
zoning text and/or map amendment, the Board of Aldermen shall adopt a
statement describing whether its action is consistent with an adopted
comprehensive plan and explaining why the Board considers the action taken to
be reasonable and in the public interest. This statement is not subject to
judicial review.



   155.4.1.5  Withdrawal of Application. An applicant may withdraw his or
her application at any time by written notice to the UDO Administrator.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1750, passed 10-13-15)



Section 155.4.2  Establishment of Vested Rights.



   155.4.2.1  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to implement the
provisions of NCGS 160A-385.1 pursuant to which a statutory vested right is
established upon the approval of a site specific development plan.



   155.4.2.2  Establishment of a Vested Right.



   (A)   A vested right shall be deemed established upon the valid
approval by the Board of Aldermen of a site specific development plan,
following notice and public hearing as provided for by law.



   (B)   The Board of Aldermen may approve a site specific development
plan upon the terms and conditions as may reasonably be necessary to protect
the public health, safety and welfare. The failure to satisfy any of the
terms and conditions so imposed will result in a forfeiture of vested rights.



   (C)   Notwithstanding subsections (A) and (B) above, approval of a
site specific development plan with the condition that a variance be obtained
shall not confer a vested right unless and until the necessary variance is
obtained.



   (D)   A site specific development plan shall be deemed approved upon
the effective date of the Board of Aldermen’s action relating thereto.



   (E)   The establishment of a vested right shall not preclude the
application of overlay zoning that imposes additional requirements but does
not affect the allowable type or intensity of use, or ordinances or
regulations that are general in nature and are applicable to all property
subject to land-use regulation by the town, including, but not limited to,
building, fire, plumbing, electrical and mechanical codes. Otherwise
applicable new or amended regulations shall be effective with respect to
property that is subject to a site specific development plan upon the
expiration or termination of the vested right in accordance with this section.



   (F)   A vested right is not a personal right, but shall attach to
and run with the applicable property. After approval of a site specific
development plan, all successors to the original landowner shall be entitled
to exercise such right while applicable.



   155.4.2.3  Approval Procedures.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, an application
for site specific development plan approval shall be processed in accordance
with the procedures established by ordinance and shall be considered by the
designated approval authority for the specific type of zoning or land-use
permit or approval for which application is made. Provided, however, that if
such procedures established by ordinance do not provide for notice and a
public hearing, in order for the applicant to obtain a vested right, the
application must be considered and acted on following notice and a public
hearing as provided in NCGS 160A-364.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) above, if the
authority to issue a particular zoning or land-use permit or approval has
been delegated by ordinance to a board, committee or administrative official
other than the Board of Aldermen, in order to obtain a vested right, the
applicant must request in writing at the time of application that the
application be considered and acted on by the Board of Aldermen following
notice and a public hearing as provided in NCGS 160A-364.



   (C)   In order for a vested right to be established upon approval of
a site specific development plan, the applicant must indicate at the time of
application, on a form to be provided by the town, that a vested right is
being sought.



   (D)   Each map, plat, site plan or other document evidencing a site
specific development plan shall contain the following notation: “Approval
of this plan establishes a vested right under NCGS 160A-385.1. Unless
terminated at an earlier date, the vested right shall be valid until
(date).”



   (E)   Following approval or conditional approval of a site specific
development plan, nothing in this section shall exempt the plan from
subsequent reviews and approvals to ensure compliance with the terms and
conditions of the original approval, provided that the reviews and approvals
are not inconsistent with the original approval.



   (F)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the revocation of the
original approval or other remedies for failure to comply with applicable
terms and conditions of the approval or the zoning ordinance.



   155.4.2.4  Duration.



   (A)   A zoning right that has been vested as provided in this
section shall remain vested for a period of two years from the effective date
thereof. Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding sentence, a zoning
right may be vested for a period not to exceed five years where warranted in
light of all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the size
and phasing of development, economic cycles, and market conditions. The
determination as to whether the five year vesting period rather than the two
year vesting period shall apply shall be made at the sole discretion of the
Board of Aldermen. This vesting shall not be extended by any amendments or
modifications to the site specific development plan.



   (B)   Upon the issuance of a building permit, the expiration
provisions of NCGS 160A-418 and the revocation provisions of NCGS 160A-422
shall apply, except that a building permit shall not expire or be revoked
because of the running of time while a vested right under this section is
outstanding.



   155.4.2.5  Termination. A zoning right that has been vested as
provided in this section shall terminate:



   (A)   At the end of the applicable vesting period with respect to
buildings and uses for which no valid building permit applications have been
filed;



   (B)   With the written consent of the affected land owners;



   (C)   Upon findings by the Board of Aldermen, by ordinance after
notice and a public hearing, that natural or man-made hazards on or in the
immediate vicinity of the property, if uncorrected, would pose a serious
threat to the public health, safety, and welfare if the project were to
proceed as contemplated in the site specific development plan;



   (D)   Upon payment to the affected land owner of compensation for
all costs, expenses and other losses incurred by the land owner, including,
but not limited to, all fees paid in consideration of financing, and all
architectural, planning, marketing, legal and other consultant’s fees
incurred after approval by the town, together with interest thereon at the
legal rate until paid. Compensation shall not include any diminution in the
value of the property which is caused by such action;



   (E)   Upon findings by the Board of Aldermen by ordinance after
notice and a hearing, that the land owner or his representative intentionally
supplied inaccurate information or made material misrepresentations which
made a difference in the approval by the Board of Aldermen of the site
specific development plan; or



   (F)   Upon the enactment or promulgation of a state or federal law
or regulation that precludes development as contemplated in the site specific
development plan, in which case the Board of Aldermen may modify the affected
provisions, upon a finding that the change in state or federal law has a
fundamental effect on the plan, by ordinance after notice and a hearing.



   155.4.2.6  Voluntary Annexation. A petition for annexation filed with
the town under NCGS 160A-31 or NCGS 160A-58.1 shall contain a signed
statement declaring whether or not any vested right with respect to the
properties subject to the petition has been established under NCGS 160A-385.1
or NCGS 153A-344.1. A statement that declares that no vested right has been
established under NCGS 160A-385.1 or NCGS 153A-344.1, or the failure to sign
a statement declaring whether or not a vested right has been established,
shall be binding on the land owner and any such vested right shall be
terminated.



   155.4.2.7  Limitations. Nothing in this section is intended or shall
be deemed to create any vested right other than those established pursuant to
NCGS 160A-385.1.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.4.3  Moratorium.



   155.4.3.1  Temporary Moratorium. The town may adopt temporary
moratoria on any town development approval required by law. The duration of
any moratorium shall be reasonable in light of the specific conditions that
warrant imposition of the moratorium and may not exceed the period of time
necessary to correct, modify, or resolve such conditions. Except in cases of
imminent and substantial threat to public health or safety, before adopting
an ordinance imposing a development moratorium with a duration of 60 days or
any shorter period, the governing board shall hold a public hearing and shall
publish a notice of the hearing in a newspaper having general circulation in
the area not less than seven days before the date set for the hearing. A
development moratorium with a duration of 61 days or longer, and any
extension of a moratorium so that the total duration is 61 days or longer, is
subject to the notice and hearing requirements of NCGS 160A-364. Absent an
imminent threat to public health or safety, a development moratorium adopted
pursuant to this section shall not apply to any project for which a valid
building permit issued pursuant to NCGS 160A-417 is outstanding, to any
project for which a conditional use permit application or special use permit
application has been accepted, to development set forth in a site-specific or
phased development plan approved pursuant to NCGS 160A-385.1, to development
for which substantial expenditures have already been made in good faith
reliance on a prior valid administrative or quasi-judicial permit or
approval, or to preliminary or final subdivision plats that have been
accepted for review by the town prior to the call for public hearing to adopt
the moratorium. Any preliminary subdivision plat accepted for review by the
town prior to the call for public hearing, if subsequently approved, shall be
allowed to proceed to final plat approval without being subject to the
moratorium.



   155.4.3.2  Ordinance Establishing a Development Moratorium. Any
ordinance establishing a development moratorium must expressly include at the
time of adoption each of the following:



   (A)   A clear statement of the problems or conditions necessitating
the moratorium and what courses of action, alternative to a moratorium, were
considered by the town and why those alternative courses of action were not
deemed adequate.



   (B)   A clear statement of the development approvals subject to the
moratorium and how a moratorium on those approvals will address the problems
or conditions leading to imposition of the moratorium.



   (C)   An express date for termination of the moratorium and a
statement setting forth why that duration is reasonably necessary to address
the problems or conditions leading to imposition of the moratorium.



   (D)   A clear statement of the actions, and the schedule for those
actions, proposed to be taken by the town during the duration of the
moratorium to address the problems or conditions leading to imposition of the
moratorium.



   155.4.3.3  Renewal or Extension of Moratorium. No moratorium may be
subsequently renewed or extended for any additional period unless the town
shall have taken all reasonable and feasible steps proposed to be taken by
the town in its ordinance establishing the moratorium to address the problems
or conditions leading to imposition of the moratorium and unless new facts
and conditions warrant an extension. Any ordinance renewing or extending a
development moratorium must expressly include, at the time of adoption, the
findings set forth in subsections (A) through (D) of Section 155.4.3.2,
including what new facts or conditions warrant the extension.



   155.4.3.4  Persons Aggrieved by Imposition of Moratorium. Any person
aggrieved by the imposition of a moratorium on development approvals required
by law may apply to the appropriate division of the General Court of Justice
for an order enjoining the enforcement of the moratorium, and the court shall
have jurisdiction to issue that order. Actions brought pursuant to this
section shall be set down for immediate hearing, and subsequent proceedings
in those actions shall be accorded priority by the trial and appellate
courts. In any such action, the town shall have the burden of showing
compliance with the procedural requirements of this section.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.4.4  Appeals, Variances, and Interpretations.



   155.4.4.1  Appeals.



   (A)   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals from
decisions of the UDO Administrator concerning the interpretation or
administration of Chapter 155 of the Town Code.



   (B)   Appeals under the provisions of this Section may be filed by
any person who has standing under G.S. § 160A-393(d) or the Town may appeal
a decision to the Board of Adjustment. An appeal is taken by filing a notice
of appeal with the Town Clerk. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds
for the appeal.



   (C)   Decisions concerning the interpretation or administration of
this chapter shall be given in writing to the owner of the property that is
the subject of the decision and to the party who sought the decision, if
different from the owner. The written notice shall be delivered by personal
delivery, electronic mail, or by first class mail.



   (D)   The owner or other party shall have thirty (30) days from
receipt of the written notice within which to file an appeal. Any other
person with standing to appeal shall have thirty (30) days from receipt from
any source of actual or constructive notice of the decision within which to
file an appeal.



   (E)   It shall be conclusively presumed that all persons with
standing to appeal have constructive notice of the decision from the date a
sign containing the words “Zoning Decision” or “Subdivision Decision”
in letters at least six inches (6") high and identifying the means to contact
an official for information about the decision is prominently posted on the
property that is the subject of the decision, provided the sign remains on
the property for at least ten (10) days. Posting of signs is not the only
form of constructive notice. Any such posting shall be the responsibility of
the landowner or applicant. Verification of the posting shall be provided to
the official who made the decision. Posting of a sign as described herein is
not required but shall be done at the discretion of the landowner or
applicant. The Town may post such sign.



   (F)   The UDO Administrator shall transmit to the Board of
Adjustment all documents and exhibits constituting the record upon which the
action appealed from is taken. The UDO Administrator shall also provide a
copy of the record to the appellant and to the owner of the property that is
the subject of the appeal if the appellant is not the owner.



   (G)   An appeal of a notice of violation or other enforcement order
stays enforcement of the action appealed from unless the official who made
the decision certifies to the Board of Adjustment after notice of appeal has
been filed that because of the facts stated in an affidavit, a stay would
cause imminent peril to life or property or because the violation is
transitory in nature, a stay would seriously interfere with enforcement of
the ordinance. In that case, enforcement proceedings shall not be stayed
except by a restraining order, which may be granted by a court. If
enforcement proceedings are not stayed, the appellant may file with the
official a request for an expedited hearing of the appeal, and the Board of
Adjustment shall meet to hear the appeal within 15 days after such a request
is filed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, appeals of decisions granting a
permit or otherwise affirming that a proposed use of property is consistent
with the ordinance shall not stay the further review of an application for
permits or permissions to use such property; in these situations the
appellant may request and the Board may grant a stay of a final decision of
permit applications or building permits affected by the issue being appealed.



   (H)   Subject to the provisions of subdivision (G) of this
subsection, the Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide the appeal within a
reasonable time.



   (I)   The official who made the decision shall be present at the
hearing as a witness. The appellant shall not be limited at the hearing to
matters stated in the notice of appeal. If any party or the Town would be
unduly prejudiced by the presentation of matters not presented in the notice
of appeal, the Board shall continue the hearing. The Board of Adjustment may
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision appealed from
and shall make any order, requirement, decision, or determination that ought
to be made. The Board shall have all the powers of the official who made the
decision.



   155.4.4.2  Variances.



   (A)   An application for a variance shall be submitted to the Board
of Adjustment by filing a copy of the application with the UDO Administrator.
Applications shall be handled in the same manner as applications for permits.



   (B)   A variance may be granted by the Board of Adjustment if it
concludes that, by granting the variance, the following findings are
supported by the Board of Adjustment decision:



      (1)   Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict
application of the ordinance. It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that,
in the absence of the variance, no reasonable use can be made of the property.



      (2)   The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar
to the property, such as location, size, or topography. Hardships resulting
from personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from conditions
that are common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not be the
basis for granting a variance.



      (3)   The hardship did not result from actions taken by the
applicant or the property owner. The act of purchasing property with
knowledge that circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a
variance shall not be regarded as a self-created hardship.



      (4)   The requested variance is consistent with the spirit,
purpose, and intent of the ordinance, such that public safety is secured, and
substantial justice is achieved.



   (C)   Appropriate conditions may be imposed on any variance,
provided that the conditions are reasonably related to the variance.



   (D)   The nature of the variance and any conditions attached to it
shall be entered on the face of the zoning permit, or the zoning permit may
simply note the issuance of the variance and refer to the written record of
the variance for further information. All such conditions are enforceable in
the same manner as any other applicable requirement of this Ordinance.



   155.4.4.3  Interpretations.



   (A)   The Board of Adjustment is authorized to interpret the zoning
map and to pass upon disputed questions of lot lines or district boundary
lines and similar questions. If such questions arise in the context of an
appeal from a decision of the UDO Administrator, they shall be handled as
provided in Section 155.4.4.1.



   (B)   An application for a map interpretation shall be submitted to
the Board of Adjustment by filing a standard Town of Wrightsville Beach
appeal form with UDO Administrator. The application shall contain sufficient
information to enable the board to make the necessary interpretation.



   (C)   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as
shown on the Official Zoning Map, the rules of interpretation as specified in
Section 155.1.10 shall be applied. Where uncertainties continue to exist
after application of the above rules, appeal may be taken to the Board of
Adjustment as provided in Section 155.4.4.1 of this Ordinance.



   (D)   Interpretations of the location of floodway and floodplain
boundary lines may be made by the UDO Administrator as provided in Article
155.11, Part 1.



   155.4.4.4  Requests to be Heard Expeditiously. As provided in Article
155.3, the Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide all appeals, variance
requests, and requests for interpretations, including map boundaries, as
expeditiously as possible, consistent with the need to follow regularly
established agenda procedures, provide notice in accordance with Section
155.4.4.6, and obtain the necessary information to make sound decisions.



   155.4.4.5  Hearing Required on Appeals, Variances and Interpretations.



   (A)   Before making a decision on an appeal or an application for a
variance or interpretation, the Board of Adjustment shall hold a hearing on
the appeal or application.



   (B)   Subject to subsection (C), the hearing shall be open to the
public. All persons presenting evidence or arguments shall be sworn in by the
Chairman prior to the presentation of any evidence or arguments.



   (C)   The Board of Adjustment may place reasonable and equitable
limitations on the presentation of evidence and arguments and the
cross-examination of witnesses so that the matter at issue may be heard and
decided without undue delay.



   (D)   The Board of Adjustment may continue the hearing until a
subsequent meeting and may keep the hearing open to take additional
information up to the point a final decision is made. No further notice of a
continued hearing need be published unless a period of six weeks or more
elapses between hearing dates.



   (E)   The required application fee and all supporting materials must
be received by the UDO Administrator before an application is considered
complete and a hearing scheduled.



   155.4.4.6  Notice of Hearing. The UDO Administrator shall give notice
of any hearing required by Section 155.4.4.5 as follows:



   (A)   Notice of hearings conducted pursuant to Section 155.4.4.5
shall be mailed to the person or entity whose appeal, application, or request
is the subject of the hearing; to the owner of the property that is the
subject of the hearing if the owner did not initiate the hearing; to the
owners of all parcels of land abutting the parcel of land that is the subject
of the hearing; and to any other persons owning real property, any portion of
which is located within 150 feet of the lot that is the subject of the
hearing.



   (B)   In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the Town may rely
on the county tax listings to determine owners of property entitled to be
mailed notice.



   (C)   The notice must be deposited in the mail at least ten (10)
days, but not more than twenty-five (25) days, prior to the date of the
hearing. Within that same time period, the Town shall also prominently post a
notice of the hearing on the site that is the subject of the hearing or on an
adjacent street or highway right-of-way.



   155.4.4.7  Burden of Proof in Appeals and Variances.



   (A)   When an appeal is taken to the Board of Adjustment in
accordance with Section 155.4.4.1, the UDO Administrator shall have the
initial burden of presenting to the board sufficient evidence and argument to
justify the order or decision appealed from. The burden of presenting
evidence and argument to the contrary then shifts to the appellant, who shall
also have the burden of persuasion.



   (B)   The burden of presenting evidence sufficient to allow the
Board of Adjustment to reach the conclusions set forth in Section
155.4.4.2(B), as well as the burden of persuasion on those issues, remains
with the applicant seeking the variance.



   155.4.4.8  Board of Adjustment Action on Appeals and Variances.



   (A)   Appeals. A motion to reverse, affirm, or modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from shall include a
statement of the specific reasons or findings of facts that support the
motion. A favorable vote of the majority of the members shall be required to
reverse or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed
from.



   (B)   Variance. The Board must take a separate vote and vote
affirmatively (by a four-fifths majority-see Section 155.3.13) on each of the
required findings stated in Section 155.4.4.2(B). Insofar as practicable, a
motion to make an affirmative finding on each of the requirements set forth
in Section 155.4.4.2(B) shall include a statement of the specific reasons or
findings of fact supporting such motion.



   (C)   A motion to deny a variance may be made on the basis that any
one or more of the criteria set forth in Section 155.4.4.2(B) are not
satisfied or that the application is incomplete. Insofar as practicable, such
a motion shall include a statement of the specific reasons or findings of
fact that support it. This motion is adopted as the Board’s decision if
supported by more than one-fifth of the Board’s membership (excluding
vacant seats).



   155.4.4.9  Evidence/Presentation of Evidence.



   (A)   The provisions of this section apply to all hearings for which
a notice is required by Section 155.4.4.6.



   (B)   All persons who intend to present evidence to the Board of
Adjustment shall be sworn in by the Chairman.



   (C)   All findings and conclusions necessary to the issuance or
denial of the requested permit or appeal (necessary findings) shall be based
upon competent, material, and substantial evidence.



   (D)   The entirety of a quasi-judicial hearing and deliberation
shall be conducted in open session.



   (E)   Parties to a quasi-judicial hearing have a right to
cross-examine witnesses.



   (F)   Factual findings must not be based on hearsay evidence which
would be inadmissible in a court of law.



   (G)   If a Board of Adjustment member has prior or specialized
knowledge about a case, that knowledge should be disclosed to the rest of the
Board and parties at the beginning of the hearing.



   (H)   The Board of Adjustment, in conducting the hearing, has the
authority to issue subpoenas to compel testimony or the production of
evidence deemed necessary to determine the matter.



   155.4.4.10  Modification of Application at Hearing.



   (A)   In response to questions or comments by persons appearing at
the hearing or to suggestions or recommendations by the Board of Adjustment,
the applicant may agree to modify his application, including the plans and
specifications submitted.



   (B)   Unless such modifications are so substantial or extensive that
the Board cannot reasonably be expected to perceive the nature and impact of
the proposed changes without revised plans before it, the Board may approve
the application with the stipulation that the permit will not be issued until
plans reflecting the agreed upon changes are submitted to the planning staff.



   155.4.4.11  Record.



   (A)   Accurate written minutes shall be kept of all such proceedings.



   (B)   Whenever practicable, all documentary evidence, including any
exhibits, presented at a hearing as well as all other types of physical
evidence shall be made a part of the record of the proceedings and shall be
kept by the Town for at least two years.



   155.4.4.12  Written Decision.



   (A)   The Board shall determine contested facts and make its
decision within a reasonable time. Every quasi-judicial decision shall be
based upon competent, material and substantial evidence in the record. Each
quasi-judicial decision shall be reduced to writing and reflect the Board’s
determination of contested facts and their application to the applicable
standards. The written decision shall be signed by the Chair or other duly
authorized member of the Board.



   (B)   A quasi-judicial decision is effective upon filing the written
decision with the Clerk to the Board. The decision of the Board shall be
delivered by personal delivery, or electronic mail, or by first-class mail to
the applicant, property owner, and to any other person who has submitted a
written request for a copy prior to the date the decision becomes effective.
The Director of Planning and Parks or his/her designee shall certify that
proper notice has been made.



   (C)   Every quasi-judicial decision shall be subject to review by
the Superior Court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari pursuant to
G.S. § 160A-393. A petition for review shall be filed with the Clerk of
Superior Court by the later of thirty (30) days after the decision is
effective or after a written copy thereof is given in accordance with
subsection (B) above. When first-class mail is used to deliver notice, three
(3) days shall be added to the time to file the petition.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1727, passed 5-13-14)



Section 155.4.5  Conditional Use Permits.



   155.4.5.1  Purpose and Applicability. This Ordinance provides for a
number of uses to be located by right in each general zoning district subject
to the use meeting certain area, height, yard, and off-street parking and
loading requirements. In addition to these uses, this Ordinance allows some
uses to be allowed in these districts as a conditional use subject to
issuance of a conditional use permit by the Board of Aldermen upon
recommendation of the Planning Board. The purpose of having the uses being
conditional is to ensure that they would be compatible with surrounding
development and in keeping with the purposes of the general zoning district
in which they are located and would meet other criteria as set forth in this
section. All conditional use permits require some form of a site plan as
outlined in Section 155.5.3.



   155.4.5.2  Application Process/Completeness.



   (A)   The deadline for which a conditional use permit application
shall be filed with the UDO Administrator is the first business day of the
month in the month prior to the meeting at which the application will be
heard. Permit application forms shall be provided by the UDO Administrator.



      In the course of evaluating the proposed conditional use, the
Planning Board or Board of Aldermen may request additional information from
the applicant. A request for any additional information may stay any further
consideration of the application by the Planning Board or Board of Aldermen.



   (B)   No application shall be deemed complete unless it contains or
is accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale which complies with the
requirements contained in Section 155.5.3 and a fee, in accordance with a fee
schedule approved by the Board of Aldermen for the submittal of conditional
use permit applications.



   (C)   One (1) hard copy and one (1) digital copy of an application,
and all attachments and maps, for a conditional use permit shall be submitted
to the UDO Administrator.



   155.4.5.3  Technical Review Procedure/Planning Board Review and
Comment.



   (A)   All applications for a conditional use permit, including
required site plans, shall follow the technical review procedure (Article
155.3, Part II) before being submitted to the Planning Board for review and
comment. The UDO Administrator shall forward any comments received during the
technical review process to the Planning Board.



   (B)   The Planning Board may, in its review, suggest reasonable
conditions to the location, nature, and extent of the proposed use and its
relationship to surrounding properties, parking areas, driveways, pedestrian
and vehicular circulation systems, screening and landscaping, timing of
development, and any other conditions the Board may find appropriate. The
conditions may include dedication of any rights-of-way or easements for
streets, water, sewer, or other public utilities necessary to serve the
proposed development.



   (C)   The Planning Board shall forward its recommendation to the
Board of Aldermen within 45 days of reviewing the application. If a
recommendation is not made within 45 days, the application shall be forwarded
to the Board of Aldermen without a recommendation from the Planning Board.



   (D)   All comments prepared by the Planning Board shall be submitted
by the UDO Administrator. This representative of the Planning Board shall be
subject to the same scrutiny as other witnesses. Review of the conditional
use application by the Planning Board shall not be a quasi-judicial
procedure. The Planning Board shall include in its comments a statement as to
the consistency of the application with the Town's currently adopted
Comprehensive Plan. Comments of the Planning Board shall be considered with
other evidence submitted at the public hearing.



   155.4.5.4  Board of Aldermen Action.



   (A)   Conditional use permits are quasi-judicial decisions approved
by a simple majority vote of the Board of Aldermen. Quasi-judicial decisions
must be conducted in accordance with Sections 155.4.4.9 through 155.4.4.12.
For the purposes of this section, vacant positions on the Board and members
who are disqualified from voting on a quasi-judicial matter shall not be
considered “members of the Board” for calculation of the requisite
majority if there are no qualified alternates available to take the place of
such members.



   (B)   Once the comments of the Planning Board have been made, or the
45-day period elapses without a recommendation, the Board of Aldermen shall
hold a public hearing to consider the application at its next regularly
scheduled meeting. A quorum of the Board of Aldermen is required for this
hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be as specified in Section
155.4.4.6. In addition, notice shall be given to other potentially interested
persons by publishing a notice one time in a newspaper having general
circulation in the area not less than ten nor more than twenty-five days
prior to the hearing.



   (C)   In approving an application for a conditional use permit in
accordance with the principles, conditions, safeguards, and procedures
specified herein, the Board of Aldermen may impose reasonable and appropriate
conditions and safeguards upon the approval. The petitioner will have a
reasonable opportunity to consider and respond to any additional requirements
prior to approval or denial by the Board of Aldermen. In no instance shall
any of these conditions be less restrictive than any requirements which would
pertain to that particular development found elsewhere in a similar zoning
district.



   (D)   The applicant has the burden of producing competent, material
and substantial evidence tending to establish the facts and conditions which
subsection 155.4.5.4(E) below requires.



   (E)   The Board of Aldermen shall issue a conditional use permit if
it has evaluated an application through a quasi-judicial process and
determined that:



      (1)   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the
conditional use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health,
safety, or general welfare.



      (2)   The conditional use will not be injurious to the use and
enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes
already permitted, nor diminish or impair property values within the
neighborhood.



      (3)   The establishment of the conditional use will not impede
the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding
property for uses permitted in the district.



      (4)   The exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of
any proposed structure will not be so at variance with either the exterior
architectural appeal and functional plan of the structures already
constructed or in the course of construction in the immediate neighborhood or
the character of the applicable district, as to cause a substantial
depreciation in the property values within the neighborhood.



      (5)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, parking, or
necessary facilities have been or are being provided.



      (6)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide
ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the
public streets.



      (7)   The conditional use shall, in all other respects,
conform to all the applicable regulations of the district in which it is
located.



      (8)   Public access shall be provided in accordance with the
recommendations of the Town's land use plan and access plan or the present
amount of public access and public parking as exists within the Town now. If
any recommendations are found to conflict, the system requiring the greatest
quantity and quality of public access, including parking, shall govern.



      (9)   The proposed use shall be consistent with
recommendations and policy statements as described in the adopted land use
plan.



   (F)   Conditions and Guarantees. Prior to the granting of any
conditional use, the Planning Board may recommend, and the Board of Aldermen
may require, conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location,
construction, maintenance, and operation of the conditional use as is deemed
necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure compliance
with the standards and requirements specified above. In all cases in which
conditional uses are granted, the Board of Aldermen shall require evidence
and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions required
in connection therewith are being and will be complied with.



   155.4.5.5  Effect of Approval. If an application for a conditional use
permit is approved by the Board of Aldermen, the owner of the property shall
have the ability to develop the use in accordance with the stipulations
contained in the conditional use permit, or develop any other use listed as a
permitted use for the general zoning district in which it is located.



   155.4.5.6  Binding Effect. Any conditional use permit so authorized
shall be binding to the property included in the permit unless subsequently
changed or amended by the Board of Aldermen.



   155.4.5.7  Certificate of Occupancy. No certificate of occupancy for a
use listed as a conditional use shall be issued for any building or land use
on a piece of property which has received a conditional use permit for the
particular use unless the building is constructed or used, or the land is
developed or used, in conformity with the conditional use permit approved by
the Board of Aldermen. In the event that only a segment of a proposed
development has been approved, the certificate of occupancy shall be issued
only for that portion of the development constructed or used as approved.



   155.4.5.8  Change in Conditional Use Permit. An application to
materially change a conditional use permit once it has been issued must first
be submitted, reviewed, and approved in accordance with Sections 155.4.5.3
and 155.4.5.4, including payment of a fee in accordance with the fee schedule
approved by the Board of Aldermen.



   155.4.5.9  Implementation of Conditional Use Permit. A conditional use
permit, after approval by the Board of Aldermen shall expire six months after
the approval date if work has not commenced or in the case of a change of
occupancy the business has not opened; however, it may be, on request,
continued in effect for a period not to exceed six months by the UDO
Administrator. No further extension shall be added except on approval of the
Board of Aldermen. If such use or business is discontinued for a period of 12
months, the conditional use permit shall expire. Any expiration as noted or
any violation of the conditions stated on the permit shall be considered
unlawful and the applicant will be required to submit a new conditional use
application to the appropriate agencies for consideration and the previously
approved conditional use permit shall become null and void.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.4.6  Rehearings.



   When an application involving a quasi-judicial procedure/petition is
denied by the Board of Aldermen or Board of Adjustment, reapplication
involving the same property, or portions of the same property, may not be
submitted unless the petitioner can demonstrate a substantial change in the
proposed use, conditions governing the use of the property, or conditions
surrounding the property itself.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.4.7  Appeals of Quasi-Judicial Decisions.



   Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any
quasi-judicial decision of the Board of Aldermen or Board of Adjustment, any
taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the jurisdiction of
this Ordinance may, within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision
in the office of said Board, but not thereafter, present to a court of
competent jurisdiction a petition duly verified setting forth that such
decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the ground of
illegality, whereupon such decision of said Board shall be subject to review
by certiorari as provided by law.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



ARTICLE 155.5
SITE PLAN DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCESS



Section 155.5.1  Purpose and Applicability.



   The purpose of this Article is to establish an orderly process to
develop land within the Town of Wrightsville Beach. It is also the intent of
this Article to provide a clear and comprehensible development process that
is fair and equitable to all interests including the petitioners, affected
neighbors, town staff, related agencies, the Planning Board, the Board of
Aldermen, and the Board of Adjustment. Approved plans shall be the guiding
documents for final approval and permitting.



   The development review procedures outlined throughout this Article
apply to projects requiring a Minor Site Plan or Major Site Plan. Projects
requiring Subdivision Preliminary/Final Plat approval should follow the
requirements provided in Article 155.12.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.5.2  Site Plan Procedures.



   155.5.2.1  Engineering Drawing Review and Approval Procedures.



   (A)   Applicability and Process. Minor Site Plans and Major Site
Plans shall be submitted in accordance with this section except where
specifically noted. All site plans shall be engineered drawings prepared by a
civil engineer, registered land surveyor, or architect and drawn to a scale
of not less than one inch equals 30 feet. Upon determination by the UDO
Administrator or their designee that an application is complete, the
engineering drawings shall follow the approval process outlined in Section
155.5.4. Engineering drawings shall constitute the complete submittal
requirements for Minor Site Plans prior to the issuance of a Zoning Permit.



   (B)   Submittal Requirements. Engineering drawings shall be drawn to
the specifications in Section 155.5.3. The types of plans to be included in a
set of Engineering Drawings are as follows:



      •   Site Plan (Existing and Proposed)



      •   Existing Conditions



      •   Grading Plan



      •   Sedimentation and Erosion Control Plan



      •   Landscaping Plan



      •   Lighting Plan



      •   Street Details



      •   Infrastructure Details



   155.5.2.2  Minor Site Plans. Projects requiring minor site plan
approval:



      •   Single-family dwellings;



      •   Two-family (duplex) dwellings;



      •   Nonresidential development under 1,000 square feet of
aggregate building footprint area.



   Minor Site Plans follow the Administrative Approval process (see
Section155. 5.4). Minor Site Plans shall be submitted as part of a full set
of engineering drawings. For single-family and two-family (duplex) dwellings,
the floor area ratio shall be provided. Engineering drawing approval is
required prior to the issuance of a Zoning Permit.



   For Minor Site Plans, an as-built survey, a piling survey, and as-built
construction drawing(s) shall be submitted to the UDO Administrator by the
developer upon completion of the building foundation to ensure that setbacks
and building orientation match the approved site plan. If the survey shows
that the placement of the building is incorrect, then the UDO Administrator
shall issue a stop-work order and all construction shall be halted until the
problem is remedied.



   155.5.2.3  Major Site Plans. Projects requiring major site plan
approval:



   •   Mixed use commercial-residential development;



   •   Nonresidential developments greater than 1,000 square feet;



   •   Residential dwellings containing three or more units;



   •   Development parcels which include areas of environmental
concern as defined by 15A NCAC 7H.



   Major Site Plans follow the Planning Board/Board of Aldermen approval
process (see Section 155.5.5). The Major Site Plan shall be reviewed by the
UDO Administrator using the Technical Review Procedure for completeness,
compliance with this Ordinance, and soundness of design. The plan shall then
be reviewed by the Planning Board for preparation of a recommendation to the
Board of Aldermen and, subsequent approval by the Board of Aldermen. Major
Site Plan approval is required prior to the issuance of a Zoning Permit.



   For Major Sites Plans, an as-built survey, a piling survey, and
as-built construction drawing(s) shall be submitted to the UDO Administrator
by the developer upon completion of the building foundation to ensure that
setbacks and building orientation match the approved site plan. If the survey
shows that the placement of the building is incorrect, then the UDO
Administrator shall issue a stop-work order and all construction shall be
halted until the nonconformity is corrected or a variance is obtained as
provided in subsection 155.4.4.2.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.5.3  Site Plan Requirements.



   155.5.3.1  Information to be Shown on Site Plan.



   (A)   The site plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer,
registered land surveyor, or architect and shall be drawn to scale of not
less than one inch equals 30 feet. The site plan shall be based on the latest
tax map information and shall be of a size as required by each individual
site plan.



   (B)   The site plan shall contain the following information:



      (1)   A key map of the site with reference to surrounding
areas and existing street locations.



      (2)   The name and address of the owner and site plan
applicant, together with the names of the owners of all contiguous land and
of property directly across the street as shown by the most recent tax
records.



      (3)   Lot line dimensions.



      (4)   Location of all structures, streets, entrances, and
exits on the site and on contiguous property directly across the street.



      (5)   Location of all existing and proposed structures,
including their outside dimensions and elevations.



      (6)   Building setback, side line, and rear yard distances.



      (7)   Location of flood zones.



      (8)   All existing physical features, including water courses,
dunes, existing trees greater than one inch in diameter measured six feet
above ground level, and significant soil conditions.



      (9)   Topography showing existing and proposed contours at
two-foot intervals. All reference benchmarks shall be clearly designated.



      (10)   Parking, loading, and unloading areas shall be
indicated with dimensions, traffic patterns, access aisles, and curb radii
per the requirements of Article 155.9, Part I.



      (11)   Improvements such as roads, curbs, bumpers, and
sidewalks shall be indicated with cross-sections, design details, and
dimensions.



      (12)   Location and design of existing and proposed stormwater
systems, sanitary waste disposal systems, water mains and appurtenances, and
method of refuse disposal and storage.



      (13)   Landscaping and buffering plan showing what will remain
and what will be planted, indicating names of plants, trees, and dimensions,
approximate time of planting, and maintenance plans per the requirements of
Article 155.9, Part IV.



      (14)   Lighting plan indicating type of standards, location,
radius of light, and intensity in foot candles per the requirements of
Article 155.9, Part III.



      (15)   Location, dimensions, and details of signs per the
requirements of Article 155.10.



      (16)   North arrow.



      (17)   Public access shall be provided in accordance with the
recommendations of the town’s land use plan and access plan or the present
amount of public access and public parking as exists within the town now. If
any recommendations are found to conflict, the system requiring the greatest
quantity and quality of public access, including parking, shall govern.



      (18)   Location of all 404 wetland areas, areas of
environmental concern as defined by 15A NCAC 7H, and shoreline development
boundaries.



      (19)   A rendering or drawing of the proposed building shall
be provided which shows all sides of the structure.



   155.5.3.2  Performance Standards. In reviewing any site plan, the
Planning Board and the Board of Aldermen shall consider:



   (A)   Pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement within and adjacent
to the site with particular emphasis on the provision and layout of parking
areas, off-street loading and unloading, movement of people, goods, and
vehicles from access roads, within the site, between buildings, and between
buildings and vehicles. The Board shall ensure that all parking spaces comply
with Article 155.9, Part I. Access to the site from adjacent roads shall be
designed so as to interfere as little as possible with traffic flow on these
roads and to permit vehicles a rapid and safe ingress and egress to the site.



   (B)   The design and layout of buildings and parking areas shall be
reviewed so as to provide an aesthetically pleasing design and efficient
arrangement. Particular attention shall be given to safety and fire
protection, impact of surrounding development, and contiguous and adjacent
buildings and lands.



   (C)   Adequate lighting, based upon the standards set forth in
Article 155.9, Part III, shall be provided to ensure safe movement of persons
and vehicles and for security purposes. Lighting standards shall be a type
approved by the Planning Board.



   (D)   Buffering shall be located around the perimeter of the site to
minimize headlights of vehicles, noise, light from structures, the movement
of people and vehicles, and to shield activities from adjacent properties in
accordance with Article 155.9, Part IV.



   (E)   Landscaping shall be provided as part of the overall site
design and integrated into building arrangements, topography, parking, and
buffering requirements in accordance with Article 155.9, Part IV.



   (F)   Signs shall be designed so as to be aesthetically pleasing,
harmonious with other signs on the site, and located so as to achieve their
purpose without constituting hazards to vehicles and pedestrians (refer to
Article 155.10).



   (G)   Storm drainage, sanitary waste disposal, water supply, and
garbage disposal shall be reviewed and considered. Particular emphasis shall
be given to the adequacy of existing systems, and the need for improvements,
both on-site and off-site, to adequately carry runoff and sewage, and to
maintain an adequate supply of water at sufficient pressure.



   (H)   Environmental elements relating to soil erosion, preservation
of trees, protection of water courses, and resources, noise, topography,
soil, and animal life shall be reviewed, and the design of the plan shall
minimize any adverse impact on these elements. Particular reference shall be
made to areas of environmental concern as designated by the Coastal Area
Management Act and the Coastal Resources Commission.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.5.4  Administrative Approval.



   Administrative approval shall include:



   Minor Site Plans



   155.5.4.1  Administrative Approval Flowchart.







 



   NOTE: A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until an as-built
survey outlining all completed site improvements has been submitted to the
UDO Administrator.



   155.5.4.2  Application for Review. An applicant desiring to obtain
site plan approval shall file with the UDO Administrator two (2) copies of
the site plan, together with a completed application form and the required
fee as set forth in Section 155.2.9.



   155.5.4.3  Planning Staff and Technical Review Procedure. The UDO
Administrator or his/her designee will review the site plan and may require
the Technical Review Procedure as specified in Article 155.3, Part II. The
plan will be reviewed for compliance with this Ordinance and all related
plans and policies.



   155.5.4.4  Permit Issued or Final Plat Approved. If the plan,
engineering drawings, or final plat is found to meet all of the applicable
regulations of this Ordinance, then the UDO Administrator shall issue a
zoning permit for site plans.



   155.5.4.5  Zoning Inspections and Certificates of Occupancy. Prior to
the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the Building Inspections
department, the UDO Administrator or his designee shall conduct a final
zoning inspection to ensure that the approved plan has been followed and all
required improvements have been installed to town standards. Prior to the
final zoning inspection, an as-built survey must be submitted to the UDO
Administrator. The as-built survey shall be drafted and scaled by a surveyor
registered in the State of North Carolina and should show the location of all
site improvements.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.5.5  Planning Board Review and Board of Aldermen Approval.



   Planning Board review and Board of Aldermen approval applies to the
following:



   Major Site Plans



   155.5.5.1  Planning Board Review and Board of Aldermen Approval
Flowchart.







 



   NOTE: For conditional use permit public hearings, Planning Board
recommendations shall be submitted as evidence at the public hearing as
specified in subsection 155.4.5.3.



   155.5.5.2  Application for Review. An applicant desiring to obtain
site plan approval shall file with the UDO Administrator 18 copies of the
site plan, together with a completed application form and the required fee as
set forth in Section 155.2.9. The materials as required herein shall be filed
not less than 30 days prior to the regular Planning Board meeting at which
the application will be considered.



   155.5.5.3  Planning Staff and Technical Review Procedure.



   (A)   The UDO Administrator or his/her designee will review the site
plan and may require the Technical Review Procedure as specified in Article
155.3, Part II. The plan will be reviewed for compliance with this Ordinance
and all related plans and policies.



   (B)   The UDO Administrator shall submit all recommendations and
comments resulting from the Technical Review Procedure at least five days
prior to the Planning Board meeting at which the site plan is to be
considered. Failure to submit a written recommendation and comment shall be
deemed as a favorable review of the site plan.



   155.5.5.4  Review and Recommendation by the Planning Board.



   (A)   At the next regular meeting of the Planning Board following
receipt of the materials specified in subsection 155.5.5.2, the Planning
Board shall review and provide a recommendation on the site plan.



   (B)   The Planning Board shall have up to 45 days from the date of
referral by the UDO Administrator to recommend approval, approval with
conditions, or denial of the request to the Board of Aldermen.



   155.5.5.5  Consideration by the Board of Aldermen.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a recommendation from the Planning Board, the
Board of Aldermen shall consider the application. For conditional use permits
and vested rights requests, quasi-judicial evidentiary public hearings shall
be held. Notice of public hearings shall be given as specified in subsection
155.4.4.6.



   (B)   Following public hearing (where appropriate), the Board of
Aldermen shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request.
Alternatively, the Board of Aldermen may suspend the review period and
request additional information of the applicant, other governmental agencies,
or interested/affected parties in order to aid in the review of the request
or deferral of its consideration.



   (C)   Following denial by the Board of Aldermen, the applicant may
file a new application and associated fee. Unless the Board of Aldermen
explicitly states conditions that must be met prior to the resubmission of an
application, the applicant shall not submit a new application for the same
property within one (1) year of the date of denial by the Board of Aldermen
unless the application is significantly different from the previously denied
application. All applications shall be resubmitted for full review unless the
application is resubmitted to address conditions set forth by the Board of
Aldermen for reapplication.



   155.5.5.6  Permit Issued. If the plan is found to meet all of the
applicable regulations of this Ordinance, then the Board of Aldermen shall
approve issuance of a zoning permit for the project.



   155.5.5.7  Zoning Inspections and Certificates of Occupancy. Prior to
the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the UDO Administrator, the UDO
Administrator or his designee shall conduct a final zoning inspection to
ensure that the approved plan has been followed and all required improvements
have been installed to town standards.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



ARTICLE 155.6
ZONING DISTRICTS



Section 155.6.1  Purpose Statement.



   In accordance with the requirement of NCGS 160A-382 that zoning
regulation be by districts, the Town, as shown on the Zoning Map, is hereby
divided into the following districts which shall be governed by all of the
uniform use and dimensional requirements of this Ordinance.



   The purposes of establishing the following zoning districts are:



   •   To implement adopted plans;



   •   To promote public health, safety, and general welfare;



   •   To provide for orderly growth and development;



   •   To provide for the efficient use of resources;



   •   To facilitate the adequate provision of services;



   •   To protect property values and property rights.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.6.2  Interpretation.



   Zoning districts have uses specified as permitted by right, uses
permitted with supplemental regulations, and conditional uses. Detailed use
tables are provided in Section 155.6.4 showing the uses allowed in each
district. The following describes the processes of each of the categories
that the uses are subject to:



   •   Permitted by Right: Administrative review and approval subject
to district provisions and other applicable requirements only.



   •   Permitted with Supplemental Regulations: Administrative review
and approval subject to district provisions, other applicable requirements,
and supplemental regulations outlined in Article 155.7.



   •   Conditional Uses: Planning Board review and recommendation,
Board of Aldermen review and approval of Conditional Use Permit subject to
district provisions, other applicable requirements, and conditions of
approval. Some Conditional Uses may also be subject to supplemental
regulations outlined in Article 155.7.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.6.3  Primary Zoning Districts.



   For the purposes of this Ordinance, the Town of Wrightsville Beach,
North Carolina is hereby divided into the following primary zoning districts:



   (A)   R-1 Residential District. The R-1 district is established as a
district in which the principal use of the land is for single-family
residences. The regulations of this district are intended to protect existing
residential areas with minimum lot sizes of 8,000 square feet and to
encourage, in selected portions of the planning area, the subdivision of
undeveloped property into lots with a minimum of 8,000 square feet.



   (B)   R-2 Residential District. The R-2 district is established as a
district in which the principal use of land is for medium-density residential
uses. The regulations of this district are intended to protect existing
residential areas with a minimum lot size of 8,000 square feet for the first
single-family residential dwelling or duplex and an additional minimum lot
area of 4,356 square feet per residential dwelling in excess of two. The
minimum required lot area for a duplex on a nonconforming lot in the R-2
District shall be 4,000 square feet.



   (C)   Private Club District. The PC district is established to
accommodate private clubs.



   (D)   Commercial District I. The C-1 district is established to
embrace the existing and growing commercial, tourist, and short-term
residential uses. Maximum density for hotels and motels shall be 48 units per
acre.



   (E)   Commercial District II. The C-2 district is established to
embrace the existing and growing commercial, tourist, and short-term
residential uses. Maximum density for hotels and motels shall be 48 units per
acre.



   (F)   Commercial District III. The C-3 district is established to
permit those specialized uses which will fulfill the special needs of daily
commuters and periodic short-term visitors. Maximum density for hotels and
motels shall be 48 units per acre.



   (G)   Commercial District IV. The C-4 district is established to
accommodate a growing volume of short-term hotel-motel visitors. Maximum
density for hotels and motels shall be 48 units per acre.



   (H)   Commercial District V. The C-5 district is established to
permit light to medium neighborhood commercial use. Maximum density for
hotels and motels shall be 36 units per acre.



   (I)   Public and Semipublic District. The G-1 district includes
property owned by a local, state, or federal agency.



   (J)   Shore Zone. The S-1 district contains built up land
constructed by the state, the federal government, and the town. No lot or
parcel of land shall be used for any purpose whatsoever except in accordance
with subsection 6.5.11.



   (K)   Conservation Zone. The P-1 district is established as a
district in which no lot or parcel of land may be developed for any purpose
except commercial piers (where the P-1 zone adjoins a zone permitting a
marina), private piers (where the P-1 zone adjoins a residential district),
and ocean-related business activities as permitted in Chapter 92 of the Code
of Ordinances.



   For a detailed table of specified permitted/conditional uses in the
above listed zoning districts, see Section 6.4.



Section 155.6.4  Table of Permitted/Conditional Uses.



 

P - Permitted Use
 
PS - Permitted Use with Supplemental Regulations


C - Conditional Use
 
CS - Conditional Use with Supplemental Regulations



 



 

Uses
 
Primary Zoning Districts
 
Supplemental Regulations


R1
 
R2
 
C1
 
C2
 
C3
 
C4
 
C5
 
G1
 
PC
 
P1
 
S1 *





ABC package and retail

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Accessory buildings

 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.2



Accessory structures

 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.2



Accessory uses

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 



Accounting agencies

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Activities operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation, social, athletic,
educational, research or research-related purposes by a private business
entity

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.3



Adult care home

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.4



Antique and gift shop

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Art supply and retail

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Assembly halls, gymansiums and other similar structures

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Assisted living residence

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Attorney’s offices

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Automatic teller machines

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Automobile parking operated in conjunction with permitted uses

 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Auto service station

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CS
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.6



Bakery

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Barber and beauty shop

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Boat rental facility renting four or fewer boats

 



 



 



 



 
P
 



 



 



 



 



 



 






Boat rental facility renting more than four boats

 



 



 



 



 
C
 



 



 



 



 



 



 






Boat sales/service

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Book and stationery store

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Car wash

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.7



Child care center

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.8



Chiropractic office

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Church parking lots used as commercial parking lots

 
P
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155.9.2.1



Churches

 
C
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
C
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Clothing store

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Coffee shop, no food prepared on site

 
 
 
 
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
 
 
PS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.20



Coffee shop, with outside seating

 
 
 
 
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Commercial marina

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.6



Commercial parking lot not associated with another use

 
 
 
 
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Commercial piers as permitted in Section 6.5.10

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 



Computer sales and repair

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Convenience stores

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Dairy bar/ice cream manufactured for retail sale on the premises

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Department/
variety store

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Detached garages

 
CS
 
CS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.9



Docks and piers owned and operated by a local, state, or federal government
agency

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 



Drug store

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Dry cleaning pick up stations

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Dry cleaning pick up in shopping center

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Dry dock/boat works/marine railways

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Exercise and physical fitness centers

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Family care home

 
PS
 
PS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.4



Family child care home

 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Fences and walls

 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.10



Finance/loan company

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Financial institutions/banks

 
 
 
 
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
 
 
PS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Floating homes

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.6, 155.7.12



Florist, retail

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Food store, retail; grocery, delicatessen, meat and fish, but excluding the
killing and dressing of flesh or fowl

 
 
 
 
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Food store, specialty in shopping center

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Furniture store

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Government buildings

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Grocery

 
 
 
 
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Health club

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Home appliance dealers

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Home occupation

 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Hotel/motel

 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Ice cream sales, not mobile

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Insurance office

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Jewelry and watch sales

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Launderette service, where individual family-sized laundry equipment is
rented for use by the customer

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Launderette service in shopping center

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Laundry pick up

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Libraries, museums, and art galleries

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Light construction/
marina

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.6



Marina/
boatominium

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Massage and bodywork therapy

 
 
 
 
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Meeting and events center

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Meeting rooms

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Mixed use commercial- residential

 
 
 
 
 
CS
 
CS
 
CS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.6



Multi-unit assisted housing with services

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.4



Nursing home

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.14



Ocean-related business activities

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PS
 
 
 
155.7.15



Office, house, barracks, storage shed, pier, boat house or ramp, garage, or
any and all other types of buildings or houses or usages which shall be
needed or necessary in the performance or discharge of the governmental
activity for which the area is used

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Offices, professional businesses or public agencies

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



On-street and off-street parking facilities owned or managed by the town

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 



Open air market

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
C
 
 
 
C
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Opticians

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Police, fire, rescue, civil defense station

 
C
 
C
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Private club

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CS
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.16



Public buildings to include space leased in public buildings to private
entities for use as offices or professional businesses

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Public utility distribution lines, transformer stations, water tanks and
towers, telephone exchange, but no service or storage yards

 
C
 
C
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
C
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Real estate offices

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Residence, single-family

 
PS
 
PS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.17



Residence, duplex

 
 
 
PS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.17



Residence, multi-family

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.6



Residential child-care facility

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.4



Restaurant, carry-out

 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Restaurant, fast-food

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Restaurant, standard

 
 
 
 
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Retail stores similar to those otherwise named on the list

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



School, public

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Schools, limited public classroom leases **

 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Seafood process, wholesale

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.6



Shopping center

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CS
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.6



Sporting goods

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Taxicab stands

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Telecommunication towers

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CS
 
CS
 
CS
 
CS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.18



Temporary storage containers

 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
PS
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.19



Theaters housed in a permanent indoor structure

 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Therapeutic foster home

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155.7.4



Tourist or guest homes, including bed and breakfast

 
 
 
 
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Town owned or controlled grounds, recreation facilities and other facilities
for open air activities

 
C
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Travel agencies

 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Vessel for hire carrying six or fewer passengers

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Vessel for hire carrying seven or more passengers

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Veterinarian clinics, no outside kennels or animal use areas

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


* Refer to Section 155.6.5.11

**   Automatically terminates at midnight, June 30, 2015 without
additional action by the Board or Aldermen.




 



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1705, passed 4-11-13; Am. Ord. 1725,
passed 3-19-14; Am. Ord. 1739, passed 3-12-15; Am. Ord. 1742, passed 4-8-15;
Am. Ord. 1758, passed 4-14-16; Am. Ord. 1759, passed 5-12-16; Am. Ord. 1765,
passed 2-9-17; Am. Ord. 1767, passed 6-8-17)



Section 155.6.5  Zoning District Development Standards.



   155.6.5.1  R-1 Residential District.







 



A   Minimum Lot Area   Residential =      Non- residential =



            8,000 Square Feet   24,000 Square Feet



B   Minimum Lot Width   Residential =       Non-residential =



            70 Feet      200 Feet



C   Minimum Lot Depth   None



D   Minimum Front Yard Setback   15 Feet



E   Side Yard Minimum Setback      15 Feet



F   Rear Yard Minimum Setback   15 Feet



   G   Principal Building Height



   •   No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. Church spires,
antennas, chimneys, and similar accessories to buildings are exempt from this
limitation.



   H   Accessory Building



   •   Must be 15 feet from any lot line;



   •   Must be located behind the rear building line; and



   •   Shall not exceed 10 feet by 10 feet by 12.5 feet in height,
except detached garages which shall not exceed 10 feet by 20 feet by 14 feet
in height.



I   One- and Two-Family residential dwellings with wood roof shingles
shall have a minimum of 30 feet of separation between buildings.



 



The following list provides the location of additional standards which apply
to the development of uses permitted within this district:


Table of Uses
 
Section 155.6.4


Off-Street Parking& Off-Street Loading
 
Article 155.9, Part I


Outdoor Lighting
 
Article 155.9, Part II


Landscaping, Buffering, & Screening
 
Article 155.9, Part III


Sign Regulations
 
Article 155.10


Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
 
Article 155.11, Part I


Sedimentation and Soil Erosion Control
 
Article 155.12, Part II


Fences and Walls Requirements
 
Section 155.7.10


Visibility on Corner Lots
 
Section 155.2.5 and Section 155.7.10


Definitions
 
Exhibit A


Open Space Requirements
 
Section 155.2.10


Floor Area Ratio
 
Section 155.7.17


Nonconforming Situations
 
Article 155.8




 



   155.6.5.2  R-2 Residential District.







 



A   Minimum Lot Area   One Residential Dwelling or Duplex =



            8,000 Square Feet



            Duplex Dwelling on Nonconforming Lot =



            4,000 Square Feet



            Minimum required additional lot area per residential
unit in excess of two =



            4,356 Square Feet



B   Minimum Lot Width   Permitted Use =    Conditional Use =



            70 Feet      100 Feet



C   Minimum Lot Depth   None



D   Minimum Front Yard Setback   15 Feet



E   Side Yard Minimum Setback      15 Feet, which shall increase 
15 feet for each additional 50 feet of property frontage.



   Note: For conditional uses only, where residential units have rear
exits into side yards, the yard shall increase 2 feet in width for each unit
having such exit.



F   Rear Yard Minimum Setback   15 Feet



G   Principal Building Height



   •   No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. Church spires,
antennas, chimneys, and similar accessories to buildings are exempt from this
limitation.



H   Accessory Building



   •   Must be 15 feet from any lot line;



   •   Must be located behind the rear building line; and



   •   Shall not exceed 10 feet by 10 feet by 12.5 feet in height,
except detached garages which shall not exceed 10 feet by 20 feet by 14 feet
in height.



I   Residential dwellings with wood roof shingles shall have a minimum of
30 feet of separation between buildings.



 



The following list provides the location of additional standards which apply
to the development of uses permitted within this district:


Table of Uses
 
Section 155.6.4


Off-Street Parking& Off-Street Loading
 
Article 155.9, Part I


Outdoor Lighting
 
Article 155.9, Part II


Landscaping, Buffering, & Screening
 
Article 155.9, Part III


Sign Regulations
 
Article 155.10


Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
 
Article 155.11, Part I


Sedimentation and Soil Erosion Control
 
Article 155.12, Part II


Fences and Walls Requirements
 
Section 155.7.10


Visibility on Corner Lots
 
Section 155.2.5 and Section 155.7.10


Definitions
 
Exhibit A


Open Space Requirements
 
Section 155.2.10


Floor Area Ratio
 
Section 155.7.17


Nonconforming Situations
 
Article 155.8




 



   155.6.5.3  C-1 Commercial District I.







 



A   Minimum Lot Area   Permitted Use = None



            Conditional Use = 10,000 Square Feet



B   Maximum Density   •   48 units per acre for hotels and motels



            •   20 units per acre for apartments or
residential buildings



C   Minimum Lot Width   Permitted Use = None



            Conditional Use = 100 Feet



D   Minimum Lot Depth   Permitted Use = None



            Conditional Use = 100 Feet



E   Minimum Front Yard Setback   None



F   Side Yard Minimum Setback      None



   However, when a side yard is provided, it shall be at least 7.5 feet in
width, except where the side yard borders on a public thoroughfare.



G   Rear Yard Minimum Setback   None



H   Principal Building Height



   No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. Church spires, antennas,
chimneys, and similar accessories to buildings are exempt from this
limitation.



I   Lot Dimension Exception for Mixed-Use Commercial Residential
Development



   The minimum lot width and depth requirements for conditional uses in
the C-1 District shall not apply to Mixed-Use Commercial Residential projects
approved by the Board of Aldermen pursuant to Section 155.7.6.



 



The following list provides the location of additional standards which apply
to the development of uses permitted within this district:


Table of Uses
 
Section 155.6.4


Off-Street Parking& Off-Street Loading
 
Article 155.9, Part I


Outdoor Lighting
 
Article 155.9, Part II


Landscaping, Buffering, & Screening
 
Article 155.9, Part III


Sign Regulations
 
Article 155.10


Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
 
Article 155.11, Part I


Sedimentation and Soil Erosion Control
 
Article 155.12, Part II


Fences and Walls Requirements
 
Section 155.7.10


Visibility on Corner Lots
 
Section 155.2.5 and Section 155.7.10


Definitions
 
Exhibit A


Open Space Requirements
 
Section 155.2.10




 



   155.6.5.4  C-2 Commercial District II.







 



A   Minimum Lot Area   Permitted Use = None



            Conditional Use = 10,000 Square Feet



B   Maximum Density   •   48 units per acre for hotels and motels



            •   20 units per acre for apartments or
residential buildings



C   Minimum Lot Width   50 Feet



D   Minimum Lot Depth   None



E   Front Yard Minimum Setback   15 Feet



   7.5 Feet of which shall be developed for sidewalks, grass, plants, and
the necessary entrances and exits to driveways.



F   Side Yard Minimum Setback      7.5 Feet



G   Rear Yard Minimum Setback   7.5 Feet



Note: No portion of any building shall be closer than 15 feet to the right of
way or street.



H   Principal Building Height



   No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. Church spires, antennas,
chimneys, and similar accessories to buildings are exempt from this
limitation.



   Frame Structures



   A frame structure may be erected in a number two fire district if there
is a minimum setback of 15 feet on the side, rear, and front yards, and a
two-hour fire wall is provided for walls that face the wall of another
structure or adjoin a lot where another structure may be built. If a property
owner provides a 30 Foot setback from all property lines so that no structure
may ever be erected within 30 Feet of the proposed or existing structure,
then the two-hour fire wall may not be required.



Note: A parking lot, as a conditional use, shall not be subject these
dimension standards.



 



The following list provides the location of additional standards which apply
to the development of uses permitted within this district:


Table of Uses
 
Section 155.6.4


Off-Street Parking& Off-Street Loading
 
Article 155.9, Part I


Outdoor Lighting
 
Article 155.9, Part II


Landscaping, Buffering, & Screening
 
Article 155.9, Part III


Sign Regulations
 
Article 155.10


Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
 
Article 155.11, Part I


Sedimentation and Soil Erosion Control
 
Article 155.12, Part II


Fences and Walls Requirements
 
Section 155.7.10


Visibility on Corner Lots
 
Section 155.2.5 and Section 155.7.10


Definitions
 
Exhibit A


Open Space Requirements
 
Section 155.2.10




 



   155.6.5.5  C-3 Commercial District III.







 



A   Minimum Lot Area   Permitted Use = None



            Conditional Use = 10,000 Square Feet



B   Maximum Density   •   48 units per acre for hotels and motels



            •   20 units per acre for apartments or
residential buildings



C   Minimum Lot Width   Permitted Use = 50 Feet



            Conditional Use = 100 Feet



D   Minimum Lot Depth   None



E   Front Yard Minimum Setback   Permitted Use = 15 Feet



                  Conditional Use = 15 Feet



   7.5 Feet of which shall be developed for sidewalks, grass, plants, and
the necessary entrances and exits to driveways.



F   Side Yard Minimum Setback       Permitted Use = 7.5 Feet



                  Conditional Use = 20 Feet



G   Rear Yard Minimum Setback   Permitted Use = 7.5 Feet



                  Conditional Use = 20 Feet



Note: No portion of any building shall be closer than 15 feet to the right of
way or street.



H   Principal Building Height No building shall exceed 40 feet in height.
Church spires, antennas, chimneys, and similar accessories to buildings are
exempt from this limitation.



I   Frame Structures   A frame structure may be erected in a number two
fire district if there is a minimum setback of 15 feet on the side, rear, and
front yards, and a two-hour fire wall is provided for walls that face the
wall of another structure or adjoin a lot where another structure may be
built. If a property owner provides a 30 Foot setback from all property lines
so that no structure may ever be erected within 30 Feet of the proposed or
existing structure, then the two-hour fire wall may not be required.



Note: See Section 155.7.6, Mixed Use Commercial Residential



 



The following list provides the location of additional standards which apply
to the development of uses permitted within this district:


Table of Uses
 
Section 155.6.4


Off-Street Parking& Off-Street Loading
 
Article 155.9, Part I


Outdoor Lighting
 
Article 155.9, Part II


Landscaping, Buffering, & Screening
 
Article 155.9, Part III


Sign Regulations
 
Article 155.10


Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
 
Article 155.11, Part I


Sedimentation and Soil Erosion Control
 
Article 155.12, Part II


Fences and Walls Requirements
 
Section 155.7.10


Visibility on Corner Lots
 
Section 155.2.5 and Section 155.7.10


Definitions
 
Exhibit A


Open Space Requirements
 
Section 155.2.10




 



   155.6.5.6  C-4 Commercial District IV.







 



A   Minimum Lot Area   Permitted Use = None



            Conditional Use = 10,000 Square Feet



B   Maximum Density   •   48 units per acre for hotels and motels



            •   30 units per acre for apartments or
residential buildings



C   Minimum Lot Width   100 Feet, however, a parking lot permitted as a
conditional use under this section is not subject to this requirement.



D   Minimum Lot Depth   Permitted Use = None



            Conditional Use = 100 Feet



E   Front Yard Minimum Setback   30 Feet



   which shall be developed for sidewalks, grass, plants, and the
necessary entrances and exits to driveways.



   •   Off-street parking shall be permitted in the front yard area
provided that 10 Feet of the yard area be developed and used as a buffer
adjacent to the existing or proposed street.



F   Side Yard Minimum Setback      20 Feet



G   Rear Yard Minimum Setback   20 Feet



   H   Principal Building Height



   No building shall exceed 96 feet in height. Church spires, antennas,
chimneys, and similar accessories to buildings are exempt from this
limitation.



Note: No portion of any building shall be closer than 30 Feet to the
right-of-way or street.



Note: A parking lot, as a conditional use, shall not be subject to these
dimension standards.



 



The following list provides the location of additional standards which apply
to the development of uses permitted within this district:


Table of Uses
 
Section 155.6.4


Off-Street Parking& Off-Street Loading
 
Article 155.9, Part I


Outdoor Lighting
 
Article 155.9, Part II


Landscaping, Buffering, & Screening
 
Article 155.9, Part III


Sign Regulations
 
Article 155.10


Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
 
Article 155.11, Part I


Sedimentation and Soil Erosion Control
 
Article 155.12, Part II


Fences and Walls Requirements
 
Section 155.7.10


Visibility on Corner Lots
 
Section 155.2.5 and Section 155.7.10


Definitions
 
Exhibit A


Open Space Requirements
 
Section 155.2.10




 



   155.6.5.7  C-5 Commercial District V.







 



A   Maximum Density         36 units per acre for hotels and
motels



B   Minimum Lot Area         10,000 Square Feet; A church shall
have a minimum lot area of 24,000 Square Feet



C   Minimum Lot Width         100 Feet



D   Minimum Lot Depth         None



E   Front Yard Minimum Setback   30 Feet which shall be landscaped
using shrubs, grass, ground cover, and trees.



   •   A minimum of one tree for each 30 Linear Feet of property
frontage along the street right-of-way shall be required. Required trees
shall be broad leaf evergreens planted and maintained such that at 15-year
maturity, a continuous shade producing tree shall result that will have a
foliage diameter of at least 24 Feet.



   •   Landscaping shall not obstruct vehicular sight lines at points
of exit from or entrance to streets.



   •   The property owner shall be responsible for continuous
maintenance of the landscaped area.



   •   Driveways to provide entrances and exits to the property may
be included in the 30 Foot front yard setback.



   •   No commercial driveway shall go through a residential zone to
obtain access to any street.



   •   Off-street parking may be provided within the 30 Foot front
yard setback, however, in all cases, 10 Feet of the setback immediately
adjacent to the right-of-way shall be developed as a landscaped area in
accordance with the requirements of Section 9.17.



   •   A sidewalk, a minimum of 5 Feet wide by 6 Inches thick of
reinforced concrete shall be constructed within the right-of-way immediately
adjacent to the front property line. Such sidewalk shall extend across the
entire property frontage that adjoins such right-of-way.



F   Side Yard Minimum Setback      10 Feet; except where the
property adjoins a residential district in which case the side yard setback
shall be 20 Feet.



G   Rear Yard Minimum Setback   20 Feet



H   Principal Building Height



   No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. Church spires, antennas,
chimneys, and similar accessories to buildings are exempt from this
limitation provided that building height shall be defined below:



   •   The vertical distance measured from a point in the center line
of the street (whether public or private) adjoining the front of the lot on
which a structure is to be built or improved that is an equal distance from
the side lines extended to the center line of the adjoining street to the
highest point of the coping of a flat roof, to the ridge line of a mansard
roof, to the ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof, or to the highest point
of a roof deck or hand rail. Elevator penthouses and necessary mechanical
service equipment are exempt from this height limitation provided they are
properly screened. Also exempt are chimneys, solar panels, and church
steeples, For corner lots adjoining two streets or for those lots that do not
adjoin a street, the adjoining street for the purposes of this definition
shall be the street which is the address of the lot. Features which increase
the heigh of the street at its center above its average grade, such as speed
bumps, shall be omitted in determining building height.



      •   In lieu of the definition set forth in Exhibit A, when
the following conditions are satisfied:



         •   The property owner or his agent requests that said
definition be utilized as a conditional use through an application submitted
in accordance with Section 155.4.5;



         •   The Board of Aldermen shall find that the
standards set forth in subsection 155.4.5.4 are met; and



         •   The Board of Aldermen shall find, in addition to
those matters set forth in subsection 155.4.5.4, that



            •    The conditional use, if permitted, will
result in the retention of the natural terrain of the subject property;



            •   The conditional use, if permitted, will
reduce the impact on the natural environment of the subject property and
surrounding properties.



      •   In making its decision the Board of Aldermen shall
comply in all respects with the provisions of this section and Section
155.4.5.



I   Frame Structures



   A frame structure may be erected in a number two fire district if there
is a minimum setback of 15 feet on the side, rear, and front yards, and a
two-hour fire wall is provided for walls that face the wall of another
structure or adjoin a lot where another structure may be built, If a property
owner provides a 30 Foot setback from all property lines so that no structure
may ever be erected within 30 Feet of the proposed or existing structure,
then the two-hour fire wall may not be required.



 



The following list provides the location of additional standards which apply
to the development of uses permitted within this district:


Table of Uses
 
Section 155.6.4


Off-Street Parking& Off- Street Loading
 
Article 155.9, Part I


Outdoor Lighting
 
Article 155.9, Part II


Landscaping, Buffering, & Screening
 
Article 155.9, Part III


Sign Regulations
 
Article 155.10


Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
 
Article 155.11, Part I


Sedimentation and Soil Erosion Control
 
Article 155.12, Part II


Fences and Walls Requirements
 
Section 155.7.10


Visibility on Corner Lots
 
Section 155.2.5 and Section 155.7.10


Definitions
 
Exhibit A


Open Space Requirements
 
Section 155.2.10




 



   155.6.5.8  G-1 Public and Semipublic District.







 



A   Minimum Lot Area   5,000 Square Feet



B   Minimum Lot Width   50 Feet



C   Minimum Lot Depth   None



D   Front Yard Minimum Setback*   7.5 Feet



                  (15 Feet for Frame Buildings)



E   Side Yard Minimum Setback*      7.5 Feet



                  (15 Feet for Frame Buildings)



F   Rear Yard Minimum Setback*   7.5 Feet



                  (15 Feet for Frame Buildings)



   *   Minimum front, side, and rear setbacks for a church shall be 15
Feet.



G   Principal Building Height



   •   No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. Church spires,
antennas, chimneys, and similar accessories to buildings are exempt from this
limitation.



H   Accessory Building



   May be located in the required rear yard setback provided:



   •   The building shall be 15 feet from the principal building



   •   Must be not less than 5 feet from any lot line; and



   •   Must not occupy more than 10% of the required rear yard.



 



The following list provides the location of additional standards which apply
to the development of uses permitted within this district:


Table of Uses
 
Section 155.6.4


Off-Street Parking& Off-Street Loading
 
Article 155.9, Part I


Outdoor Lighting
 
Article 155.9, Part II


Landscaping, Buffering, & Screening
 
Article 155.9, Part III


Sign Regulations
 
Article 155.10


Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
 
Article 155.11, Part I


Sedimentation and Soil Erosion Control
 
Article 155.12, Part II


Fences and Walls Requirements
 
Section 155.7.10


Visibility on Corner Lots
 
Section 155.2.5 and Section 155.7.10


Definitions
 
Exhibit A


Open Space Requirements
 
Section 155.2.10


Floor Area Ratio
 
Section 155.7.17


Nonconforming Situations
 
Article 155.8




 



   155.6.5.9  PC Private Club District.







 



A   Minimum Lot Area         24,000 Square Feet



B   Minimum Lot Width         150 Feet



C   Front Yard Minimum Setback   15 Feet



   which shall be developed for sidewalks, grass, plants, and necessary
entrances, exits, and driveways.



D   Side Yard Minimum Setback      7.5 Feet



E   Rear Yard Minimum Setback   7.5 Feet



   No portion of any building shall be closer to the street or highway
than 15 feet.



F   Principal Building Height



   •   No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. Church spires,
antennas, chimneys, and similar accessories to buildings are exempt from this
limitation.



G   Accessory Building



   May be placed on a lot provided that the building shall be 7.5 feet
from the principal building and located behind the rear building line.



H   Frame Structures



   A frame structure may be erected in a number two fire district if there
is a minimum setback of 15 feet on the side, rear, and front yards, and a
two-hour fire wall is provided for walls that face the wall of another
structure or adjoin a lot where another structure may be built. If a property
owner provides a setback of 30 feet from all property lines so that no
structure may ever be erected within 30 feet of the proposed or existing
structure, then the two-hour fire wall may not be required.



 



The following list provides the location of additional standards which apply
to the development of uses permitted within this district:


Table of Uses
 
Section 155.6.4


Off-Street Parking& Off-Street Loading
 
Article 155.9, Part I


Outdoor Lighting
 
Article 155.9, Part II


Landscaping, Buffering, & Screening
 
Article 155.9, Part III


Sign Regulations
 
Article 155.10


Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
 
Article 155.11, Part I


Sedimentation and Soil Erosion Control
 
Article 155.12, Part II


Fences and Walls Requirements
 
Section 155.7.10


Visibility on Corner Lots
 
Section 155.2.5 and Section 155.7.10


Definitions
 
Exhibit A


Open Space Requirements
 
Section 155.2.10


Floor Area Ratio
 
Section 155.7.17


Nonconforming Situations
 
Article 155.8




 



   155.6.5.10 P-1  Conservation Zone.



   (A)   Within the conservation zone, designated as P-1 on the
official zoning map, no lot or parcel of land may be developed for any
purpose except commercial piers (where the P-1 Zone adjoins a zone permitting
a marina), private piers (where the P-1 Zone adjoins a residential zone),
town owned docks and piers, on-street and off-street town owned or managed
parking facilities and their support structures, town owned and operated
recreational facilities, facilities designed to mitigate the impacts of
stormwater run-off, and ocean-related business activities as permitted in
Chapter 92 of this code. There shall be no clearing, disturbance, removal,
burning, destruction, harming, cutting, or mowing of trees, shrubs, or other
natural vegetation in the P-1 Zone, except for (1) maintenance on public or
private property that is determined by the town to be necessary for public
health, safety, or general welfare; (2) as deemed necessary by the town in
conjunction with the construction or maintenance of town owned or operated
facilities; (3) clearing as is necessary to remove damage caused by
hurricane, flood, storm, fire, insects, or infectious organisms; or (4)
clearing in conjunction with development of a pier permitted by this section.



   (B)   The UDO Administrator or his or her designee will determine
when maintenance is necessary for the public health, safety, and general
welfare. Any property owner dissatisfied with the decision of the UDO
Administrator or his or her designee may appeal such decision to the Town
Manager by delivering written notice of appeal to the Town Manager within ten
days of the decision of the UDO Administrator or his or her designee. The
decision of the Town Manager in this manner is final.



   155.6.5.11 S-1  Shore Zone. Within the shore zone, as indicated on the
zoning map, which in the main is built up land constructed by the state, the
federal government, and the town, no lot or parcel of land shall be used for
any purpose whatsoever except in accordance with the following:



   (A)   No structure shall be built or no land or parcel of land in
this zone shall be used for any purpose whatsoever unless application has
been made to and permission granted by the town in accordance with the terms,
conditions, and specifications as the Board of Aldermen may prescribe.



   (B)   Permission shall not be granted by the Board of Aldermen for
the use of any land or parcel of land for the construction of any type
building or structure except piers, municipally owned or operated parks,
recreation areas, or other municipal uses; except that those commercial
enterprises which were in existence on the original passage of this
Ordinance, and which have been used continuously as commercial enterprises
since that time may continue the same commercial use. There shall be no
change to any other commercial use, nor any expansion of any commercial use
existing at that time.



   (C)   Gazebos (shelters which are open on all sides) shall be
permitted subject to plan approval by the Board of Aldermen where land
ownership is established.



   (D)   Fences shall be limited to three feet in height. No fence
shall extend beyond the established bulkhead line or mean high water mark.
Fence height shall be measured from grade at any given point along the span
of the fence.



   (E)   No vehicular parking is permitted on any lot or parcel of land
in this zone, provided, that this restriction shall not apply to property
owned by the town, the state, the United states government or any agency of
such entities.



   (F)   No increase in impervious surface is permitted within the
Shore Zone. For purposes of this section, impervious surface shall include,
but not be limited to, areas covered by concrete, asphalt, crushed stone or
gravel.



   (G)   All development within the Shore Zone must be in compliance
with both state and federal regulations.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1722, passed 2-18-14; Am. Ord. 1740,
passed 3-12-15; Am. Ord. 1765, passed 2-9-17)



ARTICLE 155.7
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS



Section 155.7.1  Introduction.



   The following supplemental regulations shall pertain to the various
uses listed in the Table of Uses located in Article 155.6. If not otherwise
listed, these regulations shall be applicable in all districts in which the
individual uses are allowed.



   For any use which requires the issuance of a conditional use permit,
the supplemental use regulations listed herein may be in addition to any
other reasonable and appropriate conditions placed on the use by the Board of
Aldermen. The conditions may impose greater restrictions on a particular use
than those which are listed herein.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.7.2  Accessory Buildings/Structures.



   (A)   Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings to residential uses
are permitted provided that no accessory building shall include habitable
space or be rented or occupied for gain and provided accessory building shall
meet the minimum yard and height requirements as defined in Section 155.6.5.



   (B)   Accessory Structures. Accessory structures, as defined in
Exhibit A, are permitted provided they are located in the rear yard and
comply with all applicable rear and side yard setbacks.



   (C)   Any use that requires a conditional use permit would require a
conditional use permit for the addition of an accessory structure or building.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.7.3  Activities Operated Exclusively for Pleasure, Recreation,
Etc.



   Activities operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation, social,
athletic, educational, research or research-related purposes by a private
business entity may be allowed pursuant to the use tables provided in Section
155.6.4, provided that the entity shall have a contract with the town which
defines the terms and conditions under which its operations shall be
performed.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.7.4  Health Care Facilities.



   As defined by NCGS 131E-256, shall not be located within a one-half
(1/2) mile radius of an existing health care facility.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.7.5  Assembly Halls, Gymnasiums, and Other Similar Structures.



   Assembly halls, gymnasiums, and other similar structures may be allowed
pursuant to the use tables provided in Section 155.6.4, provided that no part
of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any person, club,
corporation, shareholder, or any other legal entity.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.7.6  Mixed Use Commercial-Residential.



   (A)   Conceptual Plan Review. It is the intent of the site analysis
data and conceptual development plan process to provide an opportunity for
public input and to provide the Board of Aldermen, UDO Administrator, Town
Manager, the town staff, and other appropriate state and federal agencies the
opportunity to review and evaluate the impact of a mixed use development
proposal on the character of the area in which it is proposed to be located.
This process is intended to take into consideration the general form of the
land, density, and ratio of residential to commercial use before and after
development as well as the spatial relationships of the proposed structures,
open spaces, landscaped areas, and general access and circulation patterns as
they relate to the proposed development and the surrounding area, as well as
any other criteria deemed relevant by the Board of Aldermen.



   (B)   Applicability. The procedures for conceptual plan review shall
apply only to mixed use commercial-residential projects as defined in Exhibit
A.



   (C)   Procedures.



      (1)   Application Submittal Requirements. No application shall
be accepted in which the proposed development exceeds the height limit of 40
feet. Applications for conceptual development plan review shall be submitted
to the UDO Administrator on forms prescribed by the Town.



         (a)   Forms shall include the name and address of the
applicant, the name and address of the owner of each zoning lot involved, and
the relationship of the applicant and property owner in connection with the
plan.



         (b)   If the applicant or property owner is an entity
other than an individual, the application shall also include the names and
addresses of (i) all officers and shareholders of a corporation, (ii) all
members and managers of a limited liability company, and (iii) all officers
and members of an unincorporated association. If a corporation or limited
liability company is a shareholder of a corporate applicant or a member of a
limited liability company applicant, the same information for such
shareholder or member corporation or limited liability company shall be
provided.



         (c)   The application shall also include a statement of
the development experience of the applicant as well as that of its officers
and shareholders if a corporation, its members and managers if a limited
liability company, and its officers and members if an unincorporated
association.



         (d)   The conceptual review application shall be
accompanied by a plan, which demonstrates a high quality of overall site
design.



         (e)   The conceptual development plan application shall
include a written statement which addresses the following:



            (i)   The relationship and balance among site
elements;



            (ii)   The relationship of the development to
natural features;



            (iii)   The relationship of the development to
neighboring developments and undeveloped land; and



            (iv)   The application shall also describe access
and circulation systems, retention of natural vegetation, alteration of
natural topography, mitigation of erosion and sedimentation, mitigation of
stormwater drainage and flooding, arrangement and orientation of buildings
and amenities in relation to each other and to neighboring developments and
streets, landscaping, preservation or enhancement of vistas, and mitigation
of traffic impacts.



         (f)   The UDO Administrator shall prescribe any other
material that may reasonably be required to determine compliance with this
section, ordinances, and relationship to the town’s comprehensive plan.



         (g)   No less than 15 copies of the requested materials
shall be provided. More copies may be requested if required for necessary
referrals and records.



         (h)   The application shall be accompanied by one set of
plain letter-sized envelopes, stamped, unsealed, and addressed to property
owners within a 300-foot radius of the proposed development, as shown on the
New Hanover County tax listing, and bearing the return address of the town.



         (i)   The conceptual development plan application shall
be submitted together with the fee as established from time to time by the
Board of Aldermen.



         (j)   The UDO Administrator shall accept no conceptual
development plan application unless it complies with such submittal
requirements. Applications that are not complete shall be returned forthwith
to the applicant, with a notation of the deficiencies in the applications.



      (2)   Time Frame for Action on Concept Plans. Upon receipt of
a complete conceptual development plan application, the UDO Administrator
shall forward all information submitted by the applicant for review to each
Town Department and other local, state, or federal agencies as deemed
necessary. The UDO Administrator shall forward the application to the Board
of Aldermen for review and consideration within 45 days of receipt of a
complete application.



      (3)   Public Notice of Conceptual Development Plan Review. Not
less than ten days prior to the meeting at which the conceptual development
plan will be reviewed by the Board of Aldermen, notification of such review
shall be mailed by first class mail to all property owners within a 300-foot
radius of the proposed development as shown on the New Hanover County tax
listings. In addition, a sign announcing the date, time and location of all
conceptual development plan review meetings shall be posted on the
development site, and the public right-of-way adjacent to where cars enter
and exit the town shall be posted not less than ten days prior to said
meetings. The UDO Administrator or his or her designee shall mail the
property notification and post the sites indicated above. The Town Clerk
shall certify to the Planning Board and Board of Aldermen that the required
notices have been mailed.



      (4)   Aspects of Review; Board of Aldermen Review.



         (a)   The Board of Aldermen, in examining conceptual
development plan applications, shall consider the various aspects of design,
with special emphasis on whether the proposed development is consistent with
the goals and objectives of the town's comprehensive plans, the height
requirements of this Ordinance, and the setback requirements of this
Ordinance.



         (b)   The Board of Aldermen shall consider public
comments and shall base its recommendation on its determination of whether or
not the application conforms to applicable provisions of this section,
including but not limited to the height, parking, and setback requirements,
and the adopted comprehensive plans.



         (c)   The Board of Aldermen may appoint a subcommittee
to review the conceptual development plan application. The Mayor shall
determine the make-up of the subcommittee.



         (d)   After considering public comments and the
recommendations of the UDO Administrator, Town Manager, the town staff, and
other appropriate state and federal agencies, the Board of Aldermen shall
adopt a resolution transmitting its preliminary recommendations to the
applicant. Such resolution may reject, modify, or approve the conceptual plan
in whole or in part. This resolution does not vest the applicant or property
owner with any rights, other than the right to submit a formal development
plan and request consideration of conditional use permit for mixed use
development.



   (D)   Mixed Use Conditional Use Permit Application. After receipt of
the conceptual plan resolution from the Board of Aldermen, the applicant may
apply for a conditional use permit following the procedures set forth in
Section 155.4.5. When reviewing the mixed use conditional use permit, the
Planning Board and Board of Aldermen shall consider all standards and
requirements set forth in Section 155.4.5 and the additional conditions set
forth in subsection (E) below.



   (E)   Additional Conditional Use Permit Standards for Mixed Use
Development. In addition to meeting the standards for a conditional use
permit as set forth in Section 155.4.5, each mixed use development must meet
the following additional conditions:



      (1)   That the proposed development provides open space in
accordance with Section 155.2.10 (Open Space), including the proposed method
for the maintenance and conservation of said open space.



      (2)   That all stages contained in the preliminary development
plan can exist as a compatible and feasible independent development.



      (3)   That adequate measures have been or will be taken to
provide ingress and egress designed so as to minimize traffic congestion in
the public streets. This may include provisions for bicycling, walking, and
other alternatives to the automobile. In addition, that adequate primary
streets and thoroughfares are available to support traffic generated within
the proposed mixed use development.



      (4)   That the public benefits derived from the proposed
development justify the requested departure from the standard zoning district
requirements.



      (5)   That important natural amenities, to include but not be
limited to primary dunes as defined by the Coastal Area Management Act
(CAMA), trees, vegetative buffers, and scenic views and vistas on the site
and in the surrounding area of the proposed development are preserved.



      (6)   That the proposed development meets the spirit and
intent of the adopted CAMA land use plan.



      (7)   That the proposed development meets all required parking
standards unless such standards are reduced or an exception is granted to
such standards in accordance with Article 155.9, Part I.



   (F)   Public Notice Requirement for Mixed Use Developments.
Application for a mixed use conditional use permit (“MUCUP”) shall be
filed with the UDO Administrator or his or her designee on a form prescribed
by the Town. The application shall be accompanied by such plans and data
prescribed by the UDO Administrator, four sets of plain letter-sized
envelopes, stamped, unsealed, and addressed to property owners within a
300-foot radius of the proposed development as shown on the New Hanover
County tax listing, and bearing the return address of the town, together with
the fee as established from time to time by the Board of Aldermen. The
applicant shall include a statement in writing, supported by adequate
evidence, that the proposed MUCUP will conform to the standards set forth in
Sections 155.4.5 and 155.7.7(E). Notice that the MUCUP will be considered
shall be mailed by first class mail to all property owners within a 300-foot
radius as shown on the New Hanover County tax listing at the last addresses
listed for such property owners on the New Hanover County tax abstracts, not
less than 14 days prior to the public hearings at which the application will
be considered. In addition, the proposed development site and the public
right-of-way adjacent to where cars enter and exit the town shall be posted
with a sign announcing the date, time, and location of all Planning Board
meetings and the Board of Aldermen meetings at which the application is to be
considered not less than ten days prior to said meetings. The Town Clerk
shall certify to the Planning Board and Board of Aldermen that the required
notices have been mailed. The Planning Board, after its review of the
application and supporting documents, shall send its written findings and
recommendations to the Board of Aldermen for action.



   (G)   Certain Construction Within the Front Building Setback Allowed
for Mixed Use Development. Notwithstanding anything in the town’s
ordinances to the contrary, in approving a mixed use conditional use permit
pursuant to subsections (A) through (F), the Board of Aldermen may allow for
the construction of (i) vertical public accesses (e.g., stairwells,
elevators) for means of ingress and egress, and (ii) vertical shaftways for
elevator system components and fire protection systems within the established
front building setback upon a finding by the Board of Aldermen that the
proposed construction within the front setback:



      (1)   Does not materially impede vehicle, bicycle or
pedestrian vision from any adjacent street or highway;



      (2)   Does not negatively impact any scenic views from
properties adjacent to the mixed use development;



      (3)   Is not objected to by the town’s Fire, Police, and
Public Works Departments;



      (4)   Is offset by an equal amount of pervious green space
within the building footprint of the mixed use development.



      (5)   Is located no nearer than 15 feet to the existing edge
of any sidewalk or pavement on any street or highway, whichever is more
restrictive;



      (6)   Is located no nearer than 20 feet to any corner of the
mixed use building that is adjacent to a side property line; and



      (7)   Does not otherwise endanger the public health, safety or
welfare.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.7.7  Car Wash.



   Car washes shall be permitted in accordance with the use tables in
Section 155.6.4, subject to the following:



   (A)   No storage, repair, or sales of vehicles shall be allowed on
the site.



   (B)   Provisions shall be made for an on-site drainage system to
capture water used to wash vehicles; or provide connections to an approved
sanitary sewer system.



   (C)   Vehicle stacking shall be provided as required by Article
155.9, Part I.



   (D)   Accessory sales or services are not permitted.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.7.8  Child Care Centers.



   Child care centers may be allowed pursuant to the use tables provided
in Section 155.6.4, subject to the following standards:



   (A)   Licensing. A child care facility shall be licensed by the New
Hanover County Health Department and the NC Division of Child Development.



   (B)   Vehicle Circulation. In addition to the requirements of
Article 155.9, Part I, an applicant for a child care center shall provide a
vehicular circulation plan showing on-site queuing and circulation based upon
the location and number of patrons that utilize the facility.



   (C)   Recreational Facilities. Outdoor recreational facilities shall
be located in the rear yard.



   (D)   Landscaping. In addition to the landscaping requirements of
Article 155.9, Part IV, one additional shade tree per 1,000 square feet of
outdoor play or activity area shall be installed.



   (E)   Setbacks from Residential. All stationary play equipment,
dumpsters, garbage cans, or recycling bins, and similar equipment shall be
located at least 20 feet from any abutting residential property line.



   (F)   Hours of Operation. Child care centers adjacent to residential
areas shall not operate between the hours of 7:00 pm and 6:00 am.



   (G)   Parking. Parking areas for child care centers shall be located
to the side or rear of the building.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.7.9  Detached Garages.



   Detached garages may be allowed pursuant to the use tables provided in
Section 6.4, provided they comply with the requirements outlined in
subsections 155.6.5.1, 155.6.5.2, and 155.11.18(H)(1).



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.7.10  Fences and Walls.



   (A)   Intent. This section regulates fences located between the
property line and the setback line on any lot. Fences elsewhere on the
property (for example, an outdoor shower privacy screen) are considered part
of the primary or accessory structure and are not regulated by this section.
The intent of this section is to ensure that physical boundaries between
properties do not interfere significantly with visibility or air movement on
adjoining properties.



   (B)   Fences.



      (1)   Maximum fence height shall be measured from grade at any
given point along the span of a fence. Maximum permitted height of fences
shall be as follows:



         (a)   Fences constructed adjacent to any street
right-of-way from which there is vehicular access to a lot shall not exceed
four feet in height.



         (b)   Fences located within the front yard setback of a
lot shall not exceed four feet in height.



         (c)   Fences not restricted as set forth in sections (a)
or (b) above shall not exceed six feet in height.



         (d)   Fences located within the triangular area as
stated in subsection (C) of a corner lot shall not exceed three feet in
height.



      (2)   No person shall undertake construction of a fence
without first acquiring a permit from the Town. Applications for construction
of fences shall be submitted on forms prepared by the UDO Administrator and
shall include a site plan showing the location of the fence, the proposed
distance from any property line, the proposed height and a cross section of
the fence. Corner lots shall indicate compliance with subsection (C). All
fences must comply with the town’s floodplain ordinances, the North
Carolina State Building Code and any applicable wind load requirements.



      (3)   This section shall not supersede any buffering or
fencing requirements established by this Ordinance.



      (4)   No chain link fences are allowed in the R-1 and R-2
districts.



   (C)   Corner Lot Visibility. All fences shall comply with the
requirements of Section 155.2.6.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.7.11  Financial Institutions/Banks.



   Financial institutions with a drive-through may be allowed pursuant to
the use tables provided in Section 155.6.4, subject to the following
standards:



   (A)   Stacking lanes for drive-through windows shall be located so
as to avoid conflict with the normal flow of traffic on the site.



   (B)   A vehicle pass-by lane shall be constructed adjacent to each
window to provide for complete, unimpeded circulation throughout the site.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.7.12  Floating Homes.



   Floating homes may be allowed pursuant to the use tables provided in
Section 6.4, subject to the following standards:



   (A)   Floating Homes Prohibited Except in Permitted Districts. It
shall be unlawful for any floating home to dock, moor, anchor, or remain
within the waters within the zoning jurisdiction of the town except in
permitted commercial marinas.



   (B)   Prohibited Acts and Activities Regarding Floating Homes.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy, or cause
or permit another person to occupy any floating home within the zoning
jurisdiction of the town except in permitted commercial marinas.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow a
home located on or docked or moored to his property to be in violation of
this Ordinance.



   (C)   Floating Home Requirements.



      (1)   Not more than one dwelling unit per floating home shall
be permitted.



      (2)   The height of a floating home shall not exceed 16 feet
above the water line; provided that antennas, removable canopies, masts, and
electronic and navigational equipment shall not be included in making this
height determination.



      (3)   Floating homes shall be moored to provide a clear
waterway projection between adjacent floating homes or vessels of six feet on
all sides.



      (4)   All walkways or gangways providing access to any
floating home shall comply with the following requirements:



         (a)   Be constructed in accordance with the pier and
dock ordinance of the town;



         (b)   Be lighted to provide illumination of 0.1
foot-candles at the deck level, but in no case less than 0.05 foot-candles.



      (5)   A minimum of two off-street parking spaces per floating
home shall be provided on shore.



      (6)   Each marina shall provide for each floating home
permanent water and sewer systems approved by the Public Works Department of
the town. Each floating home shall be connected to such water and sewer
system. All wastewater piping from the floating homes shall be constructed in
accordance with the North Carolina State Plumbing Code and all water and
sewer connections to the public utility system shall be as prescribed under
Federal and State Safe Drinking Water Acts. No overboard discharge openings
through the hull or home shall be permitted except for one dewatering pipe,
which may not be connected to wastewater piping or to any bilge or sump into
which wastewater drains. For purposes of this section, wastewater shall
include bathwater, dishwater, and other greywater as well as sewage.



      (7)   All electrical wiring running on docks and/or shore from
the distribution center to the point of supply on the floating home shall
conform to the National Electrical Code.



      (8)   A system for the collection and removal of solid wastes
approved by the Public Works Department of the town shall be provided by each
marina.



      (9)   Each marina shall provide a drypipe fire fighting system
approved by the Fire Chief of the Fire Department and constructed in
accordance with the provisions of the pier and dock ordinance of the town.



      (10)   A minimum of 2,000 square feet of gross land area
contiguous to the docks provided for floating homes and above mean high water
shall be provided on-shore for each floating home.



      (11)   A site plan shall be submitted for approval in
connection with the application for a conditional use permit, such plan to
include all improvements as required by this section.



      (12)   Any commercial marinas in which floating homes are
located on the date of adoption of this Ordinance shall have six months from
the date of adoption to comply with all requirements of this Ordinance.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.7.13  Home Occupations.



   (A)   This section is intended to regulate the operation of an
occupation within a dwelling unit to minimize the impact to surrounding
residential uses and maintain the character of the town’s residential areas.



   (B)   Home occupations are permitted in the following zoning
districts: R-1, R-2, C-1, C-2, C-3, and C-4, provided that:



      (1)   Only one person other than residents of the dwelling
unit shall be engaged in such occupation;



      (2)   Not more than 250 square feet of the floor area of the
dwelling unit shall be used in the operation of the home occupation;



      (3)   Permitted home occupations shall be limited to office
and professional use and homecrafts;



      (4)   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of
the dwelling or premises, or other visible evidence of the operation of the
home occupation;



      (5)   There shall be no rental of goods or equipment.



      (6)   No traffic shall be generated by the home occupation
which will exceed the normal volumes of traffic anticipated within the
residential area;



      (7)   No equipment or process shall be used in connection with
the home occupation which will create noise, vibration, fumes, or electrical
interference not customarily associated with the operation of a household;



      (8)   No vehicles other than typical passenger vehicles,
1/2-ton pickup trucks, and standard step vans shall be used in connection
with the home occupation. Off-street parking requirements shall be as set
forth in Article 155.9, Part I; and



      (9)   The home occupation shall be carried out solely within
the principal dwelling unit. There shall be no display or storing of goods or
supplies so as to be visible from the street or adjoining properties.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.7.14  Nursing Home.



   A nursing home may be allowed pursuant to the use tables provided in
Section 155.6.4, subject to the following standards:



   (A)   A landscaped buffer shall be provided, at a minimum, between a
nursing home and all abutting residential districts.



   (B)   There shall be at a minimum fifty (50) feet of road frontage.



   (C)   Adequate provisions shall be made for service vehicles with
access to the building at a side or rear entrance, and without backing onto
rights-of-way to exit the property.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.7.15  Ocean-Related Business Activities.



   A business engaged in ocean-related business activities may operate on
the beach front pursuant to the use tables provided in Section 155.6.4,
subject to the following terms and conditions:



   (A)   Such business shall only operate pursuant to an annual permit
issued by the town. Such permit shall expire on January 1 of each year. A fee
established by the Board of Aldermen shall be charged for such permit.



   (B)   Each business to which an annual permit is issued shall be
required to maintain a general liability insurance policy with the town named
as an additional insured and worker's compensation insurance as required by
the State of North Carolina. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the business
must provide the town with evidence that such insurance is in force.



   (C)   Such business shall purchase the required privilege license in
addition to the permit required in the preceding subsection.



   (D)   Hours of operation of such business shall be limited to 7:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Businesses engaged in teaching surfing, paddle boarding,
and kite boarding shall not operate between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m. on Easter, Memorial Day, 4th of July, and Labor Day.



   (E)   The geographical area of operation of such businesses shall be
the “designated surfing areas” as established under the provisions of §
92.12 of the Code of Ordinances. Provided that this limitation shall not
apply to the rental of chairs and umbrellas by hotels located immediately
adjacent to the beach front.



   (F)   Any representative of such business when operating on the
beach front shall have a copy of the permit required under subsection (A)
above immediately available at all times that such business operations are
taking place.



   (G)   No sale or rental of merchandise or equipment shall be
conducted in connection with the operation of such business on the beach
front. No payment of any fees shall be accepted by such business on the beach
front. Any rental or sales of merchandise or equipment or payment for such
items and for personal services must be carried out at the primary business
location of such business.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.7.16  Private Club.



   Private clubs may be allowed pursuant to the use tables provided in
Section 155.6.4, however:



   (A)   No private club shall be allowed on any property within any
residential zone; and



   (B)   No residential units shall be permitted in a private club.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.7.17  Floor Area Ratio.



   (A)   It is the intent of this section to control the relationship
of lot size to the size or bulk of any building constructed on such lot in an
effort to maintain the neighborhood identities that prevail within the town.



   (B)   The allowable Floor Area Ratio for single-family and duplex
structures shall not exceed a ratio of 0.7.



   (C)   The square footage of porches and decks may not exceed 25% of
the allowable square footage as determined by the Floor Area Ratio permitted
by subsection (B) of this section. Provided that in cases where the permitted
measured area is not fully utilized, unutilized measured area may be traded
for additional porch and deck space. The trade ratio shall be 1:1.



   (D)   A single-family or duplex structure having habitable space (as
defined in Exhibit A) below the Base Flood Elevation (as defined in Exhibit
A) that was created prior to November 11, 1974, may be reconfigured so that
such habitable space is relocated above Base Flood Elevation. After such
reconfiguration, the ratio of measured area (as defined herein above) to lot
square footage shall be the greater of that permitted by subsection (B) and
subsection (C) of this section; or, that created by adding the measured area
above Base Flood Elevation that existed before the reconfiguration and the
square footage of the habitable space below Base Flood Elevation that existed
before the reconfiguration.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.7.18  Telecommunication Facilities and Support Towers.



   155.7.18.1  Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to
ensure that residents and businesses in the Town of Wrightsville Beach have
reliable access to wireless telecommunications networks and state of the art
communications services while also ensuring that this objective is achieved
in a fashion that preserves the intrinsic aesthetic character of the
community and is accomplished according to the Town of Wrightsville Beach's
zoning, planning and design standards. The Telecommunication Act of 1996
preserved, with certain limitations, local government land use and zoning
authority concerning the placement, construction, and modification of
wireless telecommunications facilities. The Town of Wrightsville Beach
recognizes that facilitating the development of wireless service technology
can be an economic development asset to the Town of Wrightsville Beach and a
significant benefit to residents. This section establishes parameters for the
siting of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. It is the intent of this
section to:



   (A)   Ensure access to reliable wireless telecommunications services
throughout all areas of the Town of Wrightsville Beach;



   (B)   Encourage the use of existing monopoles, towers, utility poles
and other structures for the collocation of telecommunications facilities;



   (C)   Encourage the location of new monopoles and towers in
non-residential areas;



   (D)   Minimize the number of new monopoles and towers that would
otherwise need to be constructed by providing incentives for the use of
existing structures;



   (E)   Encourage the location of monopoles and towers, to the extent
possible in areas where the adverse impact on the community will be minimal;



   (F)   Minimize the potential adverse effects associated with the
construction of monopoles and towers through the implementation of reasonable
design, landscaping and construction practices;



   (G)   Ensure public health, safety, welfare and conveniences; and



   (H)   Conform to Federal and State laws that allow certain antennas
to be exempt from local regulations.



   155.7.18.2  Approvals Required for Telecommunications Facilities and
Support Structures.



   (A)   Conditional Use Permit. New telecommunications facilities and
new support structures up to fifty (50) feet in height shall be permitted in
the C-3, C-4, and C-5 Commercial Districts and the Public and Semi-Public
Zoning District (G-1) after Planning Board review and upon the granting of a
Conditional Use Permit (CUP) from the Board of Aldermen in accordance with
the Standards set forth in this Ordinance. Provided, the height of such
facilities and structures shall be limited to forty (40) feet if the facility
or structure is located in an Area of Environmental Concern ("AEC") as
established under the Coastal Area Management Act, as amended.



   (B)   Exempt. Ordinary maintenance of existing telecommunications
facilities and support structures, as defined herein, shall be exempt from
zoning and permitting requirements. In addition, the following facilities are
not subject to the provisions of this subsection:(1) antennas used by
residential households solely for broadcast radio and television; (2)
satellite antennas used solely for residential or household purposes; (3)
COWs placed for a period of not more than one hundred twenty (120) days at
any location within the Town of Wrightsville Beach after a declaration of an
emergency or a disaster by the Governor or by the responsible official of the
Town of Wrightsville Beach; and (4) television and AM/FM radio broadcast
towers and associate facilities.



   155.7.18.3  Telecommunications Facilities and Support Structures
Permitted by CUP. All Conditional Use Permit applications for
Telecommunications Facilities and Support Structures must contain the
following:



   (A)   Conditional Use Permit Application form signed by applicant
(refer to Section 155.4.5).



   (B)   A copy of lease or letter of authorization from the property
owner evidencing applicant's authority to pursue zoning application.



   (C)   Written description and scaled drawings of the proposed
Support Structure, including structure height, ground and structure design,
and proposed materials.



   (D)   Number and type of proposed Antennas and their height above
ground level, including the proposed placement of Antennas on the Support
Structure.



   (E)   When locating adjacent to a residential area, a written
technical and operational analysis of why a support structure at a height of
less than fifty (50) feet cannot be used.



   (F)   Line-of-sight diagram or photo simulation, showing the
proposed Support Structure set against the skyline and viewed from at least
four (4) directions within the surrounding areas.



   (G)   A statement justifying why Collocation is not feasible. Such
statement shall include:



      (1)   Such technical information and other justification as is
necessary to document the reasons why collocation is not a viable option; and



      (2)   The applicant shall provide a list of all existing
structures considered as alternatives to the proposed location. The applicant
shall provide a written explanation why the alternatives considered were
either unacceptable or infeasible due to technical, physical, or financial
reasons. If an existing tower was listed among the alternatives, applicant
must specifically address why the modification of such tower is not a viable
option.



      (3)   A statement that the proposed Support Structure will be
made available for Collocation to other service providers at commercially
reasonable rates.



   (H)   Conditional Use Permit application fee.



   155.7.18.4  General Standards and Design Requirements.



   (A)   Design.



      (1)   Support Structures shall be subject to the following:



         (a)   Support Structures shall be designed to
accommodate at least two (2) telecommunications providers.



         (b)   The compound area surrounding the Support
Structure must be of sufficient size to accommodate Accessory Equipment for
at least two (2) telecommunications providers.



         (c)   Unless otherwise required by the Federal
Communications Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration, or the Town
of Wrightsville Beach, Support Structures shall be galvanized silver or gray
finish.



      (2)   Stealth Telecommunications Facilities shall be designed
to accommodate the Collocation of other Antennas whenever economically and
technically feasible or aesthetically appropriate, as determined by the Board
of Aldermen.



      (3)   Upon request of the Applicant, the Board of Aldermen may
waive the requirement that new Support Structures accommodate the collocation
of other service providers if it finds that collocation at the site is not
essential to the public interest, or that the construction of a shorter
support structure with fewer Antennas will promote community compatibility.



   (B)   Setbacks.



      (1)   Property Lines. Unless otherwise stated herein, Support
Structures shall be setback from all property lines a distance equal to their
height measured from the base of the structure to its highest point. Other
Support Structures shall be governed by the setbacks required by the
underlying zoning district.



      (2)   Residential Dwellings. Unless otherwise stated herein,
Support Structures shall be setback from all off-site residential dwellings a
distance equal to the height of the structure. There shall be no setback
requirement from dwellings located on the same parcel as the proposed
structure. Existing or Replacement utility poles shall not be subject to a
setback requirement.



      (3)   Unless otherwise stated herein, all Accessory Equipment
shall be setback from all property lines in accordance with the minimum
setback requirements in the underlying zoning district. Accessory Equipment
associated with an existing or Replacement utility pole shall not be subject
to a setback requirement.



      (4)   The Board of Aldermen shall have the authority to reduce
or waive any required setback upon the request of the applicant if the
Telecommunications Facility or Support Structure will be less visible as a
result of the diminished setback. The Board of Aldermen must also find that
the reduction or waiver of the setback is consistent with the purposes and
intent of this Ordinance. The structure must still meet the underlying
setback requirements of the zoning district.



   (C)   Height. Height shall be measured from the natural undisturbed
ground surface below the center of the tower base to the top of the tower,
including the highest antenna or piece of equipment attached thereto.



      (1)   In non-residential districts, Support Structures shall
not exceed a height of fifty (50) feet from the base of the structure to the
top of the highest point. Any proposed Support Structure shall be designed to
be the minimum height needed to meet the service objectives of the applicant.



      (2)   Support Structures and Antennas located on buildings
shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. Roof-mounted antennas extending
over five (5) feet above the principle building shall be located behind a
facade that blends with the principal building.



      (3)   In all districts, the Board of Aldermen shall have the
authority to reduce or waive the height restrictions listed in this section
upon the receipt of a Variance request from applicant and a satisfactory
showing of the need for a greater height. With its Variance request the
Applicant shall submit such technical information or other justification as
are necessary to document the need for the additional height to the
satisfaction of the Board of Aldermen.



   (D)   Aesthetics.



      (1)   Lighting and Marking. Telecommunications Facilities or
Support Structures shall not be lighted or marked unless required by the
Federal Communications Commission or the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA). Any additional lighting beyond minimum FAA requirements must be
approved by the Board of Aldermen. If approved, the lighting shall be
shielded and oriented so as not to project directly onto adjacent property,
and so as to minimize glare onto adjacent property and streets.



      (2)   Signage. Signs on any portion of a tower and/or related
accessory building, fence, or wall shall be prohibited with the following
exceptions:



         (a)   A two (2) square foot sign located at the
Telecommunications Facility shall be limited to ownership and contact
information, FCC antenna registration number (if required) and any other
information as required by government regulation. Commercial advertising is
strictly prohibited.



         (b)   Warning signs may be placed on the premises.
Equipment Information Signs may be placed at appropriate locations as
determined by the UDO Administrator or his/her designee.



         (c)   A freestanding sign may be permitted only if the
lot also contains the main business office of the telecommunications server.



         (d)   A sign permit is required whenever a sign is
allowed.



   (E)   Landscaping. In all districts, the Board of Aldermen shall
have the authority to impose reasonable landscaping requirements surrounding
the Accessory Equipment. Required landscaping shall be consistent with
surrounding vegetation and shall be maintained by the facility owner. The
Board of Aldermen may choose to not require landscaping for sites that are
not visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent property or in instances
where in the judgment of the Board of Aldermen, landscaping is not
appropriate or necessary.



   (F)   Accessory Equipment, including any buildings, cabinets or
shelters, shall be used only to house equipment and other supplies in support
of the operation of the Telecommunications Facility or Support Structure. Any
equipment not used in direct support of such operation shall not be stored on
the site.



      (1)   An equipment building, shelter or cabinet must not
exceed five hundred sixty (560) square feet and twelve (12) feet in height,
including the support structure for the equipment.



      (2)   Equipment buildings must comply with Local, State and
Federal Flood Zone Restrictions.



      (3)   Exception to height restriction. Upon the Applicant's
request, the Board of Aldermen may waive the height restriction to allow for
the stacking of equipment on top of each other. The Board of Aldermen must
find that there is a practical necessity for the stacking of the equipment
and that any resulting impact on adjoining properties is minimal or may be
minimized by requiring appropriate screening. The Board of Aldermen may also
waive the height restriction where a higher support structure is needed to
raise the equipment above a slope or floodplain.



      (4)   If the Accessory Equipment is adjacent to or visible
from a residential zone, the Board of Aldermen may require that the building
or shelter be faced with brick or other suitable material on all sides and
that the compound area is surrounded by landscaping providing a screen of at
least three (3) feet in height at installation. The Accessory Equipment must
conform to the setback standards of the applicable zone. In the situation of
stacked equipment buildings, additional screening/ landscaping measures may
be required by the Board of Aldermen.



   155.7.18.5  Miscellaneous Provisions.



   (A)   Safety.



      (1)   Ground mounted Accessory Equipment and Support
Structures shall be secured and enclosed with fence not less than six (6)
feet in height as deemed appropriate by the Board of Aldermen and must comply
with the UDO. Barbed wire, razor ribbon, concertina wire and other similar
security measures shall be prohibited.



      (2)   The Board of Aldermen may waive the requirement of
subsection (1) above if it is deemed that a fence is not appropriate or
needed at the proposed location.



   (B)   Abandonment and Removal.



      (1)   Abandonment. Any Telecommunications Facility or Support
Structure that is not operated for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months
shall be considered abandoned. A telecommunications facility is unauthorized
if the franchise of the applicable telecommunications provider has expired or
has never been obtained, if the facility has been abandoned, or if the
construction of the facility was not in compliance with this Ordinance and
the conditional use permit. A utility pole shall be deemed abandoned whenever
all wires, lines, cables and other facilities have been removed from the pole
for a period of twelve (12) months or more.



      (2)   Removal. Any tower or part of a tower that ceases to be
used for communications broadcasting and/or broadcast receiving shall be
removed by the tower owner at the tower owner’s expense, along with any and
all associated structure. The owner of the Telecommunications Facility or
Support Structure shall remove the Facility within six (6) months of its
abandonment. Upon removal, the site shall be revegetated to blend with the
existing surrounding vegetation. In the event that a tower is not removed by
the tower owner in the specified time, the tower and associated structures
may be removed by the Town and the costs of removal assessed against the
tower or property owner. The Town of Wrightsville Beach shall ensure and
enforce removal by means of its existing regulatory authority.



   (C)   Multiple Uses on a Single Parcel or Lot Telecommunications
Facilities and Support Structures may be located on a parcel containing
another principal use on the same site.



   155.7.18.6   Telecommunications Facilities and Support Structures in
Existence on the Date of Adoption of this Ordinance



   (A)   Telecommunications Facilities and Support Structures that were
legally permitted on or before the date this Ordinance was enacted shall be
considered a permitted nonconforming use.



   (B)   Non-Conforming Telecommunications Facility.



      (1)   Non-Conforming Antennas or Accessory Equipment: Ordinary
Maintenance may be performed on Non-Conforming Antennas and Accessory
Equipment.



      (2)   Minor Modifications to non-conforming Telecommunications
Facilities may be permitted upon the granting of approval by the UDO
Administrator and Public Works Director.



      (3)   Major Modifications to non-conforming Telecommunications
Facilities may be permitted only upon the granting of conditional use permit
approval by the Board of Aldermen.



   (C)   Non-Conforming Support Structures.



      (1)   Non-Conforming Support Structures: Ordinary Maintenance
may be performed on a Non-Conforming Support Structure.



      (2)   Collocation of Telecommunications Facilities on an
existing non-conforming Support Structure is permitted upon the granting of a
conditional use permit.



      (3)   Minor Modifications may be made to non-conforming
Support Structures to allow for Collocation of Telecommunications Facilities.
Such Minor Modifications shall be permitted by approval by the UDO
Administrator and the Public Works Director.



      (4)   Major Modifications may be made to non-conforming
Support Structures only upon the granting of a conditional use permit
approval by the Board of Aldermen.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.7.19  Temporary Storage Containers.



   (A)   Temporary storage containers are defined as:



      (1)   Containers no larger in dimension than 8ftx8ft6inx16ft
and transported to a designated location for temporary storage purposes,
including moving (typically known as PODS).



      (2)   Containers designed or used on property zoned or used
for residential property for the collection and hauling of waste or debris,
including but not limited to roll-off containers or boxes and bin containers
(construction dumpsters).



      (3)   Non self-propelled, fully enclosed trailers that are
designed or used to transport goods, materials and equipment and are placed
on property zoned or used for residential purposes (semi-trailers).



   (B)   Temporary storage containers may be allowed pursuant to the
uses tables contained in Section 155.6.4, upon compliance with all of the
following:



      (1)   No more than two (2) temporary storage containers shall
be located on a single lot or parcel of land.



      (2)   No other type of container or shipping container is
located on the same lot or parcel of land.



      (3)   Temporary storage containers shall not be used to store
or transport nonresidential materials and substances, including but not
limited to the following: solid waste, hazardous materials, explosives and
unlawful substances and materials.



      (4)   Permits issued for temporary storage containers will be
issued incident to an active building permit. Subsequent to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy all temporary storage containers must be removed
within thirty (30) days. The owner of a lot or parcel on which a dumpster
will be placed shall be jointly responsible for providing notice to the UDO
Administrator within twenty-four (24) hours of the placement.



         The placement of the storage container will require the
issuance of a permit through the Town of Wrightsville Beach Planning
Department. The UDO Administrator may approve an extension by issuing a
permit up to ninety (90) days, upon determining all of the following:



         (a)   That a principal residential structure is damaged
or dilapidated.



         (b)   That the residential structure will undergo
renovation, repair or reconstruction during the extension.



         (c)   That a building permit has been issued for the
renovation, repair or reconstruction, if required, and remains valid during
the extension.



         (d)   That the temporary storage container will not be
used to store nonresidential materials and equipment such as contractor's
materials and equipment during the extension. Temporary storage containers
shall comply with the following setbacks:



            -   If a temporary storage container is placed in
the required front yard, then the temporary storage container shall be
located only in the area primarily used for vehicular ingress and egress and
must have five (5) feet setback from the edge of the paved right of way,
unless otherwise approved by the UDO Administrator.



            -   If a temporary storage container is placed in
the required rear or side yard, no setback shall be required except that no
temporary storage container shall encroach upon adjacent property.



      (5)   Temporary storage containers (PODS) for the purposes of
moving may be at a location for no more than thirty (30) days in any six (6)
month period.



      (6)   Temporary storage containers shall be constructed of
noncombustible materials.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.7.20  Coffee Shops, No Food Prepared On Site.



   Coffee shops with no food prepared on site shall be permitted in
accordance with the use tables in Section 155.6.4 provided that no outdoor
seating of any kind shall be allowed.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1749, passed 9-10-15)



Section 155.7.21  Private Access Easement.



   Private access easements shall only be permitted subject to the
following conditions:



   (A)   Private access easements shall only be permitted in order to
create access to a maximum of four landlocked lots. For purposes of this
ordinance, landlocked lots shall mean those lots not abutting a public
street, a private street or a common area as described in Section 155.2.3.



   (B)   A private access easement shall be a minimum of ten feet in
width and shall not exceed one hundred feet in length.



   (C)   Private access easements shall only be permitted if all the
owners of lots served by such private access easement execute and record a
maintenance agreement for maintenance of the private access easement in a
form acceptable to the Town.



   (D)   Private access easements shall only be used as means of access
for lots located in the R-1 or R-2 Zoning Districts.



   (E)   All private access easements shall be surfaced with either
asphalt, concrete, pervious concrete, gravel, or some other pervious surface
approved by the Town.



   (F)   Setbacks for construction on lots crossed by a private access
easement shall be determined from the property line of the affected lot.
Areas within the private access easement shall be counted in determining the
permitted floor area ratio of the lot in question.



   (G)   No obstructions or encroachments of any kind whatsoever shall
be permitted on the surface of or in the air space above a private access
easement.



   (H)   A private access easement shall only be used by the landlocked
lots served by such easement and by non-landlocked lots which are immediately
adjacent to and adjoin such private access easement.



   (I)   No private access easement shall be permitted as a means of
access to a lot unless a plat is recorded in the New Hanover County Register
of Deeds depicting such easement and including the written approval of the
Planning Director of the Town.



(Ord. 1728, passed 5-13-14)



Section 155.7.22  Boat Rental Facilities.



   Boat rental facilities renting no more than four boats are permitted as
a permitted use in accordance with the Table of Permitted/Conditional Uses as
set forth in Section 155.6.4 subject to the following conditions. Boat rental
facilities renting more than four boats are permitted as a conditional use in
accordance with the Table of Permitted/Conditional Uses as set forth in
Section 155.6.4 subject to the following conditions:



   (A)   No motor boats or trailers of any kind may be stored on the
lot where the boat rental facility office is located.



   (B)   Boat rental facilities may not offer for rent or use or rent
of permit the use of jet skis or personal watercraft as defined in NCGS §
75A-13.1



   (C)   Boat rental facilities shall operate only between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.



(Ord. 1758, passed 4-14-16)



Section 155.7.23  Massage and Bodywork Therapy.



   Massage and bodywork therapy is allowed as a permitted use in
accordance with the Table of Permitted/Conditional Uses set forth in Section
155.6.4 subject to the following conditions:



   (A)   No person shall engage in the practice of massage and bodywork
therapy as those terms are defined in G.S. Chapter 90, Article 36, as
amended, without holding a license issued to such person by the North
Carolina Board of Massage and Bodywork Therapy in accordance with the
provisions of G.S. Chapter 90, Article 36.



   (B)   Any person desiring to engage in the activities described
herein shall provide proof of a current license under the provisions of G.S.
Chapter 90, Article 36 at the time application for a zoning compliance permit
is made.



(Ord. 1767, passed 6-8-17)



ARTICLE 155.8
NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS



PART I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section 155.8.1  Minimum Single Lot Requirements.



   Where the owner of a lot upon adoption of this Ordinance, or his or her
successor in title thereto, does not own sufficient land to enable him or her
to conform to the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, the lot may be
used as a building site for a single-family residence in a district in which
residences are permitted or for a duplex in R-2 Districts provided the
single-family residence or duplex shall conform to the minimum housing code
and to the following setback requirements: 15-foot setback for the front yard
street access frontage and 7-1/2 feet for all other yards (see Section
155.2.10 for open space requirements); and minimum required lot area for a
duplex in the R-2 District shall be 4,000 square feet. Setbacks for
landlocked waterfront lots shall conform to the following setback
requirements: 15 feet for the front lot line and 7-1/2 feet for all other
yards.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.8.2  Minimum Multi-Lot Requirements.



   Where there exist two or more adjoining and vacant lots considered
either as a single lot or several lots under single ownership with dimensions
smaller than that required in the zoning district in which they are located,
the owner shall be permitted to join as one or more lots by submitting a
request and plat of the proposed combination to the UDO Administrator and
recording the change in the office of the Register of Deeds of the county
provided these lots or the subdivision of these lots was recorded by the
county Register of Deeds prior to the date of adoption of this Ordinance;
that the proposed permitted uses shall conform to the minimum side and front
yard requirements set out in this Ordinance for the district in which these
uses are located except that the minimum side yard requirement shall be 15%
of the property width but in no case to be less than 7-1/2 feet.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.8.3  Extension or Enlargement of Nonconforming Situations
Prohibited.



   Except as specifically provided in this section, it shall be unlawful
for any person to engage in any activity that causes an increase in the
extent of nonconformity of a nonconforming situation.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.8.4  Elevation of Nonconforming Structures in Order to Comply
with Flood Ordinances.



   An extension or enlargement of a nonconforming situation is permitted
if it involves only raising a structure which, prior to being raised, was in
violation of the Federal Flood Insurance Program as implemented through
Article 155.11, Part I. Provided, that no increase in the extent of
nonconformity of the nonconforming situation shall occur when the structure
is raised other than those activities absolutely essential to accomplish
bringing the structure into compliance with the Federal Flood Insurance
Program as implemented through Article 155.11, Part I.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1756, passed 2-11-16)



Section 155.8.5  Change in Nonconforming Situation.



   Where a nonconforming situation exists, the equipment or process may be
changed if these or similar changes amount only to changes in degree of
activity rather than changes in kind of activity and no violations of other
provisions of this Ordinance occur.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.8.6  Discontinuance or Abandonment.



   If operation of a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of 365
consecutive days, the property involved shall thereafter be used only for a
conforming use. If a nonconforming use is maintained on one lot in
conjunction with a conforming use, discontinuance of the nonconforming use
for 365 consecutive days shall terminate the right to maintain it thereafter.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.8.7  Compliance with Flood Ordinance.



   Any extension or enlargement of a nonconforming situation permitted
under the provisions of this section may only be carried out if such
extension or enlargement complies with all requirements of the Federal Flood
Insurance Program as implemented through Article 155.11, Part I.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



PART II.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES



Section 155.8.8  Repairs and Maintenance.



   Repairs and normal maintenance required to keep nonconforming
structures in a safe condition are permitted, provided that no alterations
may be made except those allowed by this Ordinance or required by law or
ordinance.



   This section shall not be construed to prevent strengthening or repair
of a structure in compliance with the order of a public official whose duties
include protecting the public safety.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



PART III.
SINGLE-FAMILY AND DUPLEX STRUCTURES



Section 155.8.9  Expansion or Enlargement.



   A single-family residence or a duplex that is maintained as a
nonconforming structure may be enlarged or expanded so long as the
enlargement or expansion complies with the provisions of this Ordinance to
include Section 155.8.9 and the following provisions:



   (A)   A single-family residence or duplex may be expanded or
enlarged to an extent that does not exceed 50% of the measured area of the
structure. For the purposes of calculating the permitted expansion or
enlargement, all expansion or enlargement permitted under the provisions of
this section within the five-year period preceding the date on which any work
to enlarge or expand the dwelling is started shall be included within the
proposed expansion.



   (B)   For purposes of calculating the measured area, the deck areas
shall be excluded.



   (C)   Such expansion or enlargement shall not create new
nonconformities.



   (D)   Such expansion or enlargement shall not cause an expansion or
encroachment into an existing or required setback.



   (E)   Such expansion or enlargement shall not exceed the Floor Area
Ratio (see Section 155.7.17).



   (F)   The expansion or enlargement must maintain the following
structural elements as they existed prior to the expansion or enlargement:



      (1)   The existing exterior wall height. For the purposes of
this section, exterior wall height shall be measured from the top of the
subfloor to the top plate of the exterior wall;



      (2)   The existing exterior walls except as needed to
change/add windows and doors, to perform lateral additions or to correct code
violations; and



      (3)   The original structural floor system except as needed to
add new ingress and egress or to correct code violations.



   (G)   If the expansion or enlargement is only into a side yard area,
then upon completion the combination of the two side yard setbacks shall be
equal to or exceed the total of the two side yard setbacks required under
this Ordinance. This provision is subject to subsection (K) below.



   (H)   If the enlargement or expansion is only into a front or rear
yard area, then upon completion the combination of the front yard and rear
yard setbacks shall be equal to or exceed the total of the front and rear
yard setbacks required under this Ordinance. This provision is subject to
subsection (K) below.



   (I)   If the expansion or enlargement is into one or more side yard
areas and into the front or rear yard areas, then upon completion the
combination of the two side yard setbacks shall be equal to or exceed the
total of the two side yard setbacks required under this Ordinance and the
combination of the front yard and rear yard setbacks shall be equal to or
exceed the total of the front and rear yard setbacks required under this
Ordinance. This provision is subject to subsection (K) below.



   (J)   Will comply in all respects with the off-street parking
requirements contained in Article 155.9, Part I.



   (K)   If a nonconforming structure is located ten feet or less from
an adjoining structure (either on the same or an adjoining lot), then the
nonconforming structure may not be enlarged or expanded in any manner
whatsoever.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



PART IV.
MULTI-FAMILY STRUCTURES



Section 155.8.10  Expansion or Enlargement.



   A residential structure having three or more residential units and a
housing development as defined in this Ordinance that is maintained as a
nonconforming structure may be enlarged or expanded to increase its square
footage by an amount no larger than 1% of the measured area of such structure
so long as the enlargement or expansion complies with the provisions of this
paragraph. The provisions of this paragraph shall apply only to nonconforming
structures and a structure which is maintained as a nonconforming use may not
be enlarged or expanded in any way under the provisions of this paragraph.
The expansion or enlargement shall comply with the following provisions:



   (A)   For purposes of calculating the permitted expansion or
enlargement, all expansion or enlargement permitted under the provisions of
this section within the five-year period preceding the date on which any work
to enlarge or expand the dwelling is started shall be included with the
proposed expansion.



   (B)   In calculating the measured area of the building, deck areas,
garage areas, and parking areas shall be excluded.



   (C)   The expansion or enlargement shall be limited to
nonresidential areas only. No expansion of a residential area or a deck or
porch associated therewith shall be permitted.



   (D)   Such expansion or enlargement does not create new
nonconformities.



   (E)   Such expansion or enlargement does not create an expansion or
encroachment into an existing or required setback.



   (F)   If the expansion or enlargement is only into a side yard area
of the existing structure, then upon completion the combination of the two
side yard setbacks shall be equal to or exceed the total of the two side yard
setbacks required under this Ordinance. This provision is subject to
subsection (I) below.



   (G)   If the enlargement or expansion is only into a front or rear
yard area, then upon completion the combination of the front yard and rear
yard setbacks shall be equal to or exceed the total of the front and rear
yard setbacks required under this Ordinance. This provision is subject to
subsection (I) below.



   (H)   If the expansion or enlargement is into one or more side yard
areas and into the front or rear yard areas, then upon completion the
combination of the two side yard setbacks shall be equal to or exceed the
total of the two side yard setbacks required under this Ordinance and the
combination of front yard and rear yard setbacks shall be equal to or exceed
the total of the front and rear yard setbacks required under this Ordinance.
This provision is subject to subsection (I) below.



   (I)   Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this section, if a
nonconforming structure is located ten feet or less from an adjoining
structure (either on the same or adjoining lot), then the nonconforming
structure may not be enlarged or expanded in any manner whatsoever.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



PART V.
OCEANFRONT PIERS



Section 155.8.11  Expansion or Enlargement.



   For purposes of this section, an “oceanfront fishing pier” shall
mean a pier constructed wholly or in part east of the Property Line as
established by Chapter 246 of the Public Laws of North Carolina, Session
1939, as amended.



   An oceanfront fishing pier that is maintained as a nonconforming use or
nonconforming structure may be expanded or enlarged in accordance with the
provisions of this section as follows:



   (A)   Expansion of enlargement shall only be permitted if the
oceanfront fishing pier provides public access for fishing or other
recreational purposes whether on a commercial, public, or non-profit basis.



   (B)   Any pier house associated with an oceanfront fishing pier
shall not be expanded, except as follows:



      (1)   An expansion of the roof overhang shall be permitted if
the area does not exceed 400 square feet. Such area shall not be enclosed in
any manner.



      (2)   An uncovered and unenclosed deck not to exceed 225
square feet in size may be added to the northern side of the pier house to be
used solely for the installation of a freezer, heating and air conditioning
equipment and any required screening.



      (3)   A portion of a deck existing on the date of adoption of
this ordinance, which date is February 14, 2013, not exceeding 198 square
feet and located at the northwest corner of the pier house may be enclosed
with siding matching the siding of the pier house not to exceed 12 feet and
10 inches in height. Such enclosed area may be used solely for the purposes
set forth in subsection (2) above and for installation of a manufactured and
enclosed trash cooler unit. Except for the top of the manufactured trash
cooler unit, this area may not have a roof or cover of any kind.



      (4)   Enclosure of an area not exceeding 56 square feet at the
southeast corner of the pier house which is covered by an existing rood of
the date of adoption of this ordinance, which date is February 14, 2013. Such
enclosed space may only be used as a vestibule and entrance area.



      (5)   Construction of an access ramp on the south side of the
pier house not to exceed 249 square feet in area. Such ramp must be
constructed so as to provide access to the pier house from ramps in existence
on the date of adoption of this ordinance, which date is February 14, 2013.
No new access ramp may be constructed that would permit access to the pier
house except from an existing ramp as described in the preceding sentence.



   (C)   Use of any pier house associated with an oceanfront fishing
pier shall be limited to restaurants and retail services.



   (D)   The oceanfront pier located east of the pier house and
excluding the pier house may be expanded a total of 2,600 square feet (the
“permitted expansion area”) subject to the following restrictions and
provisions:



      (1)   Except as otherwise permitted in this section, the
permitted expansion area may only be used for open air seated dining service
associated with the restaurant operated in the pier house and access to the
oceanfront fishing pier. The use of the permitted expansion area for open air
seated dining service shall be limited to the hours of operation of the
restaurant located within the pier house.



      (2)   The permitted expansion area used for open air seated
dining service must not extend more than 120 feet seaward of the eastern wall
of the pier house. For purposes of this ordinance, the “eastern wall of the
pier house” shall mean the primary wall of the eastern side of the pier
house at the location of such wall on the date of adoption of this ordinance
which date is April 12, 2012. This area may be covered by removable fabric
awnings, the highest point of which shall not exceed a height of 12 feet
above the deck of the pier. Tables in this area may utilize table umbrellas.
Except as otherwise provided herein, no other roof or covering of any kind
shall be permitted in this expansion area. Removable fabric awnings may be
extended another 25 feet beyond the permitted expansion area (the “25 foot
service area”) to provide cover for service facilities related to the open
air seated dining service. For purposes of this section, “service
facilities” shall mean and be limited to temporary facilities for serving
persons seated at the tables within the permitted expansion area and shall
include mobile underbar cooler, beer station cabinet, beer tap, freezer, mug
chiller, wine dispenser, carbonated drink dispenser, soda gun dispenser,
blender station, dump sink, ice station, underbar speed rail, POS station,
and glass storage or other facilities as are required by the New Hanover
County Health Department. No permanently affixed service facilities of any
kind (except as provided below) shall be permitted within this 25 foot
service area and all such service facilities shall be designed to be
removable and shall be removed during the period November 1st through March
31st. No tables for customers shall be permitted within this 25 foot service
area. The use of permitted service facilities shall be limited to serving
persons who seated at the tables within the permitted expansion area. Under
no circumstances shall such service facilities be used as a bar for customers
of the fishing pier or to serve anyone except customers seated at the tables
within the permitted expansion area. All use of the service facilities shall
cease at 10:00 p.m. Permanent utilities may be installed in the 25 foot
service area to include power, water, and drain lines and two 42" high walls
20' in length running parallel to the eastern wall of the pier house.



      (3)   The width of any permitted expansion of the oceanfront
fishing pier shall be limited as follows:



         (a)   Any permitted expansion within the area that is
located 30 feet seaward of the eastern wall of the pier house shall be
limited to the width of the existing pier house.



         (b)   Any permitted expansion located beyond the 30 feet
area referenced in subparagraph (a) above, shall be limited so that the
maximum width of the oceanfront pier does not exceed 32 feet.



      (4)   Existing oceanfront piers which choose not to expand
consistent with authority granted in this subsection (D) may provide open air
seating. The use of any portion of the pier for open air seating shall be
subject to any limitations on open air seating set forth in this subsection
(D).



   (E)   In addition, the fishing pier may be extended eastwardly for a
maximum distance of 1,000 feet from the eastern wall of the pier house
provided that any expansion to the fishing pier beyond 145 feet from the
eastern wall of the pier house shall not exceed 20 feet in width.



   (F)   No expansion or enlargement shall be permitted unless the
owner first acquires a conditional use permit in accordance with Section
155.4.5 of this UDO.



   (G)   All other applicable provisions of the UDO shall be complied
with in conjunction with such expansion or enlargement to include compliance
with all off-street parking requirements.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1699, passed 2-14-13; Am. Ord. 1713,
passed 6-13-13)



PART VI.   COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES IN THE C-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT II,
C-3 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT III AND C-5 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT V ZONING DISTRICTS



Section 155.8.12  Expansion or Enlargement.



   A structure that is conforming as to use and is used solely for
commercial purposes in the C-2 Commercial District II, C-3 Commercial
District III and C-5 Commercial District V Zoning Districts that is
maintained as a nonconforming structure may be enlarged or expanded so long
as the enlargement or expansion complies with all applicable provisions of
the Code and the following provisions:



   (A)   For purposes of this section, a structure that is “used
solely for commercial purposes” or a “commercial structure” shall mean
a structure located in the zoning districts specified above that is
conforming as to use and is used only for commercial purposes and no part of
which is used for residential purposes. Any structure that does not meet this
definition shall not be permitted to expand or enlarge as provided herein.



   (B)   A commercial structure may be expanded or enlarged to an
extent that does not exceed 50% of the commercial measured area of the
structure as defined in this Section 155.8.12. For purposes of calculating
the permitted expansion or enlargement, all expansion or enlargement
permitted under the provisions of this section within the five-year period
preceding the date on which any work to enlarge or expand the structure is
started shall be included.



   (C)   For purposes of calculating the commercial measured area, any
deck area shall be excluded.



   (D)   Such expansion or enlargement shall not create new
nonconformities.



   (E)   Such expansion or enlargement shall not encroach into an
existing or required setback.



   (F)   The expansion or enlargement must maintain the following
structural elements as they existed prior to the expansion or enlargement:



      (1)   The existing wall height. For the purposes of this
section, existing wall height shall be measured from the top of the subfloor
to the top plate of the exterior wall;



      (2)   The existing exterior walls except as needed to
change/add windows and doors, to perform lateral additions or to correct code
violations; and



      (3)   The original structural floor system except as needed to
add new ingress and egress or to correct code violations.



   (G)   Upon completion of the expansion or enlargement, all
requirements for off-street parking contained in Article 155.9, Part I must
be satisfied.



   (H)   If the nonconforming structure is located 10 feet or less from
an adjoining structure (either on the same or on an adjoining lot) then the
nonconforming structure may be not be enlarged or expanded in any manner
whatsoever.



   (I)   For purposes of this section “commercial measured area”
shall mean the following: all of the interior floor area of a building which
is surrounded by exterior walls and/or attic with or without a laid floor
with structural headroom of five feet or greater. Where a floor lies below a
ceiling height of greater than 15 feet (as in a vaulted ceiling), then that
area of the floor under the vertical height of greater than 15 feet shall be
counted twice. One access corridor in the attic of a structure may be
excluded from the commercial measured area so long as it:



      (1)   Runs parallel to the center roof ridge; and



      (2)   Is no wider than three feet; and



      (3)   Does not exceed five feet in height.



(Ord. 1735, passed 11-13-14)



PART VII.
NON-CONFORMING USES



Section 155.8.13  Expansion or Enlargement.



   Except as provided by this paragraph, no nonconforming use shall be
enlarged or expanded to occupy a greater area of land or floor area than was
occupied on the effective date of this Ordinance and no additional accessory
use shall be established on the site of a nonconforming use.



   (A)   A single-family residence or duplex maintained as a
nonconforming use may be expanded or enlarged by the addition of an uncovered
deck subject to the following requirements:



      (1)   The construction of such uncovered deck must comply in
all respects with all other provisions of this Ordinance and in addition,
such uncovered deck must meet the 15-foot setback requirements imposed on
structures built on conforming lots.



      (2)   Such deck must be constructed so as to be pervious and
no impervious surface shall be permitted below such deck unless impervious
surface is existing underneath the area of proposed deck expansion permitted
by this section.



      (3)   The total area of all decks, to include any new deck
permitted by this section and all other existing decks, shall not exceed the
deck area permitted by Section 155.7.17.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this section, if a
nonconforming use is located ten feet or less from an adjoining structure
(either on the same or an adjoining lot), then the nonconforming use may not
be enlarged or expanded in any manner whatsoever.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.8.14  Relocation of Nonconforming Use.



   No nonconforming use may be moved, in whole or in part, to any other
portion of such parcel nor to another lot unless the use will be in
conformance with the use regulations of the district into which it is moved.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.8.15  Change in Use.



   A nonconforming use may not be changed to another use unless the
proposed use is permitted in the district in which the land is located.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



PART VIII.
DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION



Section 155.8.16  Reconstruction Damage Less Than 50%.



   Any nonconforming building or structure or any building or structure
containing a nonconforming use or any building or structure constituting a
nonconforming situation, which has been damaged by fire, acts of God, and
other causes beyond the control of the owner, may be reconstructed and used
as before subject to the conditions and restrictions of this Ordinance and
further subject to a determination by the UDO Administrator that the cost to
repair such damage or destruction is less than 50% of the assessed tax value
of the structure as listed by the New Hanover County Tax Office or that value
(as defined in Exhibit A) as determined by a certified appraisal. For
purposes of this section, “value” shall mean the value of the building
before the damage or destruction occurred. In addition, the property owner
may be required to provide other information as required by the UDO
Administrator to substantiate the cost of such repairs, reconstruction,
improvements, or addition.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.8.17  Reconstruction Damage More Than 50%.



   If such building or structure as described in the preceding paragraph
is damaged to an extent equal to or greater than 50% of the value as
specified in the preceding paragraph, then such building may only be
reconstructed if it is brought into full compliance with Article 155.11, Part
I (Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance); Article 155.9, Part I (Off-Street
Parking and Off-Street Loading Requirements); and the setback requirements
contained in Section 155.6.5. In the event the number of units in the
building that existed before the damage cannot be  rebuilt because of an
inability to meet the requirements of this paragraph, a building containing a
lesser number of units (but more than are permitted under the zoning
applicable to the property) may be rebuilt so long as all applicable
requirements of the UDO, to include this paragraph, are met. For example, a
damaged quadraplex in a zoning district permitting only single-family units
cannot be rebuilt because the current parking requirements cannot be met.
However, a duplex can be built on the subject property that will meet the
requirements of the UDO and this section. In this situation, a duplex may be
constructed in this zoning district.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.8.18  Increase in Extent of Nonconformity.



   In no event shall the extent of nonconformity of a building or
structure repaired under the provisions of this Ordinance be increased or
enlarged in any manner except as permitted herein.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.8.19  Time for Carrying Out Reconstruction.



   Any owner wishing to repair a nonconforming building or structure under
the provisions of this Ordinance must acquire a building permit for such
repairs within 18 months of the date of the damage or destruction. The UDO
Administrator shall have the authority to extend such 18 month period for an
additional 90 days upon receipt of a written request to do so prior to the
expiration of the initial 18 month period. In the event the owner fails to
meet these time restrictions, the right to continue the nonconforming
situation, use, building or structure shall terminate and the property shall
thereafter be used only in a conforming manner.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



ARTICLE 155.9
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS



PART I.
OFF-STREET PARKING AND OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS



Section 155.9.1  Off-Street Parking Requirements.



   There shall be provided at the time of the erection of any building, or
at the time any principal building is enlarged or increased in capacity by
adding dwelling units, guest rooms, seats, or floor area, permanent
off-street parking space in the amount specified by this section. Such
parking space may be provided in a parking garage or properly graded open
space that complies with the standards for parking established in this
section.



   155.9.1.1  Certification of Minimum Parking Requirements. Each
application for a building permit or certificate of zoning compliance
submitted to the UDO Administrator as provided for in this Ordinance shall
include information as to the location and dimensions of off-street parking
and the means of entrance and exit to the space. This information shall be in
sufficient detail to enable the UDO Administrator to determine whether or not
the requirements of this section are met. In the case of mixed use
developments, the total required off-street parking or loading space shall be
the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately except
for as provided below.



   (A)   Up to one-half of the parking spaces required for one use in a
mixed use development may be used to satisfy the parking requirements for a
second use within the proposed development, subject to certification by the
Board of Aldermen that such joint usage parking complies with the following
provisions:



      (1)   The peak usage of the parking facility by one use will
be at night or on Sundays and the peak usage of the parking facility by the
second use will be at other times as provided in subsection 155.9.1.2; and



      (2)   The second use is ancillary to the first use, such as
restaurants and meeting rooms to hotels and motels.



   (B)   Minimum parking requirements for a mixed use development may
be reduced by the Board of Aldermen if a traffic/parking study is submitted
to demonstrate and the Board of Aldermen finds that:



      (1)   Sidewalks, bicycle facilities, transit service, and
transit amenities are in place such that together with the number of parking
spaces that are proposed, transportation is adequately served or the
commercial establishment(s) existing or previously existing on the subject
property have historically utilized on-street public parking for a
significant portion of customer parking and there is sufficient on-street
public parking available within a 400-foot radius of the mixed-use
development to meet the demand for the commercial component of the mixed-use
development; and provided the commercial component of the mixed use in the
proposed project is equal to and not less than 100% of the previous
commercial use as determined by heated square footage; and



      (2)   Reduction of the minimum parking requirements will not
be injurious to the general health, safety, and welfare.



   155.9.1.2  Combination of Required Parking Space. The required parking
space for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot but the
required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use.
However, one-half of the parking space required for churches, theaters, or
assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be
assigned to a use which will be closed at night or on Sunday mornings until
12:00 noon.



   155.9.1.3  Bicycle Rack Requirements. For all parking lots containing
twenty (20) or more spaces, bicycle racks which accommodate at least five (5)
bicycles shall be installed. The final location of the bicycle rack shall be
determined by the UDO Administrator or his/her designee.



   155.9.1.4  Parking Standards.







 



1.   Parking lands shall be physically improved, landscaped, properly
surfaced, marked, or otherwise designated and shall conform to the town
standards as the parking area located on the lands on which the use is
situated.



2.   Lighting. Any lighting shall be so arranged as to direct light and
glare away from streets and adjacent property (see Article 155.9, Part III).



3.   Sidewalks. Paved sidewalks, per town specifications, shall be
provided at the owner’s expense.



4.   All parking lots shall observe the following yard requirements:



   a.   Minimum Front Yard - 5 ft



   b.   Corner Lots, Minimum Side Yard - 5 ft



5.   Bumpers. The required yards shall be set off from parking areas by
one noncontinuous stationary bumper for each parking space abutting a yard;
bumper shall be not less than 5 inches or more than 12 inches high.



6.   Separation of Bumper and Walkways. In the event any parking stall
abuts a walkway, there shall be a space of 3.5 feet between the wheel bumper
and the edge of the walkway.



7.    Drainage. Parking lots shall not drain onto or across public
sidewalks or into adjacent property except into a drainage easement. Parking
lots with 15 or more spaces shall require a 6 inch curb and gutter and/or
best management practice low impact development (LID) system designed by a
licensed Landscape Architect or Professional Engineer. In already developed
areas where this condition would be impossible to meet, the Board of
Aldermen, upon review and recommendation by the UDO Administrator, may exempt
this requirement provided that adequate provision is made of drainage.



8.   Twenty-five percent (25%) of all parking spaces may be established as
compact parking stalls. The dimensions for standard & compact parking stalls
are outlined in subsection 155.9.1.7.



9.   Paved parking areas shall have lines demarcating each parking space.



10.   On-street parking may be used to satisfy parking requirements on
streets.



11.   Landscaping shall be provided as specified in Article 155.9, Part IV.



12.   Off-street parking areas shall be designed:



   a.   to facilitate adequate movement and access by sanitation,
emergency, and other public service vehicles.



   b.   so that parked vehicles do not encroach upon, extend into, or
cause vehicles to back into public rights-of-way, sidewalks, or strike
against or damage any wall, vegetation, utility, or other structure.



13.   Larger lots (15 or more spaces) shall be broken up through the
establishment of landscaped islands and buffers per the requirements of
Article 155.9, Part IV.



14.   Off-street parking area shall be properly maintained in all
respects. In particular, and without limiting the foregoing, off-street
parking area surfaces shall be kept in good condition (free from potholes,
etc.) and parking space lines or marking shall be kept clearly visible and
distinct.







 



   Handicapped Parking Requirements



15.   Handicapped parking spaces shall be in accordance with the
regulations set forth by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), NC
Department of Transportation (NCDOT), and NC Division of Motor Vehicles
(NCDMV) ADA requirements. All handicapped spaces shall be identified by
pavement markings and appropriate signage approved by the NCDOT. Handicapped
parking shall be required on all multi-family and non-residential sites.



16.   Handicapped parking spaces shall be located in closest proximity to
major building entrances, but in no event shall such spaces be located more
than 100 feet from a major building entrance.



17.   Handicapped parking spaces shall be a minimum of 8 feet in width by
20 feet in length and shall have an adjacent access aisle that has a minimum
width of 5 feet. Two accessible parking spaces may share a common access
aisle.



18.   The minimum number of accessible spaces to be provided for all
multi-family and non-residential sites is as follows:



 

Total Number of Spaces in the Lot
 
Minimum Number of Accessible Spaces




1 to 25
 
1


26 to 50
 
2


51 to 75
 
3


76 to 100
 
4


101 to 150
 
5


151 to 200
 
6


201 or more
 
7 plus one for every 100 spaces over 100




 







 



19.    The number of accessible spaces shall be in addition to those
required by the minimum parking ratios.



20.   All spaces for the disabled shall have access to a curb-ramp or
curb-cut when necessary to allow access to the building served, and shall be
located so that users will not be compelled to wheel behind parked vehicles.



21.   Parallel parking spaces for the disabled shall be located either at
the beginning or end of a block or adjacent to alley entrances. Elective
curbs adjacent to such spaces shall be of a height which will not interfere
with the opening and closing of motor vehicle doors.



22.   The first one out of every eight accessible parking spaces shall be
a van accessible space. Van parking spaces shall have an adjacent access
aisle a minimum of eight feet in width and a vertical clearance of at least
eight feet along the vehicular route to the parking space.



   155.9.1.5 Off-Street Parking Requirements Per Land Use. No certificates
of occupancy shall be issued for any units until the required number of
parking spaces, with ingress and egress, are fully constructed. If any
required parking spaces for units for which certificates of occupancy are
requested are provided on noncontiguous parking lands, then all applicable
provisions of subsection 155.9.1.6 must be complied with. All such
noncontiguous parking lands shall be fully constructed and dedicated by
recorded lease agreement or memorandum of lease in accordance with all of the
standards of this section before the certificates of occupancy shall be
issued. If the lease agreement is terminated, then the conditional use permit
or the permitted use becomes invalid. The following off-street parking space
shall be required and shall conform to the standards contained in subsection
155.9.1.3.



 


Uses

 

Required Off-Street Parking





Residential

   Single-family

   Duplexes/Multi-family
 
Determined by the number of toilet fixtures in the residence (single-family)
or in the individual dwelling unit (duplex/multi-family) in accordance with
the following:

Toilet         Parking spaces per dwelling unit

1-3         2

4-5         3

6-7         4

8 or more      5


Adult care home
 
One space per two beds.


Assisted living residence
 
One space per two bedrooms.


Auditoriums/meeting rooms and hotel or motel operated restaurants
 
One parking space for each four persons as stated on the maximum posted
occupancy placard except that hotels and motels containing 50 or more rooms
may be allowed to reduce this requirement by 50%.


Automobile service station
 
Three spaces per service bay, plus one space per wrecker or service vehicle
and two spaces for each pump.


Barber shop
 
Two spaces per operator plus one space for each employee.


Beauty shop
 
Three spaces per operator plus one space for each employee.


Car washes
 
One space for each employee.


Child care center
 
One space per teacher or staff, plus space for one car drop off and pickup or
stacking for one car per ten children, whichever is greater.


Churches
 
One parking space for each four seats in the sanctuary.


Dry cleaners or laundries
 
One space per four rental pieces of equipment.


Family care home
 
One space per four licensed beds.


Financial institution/bank
 
One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.




 



 


Uses

 

Required Off-Street Parking





Fishing piers
 
A minimum of 25 parking spaces plus one additional space for each 175 square
feet of gross floor area in pier house and other covered areas, plus one
parking space for each two employees on the largest shift.


Home occupation
 
In addition to residence requirements, one parking space per 175 square feet
of floor space devoted to the home occupation use.


Industrial uses
 
One parking space for each employee on the largest shift.


Library, museum, and art

galleries
 
One space per 300 square feet.


Light construction/marina
 
One parking space per each two employees on the largest shift.


Marina/boatominiums
 
One parking space for each slip in the marina plus one parking space for each
four dry storage spaces.


Motels; hotels
 
One parking space for each room to be rented, 1.5 parking spaces for each
two-room suite to be rented, two parking spaces for any suite above two rooms
to be rented, plus one additional parking space for each two employees.


Multi-unit assisted living with services
 
One space per two bedrooms.


Nursing homes
 
One space per three beds, plus one space per staff doctor or practitioner.


Offices, professional businesses or public agencies
 
One parking space for each 225 square feet of gross floor area.


Public or private clubs
 
One parking space for each 100 square feet of gross floor space plus one
parking space for each two employees.


Public or private indoor recreation facility, including community center
 
One space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area.


Residential child-care facility
 
One space for each staff member plus one space per five children.


Restaurants and places of entertainment
 
One parking space for each four persons as stated on the maximum posted
occupancy placard plus one additional parking space for each two employees on
the largest shift.


Retail uses not otherwise listed
 
One parking space for each 225 square feet of gross floor area.


Schools, public
 
One parking space for each classroom and administrative office.




 



 


Uses

 

Required Off-Street Parking



Shopping center complex
 
5.5 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.


Theaters
 
One parking space for each three seats in the auditorium.


Tourist and guest homes, including bed and breakfasts
 
One parking space for each room to be rented plus one additional

parking space for each three employees.


Vessel for hire carrying seven or more passengers
 
One parking space for each two persons. The total required parking spaces
shall be determined by dividing by two the number of persons that the vessel
is permitted to carry based on the Certificate of Inspection issued for that
vessel by the United States Coast Guard. In addition, there shall be required
one parking space for each employee working on the vessel.



 



   155.9.1.6  Exception in Parking Requirements.



   (A)   Parking required for uses in districts zoned commercial or
public or semi-public (G-1) may be provided within 400 feet of the main
entrance to the principal use and located in any commercial zone if the
required off-street parking cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on
which the principal use is located.



   (B)   If the off-street parking space required by this Ordinance for
districts zoned residential cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on
which the principal use is located, such space may be provided on any land
within 400 feet of the main entrance to, and within the same zone as, such
principal use.



   (C)   The Board of Aldermen may grant an exception for off-street
parking requirements in the C-1, C-2 or C-3 zoning districts after a finding
by the Board of Aldermen that:



      (1)   The proposed use is directed primarily toward pedestrian
trade existing in the area;



      (2)   The character of existing development or properties
within 400 feet prohibit the acquisition of land for parking;



      (3)   The inability of the applicant to provide the required
parking does not result from actions of the applicant;



      (4)   Granting the requested exception will not impair public
safety or adversely impact adjacent property; and



      (5)   That one parking space for each two employees shall be
provided. An exception to this requirement may be granted if the applicant
can satisfy the Board of Aldermen that circumstances exist that prevent the
applicant from providing the required parking space(s) for each two employees.



   155.9.1.7  Off-Street Parking Access to Paved Street. No building or
land use of any kind for which 75 or more off-street parking spaces are
required under the terms of this section shall be permitted in any zoning
district unless the lot on which the building or land use is located, adjoins
and has access to a paved street, as defined in this Ordinance, having at
least two paved lanes for traffic and one paved lane for parking. Where the
street facility does not exist at the time a project of land use is proposed,
the developer shall be required to provide such additional right-of-way as
may be necessary for this purpose.



   155.9.1.8  Parking Space Arrangements and Dimensions.



   Parallel Parking



   a.   Length   23 feet



   b.    Widt h   7 feet 5 inches







 



   90 Degree Parking



   a.   Length    18 feet



   b.   Width    9 feet



   c.   Aisle Width   24 feet



   d.   Two Row



      Parking with



      Aisle   60 feet total



   Compact Cars



   e.   Length   16 feet



   f.   Width   8 feet







 



   60 Degree Parking



   a.   Length   20 feet 1 inch - measured from the end of striping
perpendicular to the curb



   b.   Width   9 feet



   c.   One-Way Aisle   16 feet



      Two-Way Aisle   20 feet



   d.   Two Row Parking   56 feet 2 inches total



      with One-Way



      Aisle



      Two Row Parking   60 feet 2 inches total



       with Two-Way



      Aisle



   Compact Cars



   e.   Length      17 feet6 inches - measured from the end of
striping perpendicular to the curb



   f.   Width      8 feet







 



   45 Degree Parking



   a.   Length      19 feet, 1 inch - measured from the end of
striping perpendicular to the curb



   b.   Width      9 feet



   c.   One-Way Aisle   15 feet



      Two-Way Aisle   20 feet



   d.   Two Row Parking   53 feet 2 inches total



      with One-Way Aisle



      Two Row Parking   58 feet 2 inches total



      with Two-Way Aisle



   Compact Cars



   e.   Length      16 feet, 6 inches - measured from the end of
striping perpendicular to the curb



   f.   Width      8 feet







 



   30 Degree Parking



   a.   Length      15 feet, 11 inches - measured from the end of
striping perpendicular to the curb



   b.   Width      9 feet



   c.   One-Way Aisle   14 feet



      Two-Way Aisle   19 feet



   d.   Two Row Parking   45 feet 10 inches total



       with One-Way Aisle



      Two Row Parking   50 feet 10 inches total



      with Two-Way Aisle



   Compact Cars



   e.   Length      14 feet, 6 inches - measured from the end of
striping perpendicular to the curb



   f.   Width      8 feet







 



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1716, passed 9-12-13; Am. Ord. 1725,
passed 3-19-14; Am. Ord. 1760, passed 5-12-16)



Section 155.9.2  Off-Street Loading for Commercial and Industrial Uses.



   (A)   The number of off-street loading spaces required by this
section shall be considered as the absolute minimum and the developer shall
evaluate his own needs to determine if they are greater than the minimum
specified by this section. For purposes of this section, an off-street
loading berth shall have minimum plan dimensions of 12 feet by 25 feet and 14
feet overhead clearance with adequate means for entrance and exits. A loading
space requirement may be modified or waived by the Board of Aldermen on
application in the case of a bank, theater, assembly hall, or other building
or similar limited loading space requirements.



   (B)   Minimum Number of Required Off-Street Loading Berths.



 

Square Feet of Gross Floor Area
 
Required Number of Berths


0 - 20,000
 

0



20,001 - 40,000
 

1



40,001 - 100,000
 

2




 



   Sec 155.9.2.1 Use of Church Parking Lots as Commercial Parking Lots.
Church parking lots permitted under the provisions of the Town Code may be
used as commercial parking lots subject to the following conditions:



   (A)   A church parking lot may be used as a commercial parking lot
on the following days:



      (1)   Saturday, Sunday and Monday of the Memorial Day weekend;



      (2)   The day on which July 4th falls;



      (3)   Saturday and Sunday before July 4th if July 4th falls on
a Monday or Tuesday;



      (4)   Saturday, Sunday and Monday of the July 4th weekend if
July 4th falls on a Saturday or Sunday;



      (5)   Saturday and Sunday after July 4th if July 4th falls on
a Wednesday, Thursday or Friday; and



      (6)   Saturday, Sunday and Monday of the Labor Day weekend.



   (B)   The use of such lots as commercial parking lots shall not
begin before 10:00 a.m.



   (C)   The church shall provide an on-site parking attendant 21 years
of age or older at all times that the lot is used as a commercial parking lot.



   (D)   Trash containers shall be maintained on-site and shall be kept
in a clean and orderly fashion and emptied on a regular basis in order to
prevent the accumulation of trash and other debris.



   (E)   The parking lot shall be kept in a clean and orderly state.
All trash and debris shall be promptly picked up and deposited in appropriate
receptacles.



   (F)   No tailgating (to include, but not be limited to, eating and
picnicking), no partying, no outside activities except parking shall be
permitted in the parking lot.



   (G)   No persons using the parking lot shall violate the town's
noise ordinances.



   (H)   No signage of any kind advertising the availability of public
parking shall be permitted except for three temporary signs not exceeding
eighteen square feet in size for a total of eighteen square feet in size.
Such signs may only be in place during the days on which parking is permitted
pursuant to this section.



   (I)   The signs permitted in division (H) above may state that the
church is accepting donations in return for parking but shall not indicate in
any manner that payment of a fee is required.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1759, passed 5-12-16)



PART II.
DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION



Section 155.9.3  Permit to Construct Driveway Required.



   No person shall construct, reconstruct or repair any driveway within
the town without first obtaining from the Code Enforcement Official a zoning
permit to do so. Such person shall construct, reconstruct and repair such
driveway under the supervision of the Code Enforcement Official, and in
accordance with specifications as may be prepared by the Code Enforcement
Official and adopted by the Board of Aldermen. The specifications prepared by
the Code Enforcement Official for driveway construction shall include type of
construction, materials used, dimensions regarding width, spacing, location,
and situation with respect to street intersections and property lines as may
be deemed necessary by the Code Enforcement Official to promote safety and
safeguard the general public.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.9.4  Conformity of Surrounding Areas of Abutting Property
Owners; Refusal to Make Improvements.



   (A)   The Board of Aldermen may, without petition of abutting
property owners, require the construction, reconstruction, alteration or
repair of sidewalks, driveways, curbs, gutters or drains in conformity with
the provisions of the Wrightsville Beach UDO.



   (B)   If any such improvements are required of a property owner and
the property owner shall fail or refuse to make the same within 30 days after
notice thereof, the Board of Aldermen may cause such improvements to be made
and assess the cost thereof against the property abutting the improvement. In
making and collecting assessment for such improvements, the procedure as
outlined in the North Carolina General Statutes shall be followed.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.9.5  Costs Assessed Against Property Abutting Sidewalk.



   The cost of the construction, reconstruction or alteration of
sidewalks, including the cost of grading and the construction of retaining
walls necessary to provide lateral support for abutting property, shall be
assessed against the property abutting the sidewalk. The cost of relocation
and construction of driveways, steps, or other means or access to his or her
property from the streets as he or she may deem necessary, shall be borne by
the property owner.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.9.6  Specifications for Driveway Construction.



   (A)   The specifications for driveway construction set forth herein
are intended to regulate access from public and private streets or public and
private rights-of-way to the adjoining property.



   (B)   All driveways lawfully permitted at the time of adoption of
this UDO shall be permitted to continue as currently constructed, provided
that the existing driveway is defined and/or improved in a manner that
permits its location to be determined without question. Any structure or
vacant lot existing at the date of adoption of this section and having fewer
driveways on the date of adoption of this section than are permitted in
accordance with subsection (E) below, may apply for additional driveways to
the extent permitted by subsection (E) below and other provisions of this
section.



   (C)   If an existing structure does not have a defined driveway,
then driveway locations will be established by the town consistent with the
provisions of this section for new structures.



   (D)   All matters related to driveways shall be decided by the
Director of Planning and Parks or his or her designee. Any property owner
dissatisfied with a decision of the Director of Planning and Parks or his or
her designee may appeal such decision to the Town Manager by delivering
written notice of appeal to the Town Manager within 30 days of the decision
of the Director of Planning and Parks or his or her designee. The decision of
the Town Manager in this matter shall be final.



   (E)   The following requirements shall apply to the construction of
new driveways and the removal and replacement of existing driveways:



      (1)   Commercial properties, to include properties with
combined commercial and residential uses, shall be permitted one driveway not
to exceed 26 feet in width and must be compliant with the North Carolina Fire
Code. If in the interest of the general public it is deemed necessary to
construct a wider driveway entrance for a commercial property, special
permission to do so  may be granted by the Board of Aldermen.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, mixed-use developments approved by the Board
of Aldermen pursuant to Section 155.7.6 may be permitted more than one
driveway.



      (2)   Driveways on lots located within a residential district
shall be permitted as follows:



         (a)   A vacant lot may have one driveway not to exceed
12 feet in width including flares.



         (b)   A single family residence may have one driveway
not to exceed 24 feet in width including flares or two driveways not to
exceed 12 feet each in width including flares. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
a single family residence located on a lot that is a combination or
recombination of two or more contiguous lots having frontage on two public
rights-of-way with frontage on one of the rights-of-way equal to or exceeding
100 linear feet may have three 12-foot driveways, two on one public
right-of-way and one on the remaining public right-of-way, provided said
driveways do not adversely impact paid on-street parking adjacent to said lot.



         (c)   A duplex may have one driveway not to exceed 30
feet in width including flares or two driveways not to exceed 15 feet each in
width including flares.



         (d)   In the event driveways are separated, they shall
be separated by at least 16 feet of space. The use of an expansion joint no
greater than two inches in width shall not be considered separation of a
driveway. Provided that on any lot having a width adjoining a street right of
way of less than fifty-five feet, driveways shall be separated by at least 8
feet of space.



      (3)   Driveways shall not encroach into the required setback
for the lot in question. Provided that driveways may encroach into the
required side yard setback for lots if the following conditions are met:



         (a)   The driveway existed at the time of adoption of
this subsection (which date is February 14, 2013) and encroached into a
required setback; the driveway was legally permitted by the Town at the time
it was constructed; and the following conditions are satisfied:



            1)   Any part of the driveway encroaching into the
required side yard setback that is repaired or replaced must be constructed
of pervious materials;



            2)   Such repair or replacement shall not create
new nonconformities or increase encroachments into the required setbacks;



            3)   Any part of the driveway that is located
within the Town’s right- of-way that is repaired or replaced shall comply
with the provisions of subsection (E) above; and



            4)   All other provisions of this chapter are
complied with.



         (b)   For lots on which structures exist that have been
determined to be pre- FIRM (as defined in Exhibit A, Definitions) and the
following conditions are satisfied:



            1)   The driveway encroaching into the required
side yard setback must be constructed of pervious materials;



            2)   The total width of driveways, to include
driveways encroaching into the side yard setback as permitted by this
subsection, may not exceed the permitted width of driveways as set forth in
this section (E).



            3)   No driveway may encroach into a required side
yard setback without the prior written consent of the Board of Aldermen if
the creation of such driveway causes a metered on-street parking space to be
eliminated; and



            4)   All other provisions of this section are
complied with.



   (F)   If a structure has a driveway at the time of adoption of this
section that does not comply with the provisions of subsection (E) above, and
such structure is subsequently repaired, reconstructed, improved, or added to
in such a manner as to meet the definition of "substantial improvement" as
set forth in Exhibit A, Definitions, the owner of such structure shall be
required to bring the driveways into compliance with the provisions of
subsection (E) above.



   (G)   All driveway entrance construction shall be of 3,000 pound per
square inch, monolithic concrete, having a depth of not less than six inches
throughout and shall be given a float finish to assure an even surface having
suitable roughness. All driveway entrances and sidewalk surfaces shall be
screened and given a float finish to assure an even surface having suitable
roughness. Driveway entrances shall conform to the contour of the street
pavement, making provision for drainage flows and gutter continuity, and
shall rise not less than six inches above the gutter at the point at which
the driveway reaches the property lines in order to assure containment of
drainage flows and proper runoff. Expansion joints shall be placed at edges
of driveways where sidewalks abut, and in aprons not less than 24 feet apart.



   (H)   Where existing driveway entrances do not conform to these
regulations and constitute a hazard, obstruct drainage, or are in a dangerous
state of repair, and the owner is instructed by the Board of Aldermen to
repair said driveway entrance, or adjacent curbs and sidewalks as provided in
this section, the owner shall submit a drawing showing the proposed new
driveway to be placed in accordance with the ordinance and these regulations.



   (I)   Where streets are widened or curb and gutter sections are
placed after driveways are installed, the owner of the property adjacent to
the street where such improvements take place shall be assessed all costs of
modification of said existing driveways in order to conform to the street
improvements in accordance with the provisions of Article V of the Charter of
the Town of Wrightsville Beach.



   (J)   All requests for a zoning permit to construct driveways shall
be accompanied by a sketch showing the location of the property involved, the
frontage concerned, and the location of any structures on the property. The
inclusions of this information on site plans for building permits for new
construction will be acceptable for the purpose of driveway permit issue.



   (K)   The street area immediately adjacent to a permitted driveway
as described in this section shall be painted and/or marked so as to indicate
that no-parking is permitted within the street right-of-way immediately
adjacent to the permitted driveway. Parking shall be permitted on all other
areas of the street except those portions of such street otherwise designated
as no parking areas by this Unified Development Ordinance or action of the
Board of Aldermen. Provided, that should the designation of no parking areas
adjacent to permitted driveways as described herein result in permitted
parking areas of a length of less than 15 feet, such area shall be designated
as a no parking area.



   (L)   It shall be unlawful for any person except authorized
employees of the town to paint, mark or otherwise designate no parking areas
on a public street. Any person violating the provision of this section shall
be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 155.1.12.9.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1700, passed 2-14-13; Am. Ord. 1753,
passed 12-10-15)



PART III.
OUTDOOR LIGHTING



Section 155.9.7  Purpose.



   This section sets forth criteria for the installation and acceptable
levels of exterior lighting in the town. The purposes of this section are as
follows:



   (A)   Preserve and enhance public safety;



   (B)   Protect drivers from disabling glare and thereby enhance
traffic safety;



   (C)   Protect marine vessels from disabling glare on the waterways
and thereby enhance navigation safety;



   (D)   Enhance the town’s nighttime character;



   (E)   Shield neighboring properties from nuisance glare;



   (F)   Reduce light pollution, light trespass and the brightening of
the night sky due to manmade lighting;



   (G)   Protect and not disrupt sea turtle nesting habitats; and



   (H)   Promote energy conservation through efficient light design and
operation.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.9.8  Commercial Exterior Lighting.



   (A)   Outdoor Parking Lots, Storage and Display Areas and Driveways.
Lighting for outdoor parking lots, outdoor storage and display areas, and
commercial driveways shall be designed to provide the minimum lighting
necessary to ensure adequate public safety, to control excessive glare onto
adjacent streets and properties, and to prevent light trespass onto adjoining
properties, public rights-of-way, and any public trust waters.



      (1)   General.



         (a)   All lighting fixtures used for the purpose of
illuminating parking lots and driveways shall be full cut-off fixtures that
meet the standards set forth in the definition as documented by the
manufacturer’s specification or a qualified engineer.



         (b)   Directional floodlighting fixtures must be
full-cutoff or shielded and properly aimed so that the light source:



            1.   Does not produce glare;



            2.   Does not produce up-lighting; and



            3.   Contains light so that it does not trespass
onto adjoining properties, public rights-of-way, and any public trust waters.



         (c)   The maximum mounting height for pole-mounted
fixtures intended to illuminate parking lots is 30 feet measured from the
base of the pole.



      (2)   Special Design Areas. Lighting fixtures of a particular
period or architectural style such as carriage lights and post lights, may be
used in special design areas. In such areas, fixtures that are not full
cut-off are permitted provided that:



         (a)   The maximum initial lumens generated by each lamp
shall not exceed 500 lumens, according to the manufacturer’s specifications
(the purpose of this lumen cap is to avoid cumulative use of lights that may
be too bright or that may cause trespass); and



         (b)   Post top shall be fitted with a solid top to
control up-lighting and reduce glare; and



         (c)   Fixture mounting height is no more than 16 feet
above grade level.



      (3)   Standard. All illumination of parking lots, outdoor
storage and display areas and commercial driveways shall comply with the
intensities and uniformity ratios in Section 155.9.14 or by the standard
within this section whichever is more stringent.



   (B)   Commercial Building Exteriors and Parking Garages. These
provisions apply to all buildings and uses within the town’s Commercial and
Public/Semi-Public Zoning Districts and to any non-conforming nonresidential
uses in other zoning districts.



      (1)   General. Exterior building lights may be mounted in
front, at ground level, or wall mounted provided that:



         (a)   All light fixtures, wherever mounted, are properly
aimed and full cut-off or shielded to confine the light to the area of the
building being lighted and to prevent light trespass.



         (b)   Wall-mounted light fixtures may be mounted no
higher than 20 feet above grade. The fixtures must be full cut-off or
shielded and aimed to avoid up-lighting.



         (c)   Ground mounted fixtures must restrict up-lighting.



         (d)   Bare light sources (including but not limited to
festive light strands, incandescent, fluorescent, high intensity discharge,
and neon) used to outline property lines, open sales areas, roof lines,
doors, windows, the edges of walls or any other area of the building or
property visible from outside the building are prohibited, except for holiday
lighting permitted from Thanksgiving through January 15th of the new year.



         (e)   The maximum illumination level on any vertical
surface or roof of a commercial building shall not exceed 3.0 average
foot-candles of vertical illuminance.



      (2)   Gas Station/Convenience Store Canopies.



         (a)   Light fixtures above 200 watts mounted on canopies
shall be recessed so that the lens cover is recessed or flush with the bottom
surface of the canopy and/or shielded by the



            fixture or the edge of the canopy so that light is
restricted to no more than 85 degrees from vertical.



         (b)   The illumination level for canopy lighting
measured at the pavement/ground level shall not exceed 10 average maintained
foot-candles.



      (3)   Parking Garages.



         (a)   Lighting located outside the structure shall
comply with the requirements of subsection (C)(1) below. Lighting located
inside the structure providing illumination that is visible from the exterior
of the structure shall be full cutoff or shielded by the structure, shield,
visor, hood, or louvers in a manner that contains light and glare within the
structure and meets this section’s standards for light trespass.



         (b)   The illumination level of interior lighting that
is visible from the exterior of the structure shall comply with the
intensities and uniformity ratios in Section 155.9.14.



      (4)   Standard. All illumination of commercial building
exteriors, gas and convenience store canopies, and parking garages shall
comply with the intensities and uniformity ratios in Section 155.9.14 or by
the standard within this section whichever is the more stringent.



   (C)   Commercial Docks and Piers. Lighting for commercial docks and
piers shall minimize glare, trespass, and restrict up-lighting.



      (1)   All lighting fixtures must meet the following standards:



         (a)   Fixtures must be full cut-off or shielded and
properly aimed so that they control glare, do not produce up-lighting, and
contain light to prevent trespass on adjoining uplands, public rights-of-way
and public trust waters.



         (b)   Disabling glare that impairs the ability of
boaters to safely traverse public trust waters shall be prohibited.



         (c)   Mounting height shall be as low as practicable but
in no case shall the fixture be mounted higher than 25 feet above the lowest
platform of the dock or pier.



         (d)   Bare light sources (including but not limited to
festive light strands, incandescent, fluorescent, high intensity discharge,
and neon) used to outline commercial docks and piers are prohibited.



      (2)   Standard. All illumination of docks and piers shall
comply with the intensities and uniformity ratios in Section 155.9.14 or by
the standard within this section whichever is the more stringent.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.9.9  Residential Exterior Lighting.



   (A)   General. Fixtures using lamps (bulbs) of 60 watts/640 lumens
or less for incandescent bulbs (frosted) or 25 watts for clear lamps, such as
typical porch lights, may be installed at any location in residentially zoned
areas.



   (B)   Security Lighting.



      (1)   Motion Activated Security Lighting. Unshielded flood and
spot lights, with lamps of 45 watts/520 lumens or less or their equivalent
(this information is specified on the retail packaging), installed for
security and activated by motion sensors are permitted. These unshielded
lights must be mounted and aimed in a manner that minimizes up-lighting and
light trespass and that is consistent with the security purposes of the
lights.



      (2)   All other flood and spot light fixtures must have top
and side shields capable of containing light below the roof line of the house
and reducing light trespass on adjoining properties to the maximum extent
feasible.



   (C)   Landscape and Decorative Lighting. Landscape and decorative
lighting using quarts halogen lamps of 36 watts/110 volt system or less is
permitted (or the equivalent low-voltage system rating), provided that the
light is installed and aimed to prevent up-lighting and light trespass and
shielded to prevent view of the bulb from the public right- of-way.



   (D)   Area lights or “dusk to dawn” lights are permitted, as
follows:



      (1)   These lights must be full cut-off or shielded.



      (2)   If pole mounted on the ground, the fixture mounting
height may be no more than 16 feet above grade at the base of the pole.



      (3)   If wall mounted, the fixture mounting height may be no
more than 16 feet above grade, or 10 feet above any first floor of houses
constructed on pilings, measured from the level of the lowest habitable floor.



   (E)   Standard. All illumination of residential exteriors shall
comply with the intensities and uniformity ratios in Section 155.9.14 or by
the standard within this section whichever is the more stringent.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.9.10  Private Piers and Docks Including Residential.



   (A)   All lighting fixtures must meet the following standards:



      (1)   Fixtures must be full cut-off or shielded and properly
aimed so that they control glare, do not produce up-lighting, and contain
light to prevent trespass on adjoining uplands, public rights-of-way and
public trust waters.



      (2)   Disabling glare that impairs the ability of boaters to
safely traverse public trust waters shall be prohibited.



      (3)   Mounting height shall be as low as practicable but in no
case shall the fixture be mounted higher than 25 feet above the lowest
platform of the dock or pier.



      (4)   Bare light sources (including but not limited to festive
light strands, incandescent, fluorescent, high intensity discharge, and neon)
used to outline private piers and docks are prohibited.



   (B)   Standard. All illumination of parking lots, outdoor storage
and display areas and commercial driveways shall comply with the intensities
and uniformity ratios in Section 155.9.14 or by the standard within this
section whichever is the more stringent.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.9.11  Signs.



   Lighting of signs shall comply with the provisions of Article 155.10.
In addition, the following requirements apply:



   (A)   Lighting fixtures used to illuminate on-premise commercial
signs must be mounted at the top of the sign structure.



   (B)   The sign lighting fixture(s) must be fully-shielded to control
glare, to prevent encroachment on neighboring properties and rights-of-way
and to contain light so that it is projected below an horizontal plane
extending through the fixture.



   (C)   The height of the sign lighting fixture shall be no greater
than the maximum permitted height of the sign.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.9.12  Other Requirements.



   (A)   No lighting fixture or device may be operated in such a manner
as to constitute a hazard or danger to persons, or to the safe operation and
navigation of vehicles or watercraft.



   (B)   The following are exempt from the requirements of this section:



      (1)   Situations where federal and state laws, rules and
regulations take precedence;



      (2)   Location and operation of traffic control devices;



      (3)   Situations where there are special requirements, such as
public monuments and flag lighting, provided, however, that such lighting
shall be selected and installed to shield the lamp(s) from direct view to the
greatest extent possible and to minimize upward lighting and trespass; and



      (4)   Up lighting and security lighting owned by the Town and
installed in order to illuminate trees, foliage and other structures located
within a public right-of-way or on public property.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1730, passed 6-12-14)



Section 155.9.13  Nonconformities.



   (A)   This section shall be effective immediately upon adoption by
the Board of Aldermen of the town and shall supersede and replace all
previous ordinances pertaining to outdoor lighting.



   (B)   Any outdoor lighting not in conformity with the requirements
of this Ordinance and lawfully in place prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance shall be removed or rendered in compliance with this Ordinance
within three years of its effective date.



   (C)   After the effective date of this Ordinance, any lighting
system that replaces a lighting system not in conformity, or any lighting
system that is moved, must meet the standards of this Ordinance.



   (D)   Non-conforming lighting systems that cause disability glare to
motorists or cyclists or that directs light toward public waters so as to
cause disability glare to operators of watercraft shall be either
fully-shielded as directed in this section or re-directed within 90 days of
notification so that the lighting system does not cause a potential hazard to
motorists, cyclists or watercraft operators.



   (E)   Non-conforming lighting systems that cause light trespass or
up-lighting which can be corrected by redirecting the fixture shall be
re-directed to eliminate the trespass or up-lighting within 90 days of
notification.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.9.14  Maximum Illumination Standards.



   The figures in this table represent maximum levels of illumination for
roadways, parking lots, and building exteriors.



 


Type of Land Use

 

Horizontal Illuminance



(Foot-candles)

 

Uniformity Ratio (Average to Minimum)




Average

 

Minimum



Roadways

   Major road

   Local road
 





0.6 - 1.6



0.3 - 0.8

 



 





3:1



6:1



Parking Lots

   High activity (i.e., fast food facilities)

   Medium activity (i.e., office, residential complex, or hotel)

   Low activity (i.e., neighborhood shopping, schools, or churches)
 





3.6



2.4



0.8

 





0.9



0.6



0.2

 





4:1



4:1



4:1



Building Exteriors

   Entrances, active (pedestrian, conveyances)

   Entrances, inactive (locked doors)

   Vital locations or structures

   Surroundings
 





5



1



5



1

 



 





Commercial Docks and Piers
 

5

 



 






 



   Note: Where conflict is found between the standards set forth in
Sections 155.9.7 through 155.9.13 and this Section, the more conservative,
lower illuminance standard will be the standard of choice.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



PART IV.
LANDSCAPE, BUFFERING, AND SCREENING



Section 155.9.15  Purpose.



   The purpose of this section is to establish minimum requirements to
provide adequate visual buffering and screening of structures, parking areas,
and other uses. The intention of these requirements is to satisfy the
following objectives:



   (A)   To provide attractive visual buffering between different land
uses and enhance town beautification.



   (B)   To safeguard and enhance property values and to protect public
and private investment by providing standards for the protection of existing
vegetation and root zones and the installation of new vegetation.



   (C)   To mitigate stormwater runoff and erosion, enhance air
quality, conserve energy, and aid in abating noise, glare and heat.



   (D)   To encourage the use of the recommended plants in this section
as well as native species and related cultivars of trees and shrubs.



   (E)   To promote long term plant health through proper installation
methods.



   (F)   To promote visibility and safety.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.9.16  Applicability.



   (A)   Article 155.9, Part IV shall be applicable when the following
situations apply:



      (1)   Residential Development. When eight or greater parking
spaces a re required for all phases of development excluding all residential
developments which contain solely detached single-family dwelling units.



      (2)   Nonresidential Development.



         (a)   New Construction. When a permitted use, a use or
combination of uses contained within a conditional use permit require ten or
greater parking spaces.



         (b)   Existing Development. When there is a change from
an existing use to a new use which requires additional parking and the new
use requires ten or greater parking spaces.



         (c)   Expansion of Structure. When there is an expansion
of an existing structure by greater than 10% of the gross floor area and that
use requires ten or greater parking spaces.



         (d)   Reconstruction of Structure. When there is damage
or destruction to an existing structure beyond 50% of its assessed value, the
reconstruction must conform to the new construction standards of this section.



         (e)   Expansion of Parking Facility. When there is an
expansion of the parking facility by a minimum of 10% of the parking with a
minimum of ten total spaces.



   (B)   This section shall become effective on all applicable
conditions that are met during a five-year cumulative period.



   (C)   This section shall not apply under any circumstance to
properties in the C-1, Commercial District.



   (D)   Bufferyards which abut a Natural Water Feature shall be exempt
from the requirements of that bufferyard.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.9.17  Landscapin g Requirements.







 



   Street Yard Requirements



1.    Minimum Standards: The minimum depth of all street yards shall be
7.5 feet. For every 50 linear feet of frontage, or fraction thereof, the
street yard shall contain a minimum of 3 Shade Trees and 6 Intermediate
Shrubs. Newly installed plant material shall be evenly distributed where
possible.



2.   If there are existing trees in the proposed street yard area, the UDO
Administrator may grant credit toward the requirement for preservation of
those trees, provided their caliper is at least 2 inches or more.



3.   No planting material will be allowed which, at planting or maturity,
will impede vision between a height of 3 feet and 10 feet in a triangular
area formed by a diagonal line between two points on a driveway or public
right-of-way, 20 feet from where they intersect.



   Parking Facility Requirements



4.   Minimum Standards: For parking facilities having 15 or more parking
spaces, at least 8% of the gross paved area shall be landscaped and located
in the interior of the facility.



5.   Planting islands shall include at least one Shade Tree or one Small
Tree and 6 Small Shrubs. At least 50% of the trees planted shall be Shade
Trees.



6.   In support of the above, the following standard shall apply to
interior plantings:



   a.   All planting shall be evenly distributed throughout the parking
facility.



   b.   All interior plantings shall be curbed or otherwise physically
protected.



   c.   Consecutive parking spaces shall incorporate landscaped islands
no more than 15 spaces apart and at the ends of all parking rows. Landscaped
islands shall contain at least 100 square feet in area and be at least 8 feet
in width, measured from back of curb to back of curb.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.9.18  Bufferyards.







 



7.   Type A. Bufferyard Screening. This is a medium density screen
intended to block visual contact between uses and to create special
separation. Type A Bufferyard Screening shall be required between adjacent
non-residential properties.



   a.   Type A1: Minimum of 7.5 feet wide. For every linear 100 feet,
or fraction thereof, the screen shall consist of a combination of a minimum
of 2 Shade Trees planted evenly at 40 feet on center, and 10 evergreen
Intermediate Shrubs planted 8 feet on center.



               -or-



   b.   Type A2: Minimum of 5 feet wide. For every linear 100 feet, or
fraction thereof, the screen shall consist of a combination of at least 3
Shade Trees planted evenly at 40 feet on center, and 15 evergreen
Intermediate Shrubs 6 feet on center.



8.   Type B Bufferyard Screening. This is a high density screen intended
to exclude virtually all visual contact between uses and to create a special
separation. Type B Bufferyard Screening shall be required when a
non-residential property is adjacent to a residential district or use.



   a.   Type B1: Minimum width of 15 feet, except for the C-2 and C-3
Districts which shall have a minimum of 7.5 feet. For every linear 100 feet,
or fraction thereof, the screen shall consist of a combination of a minimum
of 3 Shade Trees planted evenly at 30 feet on center, and 15 evergreen Large
Shrubs planted 6 feet on center.



               -or-   



   b.   Type B2: Minimum width of 10 feet, except for the C-2 and C-3
Districts which shall have a minimum of 5 feet. For every linear 100 feet, or
fraction thereof, the screen shall consist of a minimum of 4 Shade Trees
planted 30 feet on center, and 20 evergreen Large Shrubs 5 feet on center.







 



9.   Type C Bufferyard Screening. An Opaque Fence or Opaque Wall may be
used in place of 50% of required bufferyard screening plants.



   a.   The design, color and material of any fence or screen used to
meet bufferyard requirements shall be approved by the Zoning Official. The
side of the fence facing the affected property owner shall be the finished
side of the fence. All planted screening required to be used in conjunction
with a fence shall be planted on the finished side of the fence facing the
affected use, and the remaining plantings shall be equally distributed in the
bufferyard.







 



10.   Type D Bufferyard Screening. A combination earthen berm with
vegetation may be used as follows:



   a.   An earthen berm may be used in conjunction with planted
vegetation provided that the combined height of the berm and planted
vegetation shall be an installed minimum height of 6 feet.



   b.   The slope of the berm shall be stabilized with vegetation and
no steeper than 3:1. The height of the berm shall be a maximum of 6 feet,
with a level or rounded area on top of the berm. The berm shall be
constructed of compacted earth.







 



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.9.19  Additional Requirements for Buffers and for Yards in Which
Buffers Are Required.



   (A)   Existing Trees and Shrubs. Any existing trees or shrubs within
required bufferyards shall be encouraged to be utilized and supplemented as
necessary to meet bufferyard screening requirements. Existing trees and
shrubs intended to meet bufferyard screening requirements shall be protected
from detrimental actions such as vehicle or equipment movement, excavating
and grading, and installation of storage or structured elements.



   (B)   Uses in the Bufferyard. No activities shall occur in the
bufferyard except for maintenance of the bufferyard, required ingress and
egress and the installation and maintenance of water, sewer, electrical, and
other utility systems where the installation causes minimal disturbance of
existing vegetation.



   (C)   Uses in the Rear Yard and Side Yards Abutting a Residential
Use. The following uses shall be shielded from view from the property line of
the residential use by means of an Opaque Fence or Opaque Wall:



      (1)   Dumpsters or other trash holding areas.



      (2)   Outside storage areas.



      (3)   Loading/unloading areas.



   (D)   Encroachment into Setbacks.



      (1)   If an existing structure is located within a setback
where the implementation of the Streetyard and/or Bufferyard requirements are
physically impossible and the encroachment into the yard (streetyard
bufferyard) allows for a minimum of three (3) feet of planting area, only the
required shrubs shall be planted.



      (2)   If the encroachment into the yard (streetyard or
bufferyard) allows for less than three (3) feet of planting area, no planting
will be required in that yard; and



         (a)   For every yard (streetyard or bufferyard) in which
the situation exists, one (1) additional Small Tree shall be planted in each
streetyard or bufferyard not encroached upon; or



         (b)   For every yard (streetyard or bufferyard) in which
the situation exists, five (5) feet of additional yard width shall be added
to a yard (streetyard or bufferyard); or



         (c)   If all four yards (streetyard and three
bufferyards) allow less than three (3) feet of planting area, no planting
shall be required.



   (E)   It is recommended and encouraged that native species and
related cultivars be planted.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.9.20  Installation.



   (A)   Plants shall meet the standards for plant quality and size as
defined in the most recent version of the “American Standard for Nursery
Stock” manual.



   (B)   Plants shall be installed per the installation details
included in Exhibit B of this Ordinance.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.9.21  Maintenance.



   (A)   All existing vegetation that is used to meet landscaping
requirements, all required plants, and all required berms shall be maintained
by the owner of the property on a continuing basis for the life of the
development.



   (B)   Opaque Fences or Opaque Walls shall be maintained, cleaned and
repaired by the owner of the property on a continuing basis for the life of
the development. Such fencing shall be kept free of litter and advertising.



   (C)   A new certificate of occupancy/building permit or a complaint
will result in an inspection for compliance.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.9.22  Landscape Plan.



   (A)   Landscaping plans shall be submitted at the time of
application for the Building Permit or Conditional Use Permit, if a
Conditional Use Permit is required. These plans shall contain the following
information:



      (1)   Date of plan preparation.



      (2)   Project name and description of land use.



      (3)   Project owner and mailing address.



      (4)   A map at a scale of 1" = 50' or less showing:



         (a)   North arrow.



         (b)   Scale.



         (c)   Locations, dimensions and square footages of
required bufferyards and parking lot landscaping.



         (d)   Details of required landscaping showing species,
dimensions, and spacing of planted materials and the use and protection of
existing vegetation.



         (e)   Location and square footage of structures and
parking lots.



         (f)   Approximate locations of all trees greater than
two-inches caliper within required buffers and of all areas of natural
vegetation to be used as part of the buffer.



         (g)   Setbacks of all structures and specifications and
shielding of certain uses, as required.



         (h)   Proposed schedule for landscaping.



   (B)   No Certificate of Occupancy for any construction or renovation
shall be approved by the UDO Administrator until the required landscaping is
completed in accordance with the approved plan.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.9.23  Tree Preservation.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The purpose of this section is to protect important
trees located at Wrightsville Beach, to provide wildlife habitat, to provide
stabilization of sand and soil, and to provide a vital link in natural
stormwater management through absorption. Trees act as a filter helpful to
maintaining the health and quality of waters.



      (2)   The objectives of this section are as follows:



         (a)   Maintain and enhance property values;



         (b)   Preserve and enhance the visual appearance of the
Town of Wrightsville Beach;



         (c)   Preserve unique and productive coastal habitats;



         (d)   Reduce impacts of development on the town's
stormwater system;



         (e)   Assist the town in preserving and enhancing the
quality of its estuarine waters; and



         (f)   Increase tree canopy.



   (B)   Tree Protection Permit Required.



      (1)   No protected tree shall be removed or be caused to be
removed, through injury or damage, from public or private property without
first obtaining and having an approved tree removal permit. Removal of any
protected tree is prohibited except in accordance with an approved tree
protection plan. The following tree removal activities may be undertaken
without an approved tree protection plan and that is consistent with good
horticultural practices:



         (a)   Clearing or maintenance of town rights-of-way.



         (b)   Clearing or maintenance required by the town in
accordance with Section 2.6 (Site Visibility Triangle).



         (c)   Emergencies. During the period of an emergency
such as a hurricane, tropical storm, flood, ice storm or any other act of
nature that causes damage to a tree such that it imperils life, property, or
other trees.



         (d)   A permit shall not be required in order to remove
minor tree limbs or to do other minor pruning.



         (e)   Hazardous trees. In the event that any tree shall
be determined to be in a hazardous or dangerous condition so as to endanger
the public health, welfare or safety, and requires immediate removal without
delay, verbal authorization may be given by the Planning and Inspections
Department and the trees removed without obtaining a written permit as herein
required.



      (2)   Public utilities removing trees or cutting trees in
conjunction with construction, maintenance or repair of utility lines shall
be subject to the following requirements:



         (a)   A public utility shall submit a tree protection
plan and shall acquire a tree protection permit before removing any protected
tree within a utility easement or right-of-way. There shall be no charge for
such permit.



         (b)   A public utility shall submit a tree protection
plan and shall acquire a tree protection permit before undertaking any tree
trimming or pruning activities in connection with the construction,
maintenance or repair of utility lines within a utility easement or
right-of-way. There shall be no charge for such permit.



   (C)   Tree Protection Permit Application and Procedure. A tree
removal application and tree protection plan must be filed with the town and
approved by the UDO Administrator or their designee prior to protected tree
removal. Requests for multiple tree removal shall be specified on the
application. A permit will be issued for any approved plan. The fee for
submission of a plan is set forth in the schedule of fees.



      (1)   Tree protection plans submitted in connection with
applications for permits for the removal, relocation or replacement of trees
shall include the following information and details which shall be summarized
on the plan:



         (a)   Name of property owner.



         (b)   Date, including the month, day, and year that the
original drawing was completed and the month, day, and year for each revision
to the original drawing.



         (c)   Location of all existing or proposed structures,
improvements and site uses, property dimensions and referenced property
lines, setback and yard requirements as they apply to tree removal.



         (d)   The common names, sizes and location of all
protected trees on the site, designating the trees which are respectfully to
be retained, removed, relocated, or replaced. Trees proposed for removal
shall be marked with an “X” through the tree symbol in the document.
Trees not marked shall be conserved.



         (e)   The location and type of trees that will be
planted after development or construction and the time frame for completion
of such planting.



      (2)   The UDO Administrator or his or her designee will review
the tree protection plan according to the requirements in this section.



   (D)   Standards for Plan Approval or Denial. Protected trees are to
be retained and protected to the maximum extent feasible. The UDO
Administrator or his or her designee shall issue or deny a tree permit within
five business days of receiving application for such. No permit shall be
issued for the removal of protected trees unless one of the following
conditions exists:



      (1)   The tree is located in the buildable area of a yard area
where a structure or improvements may be placed and it unreasonably restricts
the permitted use of the property and such trees cannot reasonably be
relocated elsewhere on the property. Necessity to remove trees in order to
construct proposed improvements as a result of the following:



         (a)   Need for access to the building site for
construction equipment;



         (b)   Essential grade changes for surface water drainage
and utility installations;



         (c)   Location of proposed structure and required
driveway(s); and



         (d)   Location of proposed parking spaces and associated
circulation required to be installed by Article 155.9, Part I.



      (2)   The tree cannot be relocated on or off the site because
of the age, type, or size of the tree.



      (3)   The tree is diseased, injured, in danger of falling, too
close to existing or proposed structures, interferes with existing utility
service, creates unsafe vision clearance, or conflicts with other ordinances
or regulations.



      (4)   Where tree removal is consistent with an approved
subdivision plat or site plan.



      (5)   It is in the welfare of the general public that the tree
be removed for a reason other than set forth above.



      (6)   If a plan is approved that allows the removal of
protected trees, the approval shall be conditioned upon compliance with a
mitigation plan meeting the standards of the mitigation policy in subsection
155.9.23(F).



   (E)   Tree Protection During Construction. Tree preservation is a
pre-planning activity and will be thoroughly considered prior to development
of engineering and/or architectural plans and prior to initiation of
construction projects. Protected trees shall be guarded during development
against the following:



      (1)   Unnecessary cutting, breaking or skinning of roots.



      (2)   Skinning and bruising of bark.



      (3)   Excessive vehicular and foot traffic within drip lines.



      (4)   Parking vehicles within drip lines.



      (5)   During the land clearing and construction stage of
development, the developer shall erect and maintain protective barriers (to
the Building Inspector's specifications consistent with good management
practices) around all trees or groups of trees to be protected. The developer
shall not allow the movement of equipment or the storage of equipment,
materials, debris or fill to be placed within the protective barrier.



      (6)   During the construction stage of development, the
developer shall not allow the cleaning of equipment or material within the
drip line of any tree or groups of trees to be protected. Neither shall the
developer allow the disposal of waste materials such as paint, oil solvents,
asphalt, concrete, mortar and so on within the drip line of any tree or
groups of trees.



      (7)   No attachments or wires other than those of a protective
nature shall be attached to any tree.



      (8)   Soil disturbances within the drip line of a protected
tree shall be limited to two inches in depth removed or two inches in depth
added. Any soil added under the drip line of the tree shall be a loamy soil
mix to ensure minimal compaction.



      (9)   During land clearing and construction stage of
development, the UDO Administrator shall periodically inspect the site to
insure compliance with the provisions of this section.



      (10)   Tree location and replacement activity permitted or
required under this section shall be done in accordance with standard
forestry practices and procedures, and all such plantings shall be reasonably
maintained and attended to promote successful establishment thereof.



   (F)   Tree Loss Mitigation Policy. To offset negative impacts to
natural environment, aesthetics, and property values of Wrightsville Beach
and to uphold the intent of this section, the following tree replacement
schedule shall be followed, which shall be in addition to any and all fees
and/or fines paid or incurred by a party that removes or alters a tree, the
effect of which is to eliminate it.



      (1)   All protected trees removed shall be replaced in
accordance with the following criteria:



         (a)   All trees required by this section, all trees on
town-owned property and other protected trees, excluding specimen trees,
shall be replaced in a one-to-one ratio with trees that at maturity will be
of comparable DBH and height of the tree removed. All replacement trees shall
have a DBH of at least three inches when planted.



         (b)   Specimen trees shall be replaced on a two-to-one
ratio with trees of the same species. All replacement trees shall have a DBH
of at least three inches when planted.



         (c)   All mitigation shall occur on the property where
the tree was removed. Mitigation in connection with construction shall be
completed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.



      (2)   Tree loss mitigation shall not take effect when a tree
removed is that lost to natural causes, such as age, disease, or storm, or
other causes beyond the control of the landowner and property developer, such
as a car crash or fire for which no party is found responsible. Tree loss
mitigation shall take effect for all other trees allowed to be removed by
permit from the UDO Administrator or by variance from the Board of Adjustment
as well as for those trees altered or removed in violation of this section.



      (3)   A developer or property owner may be excused from the
requirement to install new required trees that would cause the lot in
question to contain more than five total protected trees, to include new and
existing trees, if the UDO Administrator determines that the size of a given
property and presence of existing vegetation is such that the introduction of
a significant number of new trees may be detrimental to both existing
vegetation and proposed trees. The decision of the UDO Administrator in such
matter shall be final.



   (G)   Penalties.



      (1)   Any person who violates the provisions of Article 155.9,
Section 9.23, Tree Preservation, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or
infraction punishable as provided in NCGS 14-4 and shall be subject to a
maximum fine upon conviction of up to $2,500. Additionally, conviction
thereof shall be grounds for the revocation or suspension of any permit
granted for the construction or remodeling of any building or structure on
the site so involved.



      (2)   The violation of the provisions of Article 155.9,
Section 155.9.23, Tree Preservation, shall subject the offender to a civil
penalty for each violation as follows:



         (a)   The removal of each protected tree, excluding
specimen trees, without first obtaining an approved tree removal permit,
shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $500.



         (b)   The removal of each specimen tree without first
obtaining an approved tree removal permit shall subject the offender to a
civil penalty in the amount of $1,000.



         (c)   The violation of any other provision of Article
155.9, Section 155.9.23, Tree Preservation, shall subject the offender to a
civil penalty of $50 for each violation.



         (d)   Each day that a violation of Article 155.9,
Section 155.9.23, Tree Preservation, as described in subsection (G)(2)(c)
above continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be
subject to a fine of $50 per day.



      (3)   No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be
issued for any improvements upon a property where the provisions of Article
155.9, Section 155.9.23, Tree Preservation, have not been complied with. A
stop work order shall be issued until violations of the provisions of Article
155.9, Section 155.9.23, Tree Preservation, are corrected and until all fines
and penalties are paid.



      (4)   The UDO Administrator may defer any civil penalty levied
under the provisions of Article 155.9, Section 155.9.23, Tree Preservation,
if the offender obtains an approved tree permit and if the offender replants
the disturbed area in accordance with an approved tree protection plan
meeting the requirements of Article 155.9, Section 155.9.23, Tree
Preservation.



      (5)   Damages to protected trees shall be repaired to the
maximum extent possible. Each tree removed, destroyed, or damaged in
violation of Article 155.9, Section 155.9.23, Tree Preservation, shall be
considered a separate offense.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.9.24  Recommended Plant List.



   The following is a recommended plant list to be utilized in the
preparation of Landscape Plans to meet vegetation requirements. NOTE: Native
vegetation is preferred. Plants not listed may be accepted by the UDO
Administrator if they meet the standards defined by this section. Some plants
are listed under multiple categories as many of these plants are offered in
numerous varieties. Mature height and spread of each plant is contingent on
the variety. It is highly recommended that Landscape Plans be prepared by or
in consultation with a Registered Landscape Architect or qualified landscape
design professional.



   Key:



   E = EVERGREEN N = NATIVE



   D = DROUGHT TOLERANT



   S = SALT TOLERANT (MODERATE TO HIGH)



 



Botanical Name
 
Common Name
 



Shade Tree - installed at 12-14 foot height and 2-inch caliper, mature height
greater than 30 feet


Fagus grandifolia
 
American Beech
 
N


Ginkgo biloba (male only)
 
Ginkgo
 
D, S


Gleditsia tricanthos inermis
 
Thornless Honeylocust
 
N, S


Liquidambar styraciflua
 
American Sweetgum
 
N, D


Magnolia grandiflora
 
Southern Magnolia
 
E, N, D, S


Nyssa sylvatica
 
Black Gum
 
N, S


Quercus nigra
 
Water Oak
 
N, D, S


Quercus shumardii
 
Shumard Oak
 
N, D, S


Quercus phellos
 
Willow Oak
 
N, D, S


Quercus virginiana
 
Live Oak
 
E, N, D, S


Taxodium distichum
 
Bald Cypress
 
N, D


Ulmus parvifolia
 
Lacebark Elm
 
D, S




 



 



Botanical Name
 
Common Name
 



Small Tree - installed at 8-10 foot height and 1-inch caliper, mature height
less than 30 feet


Acer buergerianum
 
Trident Maple
 
D, S


Amelanchier canadensis
 
Shadblow Serviceberry
 
N


Cercis canadensis
 
Eastern Redbud
 
N, D


Cornus florida
 
Dogwood
 
N


Fraximus americana
 
White Ash
 
N


Ilex cassine
 
Dahoon Holly
 
E, S


Ilex latifolia
 
Lusterleaf Holly
 
E, D


Ilex opaca
 
American Holly
 
E, N, D,


Ilex vomitoria
 
Yaupon Holly
 
E, N, D,


Ilex x attenuate 'Fosters'
 
Foster's Holly
 
E, D, S


Ilex x 'Nellie Stevens'
 
Nellie Stevens Holly
 
E, D


Koelreuteria paniculata
 
Goldenraintree
 
D


Lagerstromia
 
Crapemyrtle
 
D, S


Magnnolia grandiflora 'Little Gem'
 
Little Gem Magnolia
 
E, N, D,


Magnolia virginiana
 
Sweetbay Magnolia
 
N


Magnolia x souangiana
 
Saucer Magnolia
 
D


Osmanthus americanus
 
Devilwood
 
E, N, S


Oxydendrum arboretum
 
Sourwood
 
N, S


Persea borbonia
 
Redbay
 
E, N, S


Prunus caroliniana
 
Carolina Cherrylaurel
 
E, D, S


Quercus geminate
 
Sand Live Oak
 
E, N, S


Vitex angus-castus
 
Chastetree
 
D, S


Large Shrub - installed at 5-foot height, maintained height at 6-10 feet


Berberis julianae
 
Wintergreen Barberry
 
E, D, S


Cleyera japonica
 
Japanese Cleyera
 
E


Elaeagnus pungens
 
Thorny Elaeagnus
 
E, S


Euonymous japonicas
 
Japanese Euonymus
 
E, S




 



 



Botanical Name
 
Common Name
 



Ilex cornuta
 
Holly
 
E, D, S


Ilex vomitoria
 
Yaupon Holly
 
E, N, D,


Ligustrum japonicum
 
Wax Leaf Privet
 
E, D, S


Ligustrum lucidum
 
Glossy Privet
 
E, D


Mahonia bealei
 
Leatherleaf Mahonia
 
E


Myrica cerifera
 
Southern Waxmyrtle
 
E, N, D,


Nerium oleander
 
Oleander
 
E, S


Osmanthus x fortunei
 
Fortunes Osmanthus
 
E, D


Photina serulata
 
Chinese Photina
 
E


Pittosporum tobira
 
Japanese Pittosporum
 
E, D, S


Podocarpus macrophyllus
 
Chinese Podocarpus
 
E, D, S


Rhaphiolepis umbellata
 
Indian Hawthorn
 
E, S


Intermediate Shrub - installed at 36-inch height, maintained height at 4-6
feet


Abelia x grandiflora
 
Glossy Abelia
 
E, D


Acuba japonica
 
Japanese Acuba
 
E, D, S


Clethera alnifolia
 
Sweet Pepperbush
 
N, S


Hydrangea macrophylla
 
Bigleaf Hydrangea
 
D, S


Ilex cornuta
 
Chinese Holly
 
E, D, S


Ilex crenata
 
Japanese Holly
 
E, D, S


Ilex glabra
 
Inkberry Holly
 
E, N, D


Juinperus chinensis
 
Chinese Juniper
 
E


Loropetalum chinensis
 
Chinese Fringe-Flower
 
E


Nerium oleander
 
Oleander
 
E


Raphiolepis indica
 
Indian Hawthorn
 
E, S


Sabal minor
 
Dwarf Pametto
 
E, N, D


Viburnum suspensum
 
Sandwanka Viburnum
 
E, S


Yucca filamentosa
 
Yucca
 
E, N, D, S




 



 



Botanical Name
 
Common Name
 



Small Shrub - installed at 18-inch height, maintained height at 3-4 feet


Abelia x grandiflora (dwarf var.)
 
Glossy Abelia
 
E, D


Acuba japonica (dwarf var.)
 
Japanese Acuba
 
E, D


Berberis thunbergii
 
Japanese Barberry
 
D


Buxus microphylla var. koreana
 
Korean Boxwood
 
E, D


Euonymus japonicus 'Microphyllus Variegatus'
 
Var. Boxleaf Euonymus
 
E


Gardenia jasminoides 'Radicans'
 
Cape Jasmine
 
E, D


Ilex crenata 'Soft Touch'
 
Japanese Holly
 
E, D, S


Ilex cornuta 'Carissa'
 
Carissa Holly
 
E, D, S


Ilex vomitoria 'Nana"
 
Dwarf Yaupon Holly
 
E, N, D, S


Itea virginica
 
Virginia Sweetspire
 
N, D


Jasminium nudiflorum
 
Winter Jasmine
 
E, D


Juniperus chinensis
 
Chinese Juniper
 
E, S


Nandina domestica
 
Dwarf Nandina
 
E, D


Pieris japonica
 
Japanese Pieris
 
E


Pittosporum tobira
 
Japanese Pittosporum
 
E, S


Raphiolepis indica
 
Indian Hawthorn
 
E, D, S


Spirea japonica
 
Japanese Spirea
 
D


Spirea nipponica
 
Snowmound Spirea
 
D


Yucca filamentosa
 
Yucca
 
E, N, D, S




 



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



ARTICLE 155.10
SIGN REGULATIONS



NOTE: PLEASE REFER TO EXHIBIT A FOR DEFINITIONS



Section 155.10.1  Prohibited Signs.



   (A)   Spectacular signs which are flashing or intermittently
illuminated or moving signs are prohibited in all districts. No strings of
electric light bulbs shall be permitted in any district.



   (B)   No signs shall be permitted advertising or directing persons
to services, places, or products not in the town limits. Exception: “For
Rent” or “For Sale” signs, located on specific places for rent or for
sale, of real estate agents located outside the town limits.



   (C)   No roof signs, as defined in Exhibit A, shall be permitted in
any district.



   (D)   No billboard signs, as defined in Exhibit A, shall be
permitted in any district.



   (E)   Any sign existing prior to adoption of this Ordinance, which
under the terms of this section would be nonconforming, shall be considered a
conforming sign for the purposes of this section, until/unless said sign is
altered.



   (F)   Portable signs, as defined in Exhibit A, shall not be
permitted in any district.



   (G)   No sign shall make use of the words “STOP,” “SLOW,”
“CAUTION,” “DANGER,” or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character
in such manner as is reasonably likely to be confused with traffic
directional and regulatory signs.



   (H)   No sign shall be erected so that by its location, color,
nature, or message is likely to be confused with or obstruct the view of
traffic signals or signs, or is likely to be confused with the warning lights
of an emergency or public safety vehicle.



   (I)   No flags, festoons, balloons or banners shall be allowed in
any district except as may be allowed as exempt signs under Section 155.10.2.



   (J)   No sign shall be permitted within the rights-of-way of streets
or roads except those designated for the regulations of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic and which are approved by the “Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices for Streets and Highways.”



   (K)   No mobile signs, as defined in Exhibit A, shall be permitted
in any district.



   (L)   No snipe signs, as defined in Exhibit A, shall be permitted in
any district.



   (M)   No wind signs, as defined in Exhibit A, shall be permitted in
any district.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.10.2  Exempt Signs.



   The following signs are exempt from regulation and permit requirements
under this section, provided such signs comply with the provisions of Section
155.10.1.



   (A)   Signs bearing only property identification numbers and names,
post office box numbers, names of occupants of the premises on which the
signs are located, or other identification of premises not of a commercial
nature, provided such signs are not illuminated and do not exceed two signs
per zoning lot nor two square feet in area per display surface.



   (B)   Official government flags and insignia of a government, when
flown or displayed in accordance with the patriotic customs set forth in 4
USC Section 510, as amended, with the consent of either the owner of the
property on which such flags or insignia are flown or displayed or any person
having lawful control of such property and where such flags and insignia do
not exceed 100 square feet in area.



   (C)   Legal notices, identification and informational signs, and
traffic directional or regulatory signs erected by or on behalf of a
governmental body.



   (D)   Memorial signs or tablets, and names and construction dates of
buildings when cut into any masonry surface.



   (E)   Directional or instructional signs directing and guiding
traffic and parking on private property on which the signs are located,
provided such signs are non-illuminated or indirectly illuminated, bear no
advertising matter, and do not exceed four square feet in area per display
surface, not exceeding a total of four signs per lot.



   (F)   Real estate signs advertising the sale, rental, or lease of
the premises on which said signs are located, provided said signs do not
exceed one sign per street frontage and four square feet in area per display
surface for property zoned residential; 16 square feet per display surface
for property zoned nonresidential.



   (G)   Compliant political signs are permitted during the period
beginning on the 30th day before the beginning date of “one-stop” early
voting under NCGS 163-227.2 and ending on the 10th day after the primary or
election day, persons may place political signs in the right -of-way of the
State highway system as provided in this section. The permittee must obtain
the permission of any property owner of a residence, business, or religious
institution fronting the right-of-way where a sign would be erected. Signs
must be placed in accordance with the following and must be removed by the
end of the period prescribed above.



      (1)   No sign shall be permitted in the right-of-way of a
fully controlled access highway.



      (2)   No sign shall be closer than three feet from the edge of
the pavement of the road.



      (3)   No sign shall obscure motorist visibility at an
intersection.



      (4)   No sign shall be higher than 42 inches above the edge of
the pavement of the road.



      (5)   No sign shall be larger than 864 square inches.



      (6)   No sign shall obscure or replace another sign.



   (H)   Yard or garage sale signs announcing yard or garage sales,
provided such signs do not exceed one sign per site of such sale nor four
square feet in area per display surface, are removed within seven days of
erection, and are located on the lot on which the sale is conducted.



   (I)   Public event announcements by public or nonprofit
organizations of special events or activities of interest to the general
public, provided such signs do not exceed one sign per site of such events or
activities nor 12 square feet in area per display surface, and are removed
within 14 days of erection.



   (J)   Signs announcing grand openings of new businesses only,
provided such signs are attached to the building in which the business is
located, do not exceed 32 square feet of display area per business site, and
are displayed for a period not to exceed 21 days.



   (K)   Information bulletin boards erected by or on behalf of a
governmental body on public property or rights-of-way in the Town Center
districts for the display of handbills or posters of community interest,
provided such bulletin boards contain no more than six square feet in area
per sign display surface, and a maximum of 72 square feet per bulletin board.



   (L)   Signs, banners, flags, and pennants used in connection with a
group activity function as approved by the Board of Aldermen provided that
display of the signage shall not exceed 60 days and the signage is only used
on property owned by the town or in the public right-of-way. The Board of
Aldermen shall review and approve the signage display as part of the Special
Event Permit Review Process.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.10.3  Marquee Signs.



   Marquee signs shall be constructed entirely of metal or noncombustible
material and may be attached to, or hung from a marquee. Such signs, when
hung from a marquee, shall be at least eight feet at its lowest level above
the sidewalk or ground level. Further, no such sign shall extend outside the
line of the marquee, though the sign may extend the entire length and width
of the marquee, provided the sign does not have a vertical dimension greater
than two feet on a marquee up to 40 feet in length, nor a vertical dimension
greater than three feet on a marquee 40 feet or more in length.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.10.4  Shore Zone Signs Permitted.



   (A)   The following signs shall be permitted in a shore zone without
a permit:



      (1)   Small, neat signs denoting private property or private
piers.



      (2)   Signs not to exceed four square feet for charter boards
or gangway, pier, or adjacent land; limit of one sign per boat.



      (3)   “For Sale” signs in this zone shall not exceed two
square feet; limit one sign per lot.



   (B)   A permit is required for the following signs in the shore
zone. The permit shall be granted by the Board of Aldermen.



      (1)   Signs not to exceed eight square feet on gangway or pier
identifying same; limit of one sign to pier.



      (2)   Signs not to exceed eight square feet designating public
watersports, boats for hire, and the like; limit one sign to lot.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.10.5  Signs Permitted in All Districts.



   (A)   The following signs shall be permitted in all districts:



      (1)   Directional and Informational Signs. Directional and
informational signs erected and maintained by public agencies and
governmental bodies.



      (2)   Lease, Rent, or Sale Signs. One sign per lot. Temporary
signs shall not exceed four square feet advertising the sale or rental of the
premises; permanent signs shall not exceed two square feet advertising the
sale or rental of the premises.



      (3)   Bulletin Boards. Churches, schools, community centers,
and other public and institutional uses may erect one sign or bulletin board
not exceeding 12 square feet in area for the purpose of displaying the name
of the institution and related information. The signs shall be used as wall
signs or shall be located a minimum of 7-1/2 feet from property lines. Where
side yards are required, no sign shall be permitted in the required side
yards. The signs may be indirectly illuminated.



      (4)   Construction Signs. During the construction, repair, or
alteration of a structure, a temporary construction sign which denotes the
architect, engineer, contractor, or builder or which denotes the name of the
structure and its use or occupants-to-be may be placed within the lot side of
the required yard setback as a ground or a wall sign. The dimensions of the
sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. All construction site signs
shall be removed when the building has been approved for occupancy by the UDO
Administrator. Larger signs not to exceed 64 square feet shall be subject to
special permit.



      (5)   Subdivision Signs. Subdivision signs advertising the
sale of lots or buildings within new subdivisions on which they are located
are permitted, provided:



         (a)   They are nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated.



         (b)   They do not exceed ten square feet for each parcel
in the subdivision but not more than 200 square feet.



         (c)   Not more than one sign shall be located at each
major approach to the subdivision.



         (d)   They meet all requirements applying to principal
structures with regard to yard, setback, and height requirements.



         (e)   They are landscaped and well maintained in the
best interest of the developer and the community.



         (f)   That display of the signs shall be limited to a
period of two years.



   (B)   Prior to the expiration date of the permit for subdivision
signs, the applicant may request an extension. Signs shall be removed prior
to the expiration of the two year period or extension thereof. If the sign
has not been removed, the town may enter the premises upon which the sign is
located and remove the sign at no liability to the town at the expense of the
owner.



   (C)   Permanent subdivision signs without advertising may remain as
long as they are adequately maintained.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.10.6  Business and Name Signs.



   Business signs and name signs shall be permitted on the premises of the
business in districts in which the principal use is permitted subject to the
following limitations:



   (A)   One permanent free-standing sign one-half square foot to each
linear foot of lot frontage, not to exceed a maximum of 64 square feet on a
lot with single street frontage. Two permanent free-standing signs one-half
square foot to each linear foot of lot frontage, not to exceed a maximum of
64 square feet on a lot with double street frontage. Free-standing signs
shall not exceed eight feet in height above the centerline elevation of the
adjacent street right-of-way. It shall be the responsibility of the person
applying for the sign permit to determine and verify sign, ground and street
right-of-way centerline elevations. Such free-standing sign, for churches
only, may be located on a lot within 300 feet of the main entrance of the
church and on a lot owned, used and occupied solely by the church.



   (B)   Individual uses shall be allowed canopy, wall, window,
pedestrian, and awning signs, in the total aggregate area per building front
of one square foot per linear foot of building frontage, not to exceed a
maximum combined sign area of 32 square feet per each individual use. This
shall be in addition to sign area allowed for a free-standing signs(s).



   (C)   Wall signs attached to walls of solid masonry, concrete, or
stone, shall be safely and securely attached by means of hot dipped
galvanized or stainless steel metal anchors, bolts, or expansion screws of
not less than 3/8 inch in diameter and shall be embedded at least five
inches. No wooden blocks shall be used for anchorage, except in the case of
wall signs attached to buildings with walls of wood. No wall sign shall be
supported by anchorages secured to an unbraced parapet wall.



   (D)   All projecting signs, whether they project from any building
wall, canopy, or similar structure shall be positioned so that the farthest
extended part of a sign shall be at least three feet from the existing curb
line measured from the building side of the curb line. All projecting signs
shall be constructed entirely of metal or other noncombustible material and
securely attached to a building, canopy or similar structure by hot dipped
galvanized or stainless steel metal supports such as bolts, anchors,
supports, chains, guys, or steel rods.



   (E)   If suspended the sign shall be placed no higher than one
building story and shall hang at least eight feet above the sidewalk levels.
Marquees, canopies and other similar type structures shall be placed no
higher than one building story nor shall they hang closer than ten feet to
any sidewalk level. Marquee signs shall be constructed entirely of metal or
noncombustible material and may be attached to, or hung from a marquee, and
the signs when hung from a marquee shall be at least eight feet at its lowest
level above the sidewalk or ground level, and further, no sign shall extend
outside the line of the marquee. Marquee signs may be attached to the sides
and front of a marquee, and the sign may extend the entire length and width
of the marquee; provided, that the sign does not have a vertical dimension
greater than two feet, on a marquee up to 40 feet in length, nor a vertical
dimension greater than three feet on a marquee 40 feet or more in length.



   (F)   Display lighting shall be shielded so as to prevent a direct
view of the light source from a residence in a residential district. No
intermittent lighting effects may be utilized. A lighted wall sign shall not
be located closer than 50 feet to residentially zoned property. No sign
within 150 feet of residentially zoned property shall be illuminated between
1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Eastern Standard Time.



   (G)   Free-standing signs shall be located less than ten feet from
the street lot line. No freestanding sign shall be located in a required side
yard or within ten feet of the side property line (refer to State Building
Code for construction standards which apply).



   (H)   Temporary signs, banners, placards, decorations, and the like,
constructed of light materials for promotion of civic, political, or
charitable enterprises or events may be displayed in any business district
for periods not exceeding ten days continuously and totaling not more than 30
days in any one year, except for public holiday decorations. However, no
signs may be erected on or affixed to public property.



   (I)   Where a lot contains more than one principal use or
establishment, the provisions of this section shall apply to the lot as a
whole, and the owner of the lot shall be responsible for allocating permitted
signs and display surface areas among the individual uses or establishments.
A sign plan shall be submitted to the UDO Administrator for such lot to show
all signs located or proposed thereon and shall be designed so that all signs
are in harmony and consistent with each other.



   (J)   In the C-1 Zoning District, only wall, marquee, window,
awning, and canopy signs shall be allowed.



   (K)   Service stations or any business selling gasoline are allowed
additional signs listed below:



      (1)   Gasoline price and/or self-service signs located at and
secured to each pump island and not exceeding nine square feet per sign side.



      (2)   Each gasoline pump shall be allowed to display only the
brand name or emblem of the gasoline and shall not exceed the limits on the
face of the pump.



      (3)   A North Carolina inspections sign shall be permitted on
the business site provided said sign does not exceed four square feet per
side.



   (L)   Additional provisions for signs in shopping centers.



      (1)   All free-standing signs in shopping centers shall have a
landscaped area located at the base of the sign. The landscaped area shall
equal at least twice the area of the sign. The landscaped material shall be a
planting of shrubs and flowers not over three feet in height and covering 50%
of the landscaped area. All landscaped areas shall be continually maintained.



      (2)   Window signs in shopping centers may not exceed 30% of
the window or door on which the signs are located and may not be internally
lighted.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1715, passed 8-8-13)



Section 155.10.7  Permits.



   (A)   No sign shall be erected, constructed, altered, or maintained
except as provided in this section until after a permit for the same has been
issued by the UDO Administrator and the fee paid.



   (B)   No permit fee shall be required for a single sign over a show
window or door of a store or business establishment, announcing without
display or elaboration, only the name of the proprietor and nature of
business; provided, that the sign is not over six feet square in area.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.10.8  Unsafe Signs.



   Should any sign become insecure or in danger of falling or otherwise
unsafe in the opinion of the UDO Administrator, the owner thereof, or the
person or firm maintaining the sign, shall, upon written notice from the UDO
Administrator, forthwith in the case of immediate danger and in any case
within ten days, secure the sign in a manner to be approved by the UDO
Administrator, in conformity with the provisions of this Article or remove
the sign. If the order is not complied with within ten days, the UDO
Administrator shall remove the sign at the expense of the owner or lessee
thereof.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.10.9  Maintenance.



   All signs for which a permit is required, together with all their
supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be kept in repair and unless of
galvanized or noncorroding metal shall be thoroughly painted at least once
every two years. The UDO Administrator may order the removal of any sign that
is not maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section. The
removal shall be at the expense of the owner or lessee.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.10.10  Removal of Unlawful Signs.



   In case any sign shall be installed, erected, or constructed in
violation of any of the terms of this Article, the UDO Administrator shall
notify by registered mail or written notice served personally, the owner or
lessee thereof to alter the sign so as to comply with these zoning
regulations and to secure the necessary permit therefor, or to remove the
sign. If the order is not complied with within ten days, the UDO
Administrator shall remove the sign at the expense of the owner or lessee
thereof.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.10.11  Location Restriction.



   (A)   No outdoor advertising display sign shall be erected,
constructed, or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape or any window or
door or opening used as a means of egress or so as to prevent free passage
from one part of a roof to any other part thereof. No sign shall be attached
in any form, shape, or manner to a fire escape, nor be placed in a manner as
to interfere with any opening required for legal ventilation.



   (B)   Combustible freestanding signs and roof signs, as defined in
the North Carolina Building Code Sections 2301.2(B) and (C), shall not be
permitted in Fire District No. I and Fire District No. II.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.10.12  Structural Requirements.



   Structural requirements for signs shall be those requirements found in
the North Carolina State Building Code Sections 2302.1, 2302.2, and 2302.3.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.10.13  Construction of Freestanding Signs.



   The following construction requirements shall apply to freestanding
signs:



   (A)   Lighting reflectors may project beyond the face of the sign.



   (B)   Any person or persons, partnership, firm, or corporation
occupying any vacant lot or premises by means of a ground sign, shall be
subject to the same duties and responsibilities as the owner of the lot or
premises, with respect to keeping the same clean, sanitary, inoffensive, free
and clear of all obnoxious substances and unsightly conditions on the ground
in the vicinity of the ground sign on the premises for which they may be
responsible.



   (C)   Wherever anchors or supports consist of wood embedded in the
soil, the wood shall be pressure-treated with an approved preservative.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.10.14  Exterior Lights and Signs.



   (A)   No exterior electric, gas, neon, or other illuminated
advertising sign, whether by reflection or otherwise, shall remain burning
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.



   (B)   The illuminating parts of lighting signs or advertisements,
where their rays or beams fall upon a residence, shall be so low in power and
intensity as not to create a glare or offensive light on the residence. If a
business house or boardinghouse desires to have an illumination which would
ordinarily create a glare or be a disturbance to a residence of the town, the
illumination on the signs or advertising shall be directed, hooded, or shaded
so that the full force of the beams or rays from them shall not fall upon any
residence within 200 feet of the sign.



   (C)   All lighted signs shall comply with the provisions of Article
155.9, Part III, Outdoor Lighting Ordinance.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.10.15  Nonconforming Signs.



   Any sign existing prior to the date of adoption of this Ordinance,
which under the terms of this Article would be nonconforming, shall be
considered a conforming sign for the purposes of this Article. Nothing in
this section shall be construed in any way that will allow the continued
existence of any signs found to be unsafe under the provisions of Section
155.10.8 of this Article.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



ARTICLE 155.11
ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS



PART I.
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE



Section 155.11.1  Statutory Authorization.



   The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has in Part 6, Article
21 of Chapter 143; Parts 3, 5 and 8 of Article 19 of Chapter 160A; and
Article 8 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes, delegated
to local governmental units the responsibility to adopt regulations designed
to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.2  Findings of Fact.



   (A)   The flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of the town are
subject to periodic inundation which can result in loss of life, property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities
and by the occupancy in flood prone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or
other hazards.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.3  Statement of Purpose.



   It is the purpose of this section to promote public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions within flood prone areas by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in
damaging increases in erosion, flood heights, or velocities;



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the
accommodation of flood waters;



   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development
that may increase erosion or flood damage; and



   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.4  Objectives.



   The objectives of this section are to:



   (A)   Protect human life, safety, and health;



   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;



   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   Minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;



   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e.,
water and gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets, and
bridges) that are located in flood prone areas;



   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of flood prone areas; and



   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a
Special Flood Hazard Area.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.5  Lands to Which this Section Applies.



   This section shall apply to all Special Flood Hazard Areas within the
jurisdiction, including extraterritorial jurisdictions (ETJs) if applicable,
of the Town of Wrightsville Beach.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.6  Basis for Establishing the Special Flood Hazard Areas.



   The Special Flood Hazard Areas are those identified under the
Cooperating Technical State (CTS) agreement between the State of North
Carolina and FEMA in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and its accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) for New Hanover County, dated April 3, 2006,
and hereinafter amended, which are adopted by reference and declared to be a
part of this Ordinance.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.7  Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit.



   A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required in conformance with
the provisions of this section prior to the commencement of any development
activities within Special Flood Hazard Areas determined in accordance with
Section 155.11.6.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.8  Compliance.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of
this section and other applicable regulations.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.9  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.



   This section is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
section and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.10  Interpretation.



   In the interpretation and application of this section, all provisions
shall be:



   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.11  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.



   The degree of flood protection required by this section is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. This section does not imply that
land outside the Special Flood Hazard Areas or uses permitted within such
areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This section shall not
create liability on the part of the town or by any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this section or
any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.12  Designation of Floodplain Administrator.



   The UDO Administrator, or his/her designee, hereinafter referred to as
the “Floodplain Administrator,” is hereby appointed to administer and
implement the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.13  Floodplain Development Application/Permit/Certification
Requirements.



   (A)   Application Requirements. Application for a Floodplain
Development Permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any
development activities located within Special Flood Hazard Areas. The
following items shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply
for a floodplain development permit:



      (1)   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but
shall not be limited to, the following specific details of the proposed
floodplain development:



         (a)   The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations
of the area of development/disturbance, existing and proposed structures,
utility systems, grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas,
drainage facilities, and other development;



         (b)   The boundary of the Special Flood Hazard Area as
delineated on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in Section 155.11.6,
or a statement that the entire lot is within the Special Flood Hazard Area;



         (c)   Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed
development area as determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined
in Section 155.11.6;



         (d)   The boundary of the floodway(s) or
non-encroachment area(s) as determined in Section 155.11.6;



         (e)   The Base Flood Elevation (BFE) where provided as
set forth in Section 155.11.6, Section 155.11.14, or Section 155.11.19;



         (f)   The old and new location of any watercourse that
will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;



         (g)   The boundary and designation date of the Coastal
Barrier Resource System (CBRS) area or Otherwise Protected Areas (OPA), if
applicable; and



         (h)   Certification of the plot plan by a registered
land surveyor or professional engineer.



      (2)   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all
development within a Special Flood Hazard Area, including but not limited to:



         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
proposed reference level (including basement) of all structures;



         (b)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which
any non-residential structure in Zone AE or A will be floodproofed; and



         (c)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which
any proposed utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed.



      (3)   If floodproofing, a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form
81-65) with supporting data and an operational plan that includes but is not
limited to installation, exercise, and maintenance of floodproofing measures.



      (4)   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include
details of the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this
section are met. These details include but are not limited to:



         (a)   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable
(i.e., fill, solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation,
open foundation on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls);



         (b)   Openings to facilitate equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces on walls in accordance with subsection 155.11.18(D)(3), when
solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AE, and A1 - 30;



         (c)   The following, in Coastal High Hazard Areas, in
accordance with subsection 155.11.18(D)(4) and Section 155.11.22:



            1.   V-Zone Certification with accompanying plans
and specifications verifying the engineered structure and any breakaway wall
designs;



            2.   Plans for open wood latticework or insect
screening, if applicable;



            3.   Plans for non-structural fill, if applicable.
If non-structural fill is proposed, it must be demonstrated through coastal
engineering analysis that the proposed fill would not result in any increase
in the base flood elevation or otherwise cause adverse impacts by wave
ramping and deflection on to the subject structure or adjacent properties.



      (5)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest
floor. A non-conversion agreement (on a form provided by the town) shall be
required prohibiting the conversion of any building area below the freeboard
elevation to enclosed habitable space.



      (6)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to
be located and constructed to minimize flood damage.



      (7)   Certification that all other Local, State, and Federal
permits required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been
received.



      (8)   Documentation for placement of Recreational Vehicles
and/or Temporary Structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions
of subsection 155.11.18(F) and (G) of this section are met.



      (9)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation, when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects
of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and
the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if
not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation.



   (B)   Permit Requirements. The Floodplain Development Permit shall
include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   A description of the development to be permitted under
the floodplain development permit.



      (2)   The Special Flood Hazard Area determination for the
proposed development in accordance with the available data specified in
Section 155.11.6.



      (3)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for
the reference level and all attendant utilities.



      (4)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for
the protection of all public utilities.



      (5)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines.



      (6)   A statement that no fill material or other development
shall encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any watercourse,
as applicable.



      (7)   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AE, or
A1 - 30.



      (8)   Limitations of use of the enclosures below the lowest
floor (if applicable) (i.e., parking, building access, and limited storage
only).



   (C)   Certification Requirements.



      (1)   Elevation Certificates.



         (a)   An Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is
required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the
duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean
sea level. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder prior to the beginning of construction. Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny
a floodplain development permit.



         (b)   An Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is
required after the reference level is established. Within seven (7) calendar
days of establishment of the reference level elevation, it shall be the duty
of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean
sea level. Any work done within the seven-day calendar period and prior to
submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder’s risk. The
Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted.
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder
immediately and prior to further work being permitted to proceed. Failure to
submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be
cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.



         (c)   A final as-built Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form
81-31) is required after construction is completed and prior to Certificate
of Compliance/Occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder
to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built
construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant
utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy
issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify
corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or
failure to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance
of a Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy.



         (d)   All new or substantially improved structures shall
be certified by a registered engineer that the construction shall be securely
anchored to adequately anchored pilings or columns in order to withstand
velocity waters and hurricane wave wash as required. All engineering
certification shall be in writing and bear the engineer's seal and signature.



      (2)   Floodproofing Certificate. If nonresidential
floodproofing is used to meet the regulatory flood protection elevation
requirements, a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65), with supporting
data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan, are
required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the
duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the floodproofed design elevation of the reference level and
all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea level. Floodproofing
certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational plan, and
the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such review
shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit approval. Failure to
submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be
cause to deny a floodplain development permit. Failure to construct in
accordance with the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance
of a Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy.



      (3)   If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a
description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; a
professional engineer’s certified report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map showing the
location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation shall all be
submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain
development permit.



      (4)   Certification Exemptions. The following structures, if
located within Zone A, AE, or A1-30, are exempt from the
elevation/floodproofing certification requirements specified in Items (1) and
(2) of this subsection:



         (a)   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of
subsection 155.11.18(F)(1);



         (b)   Temporary structures meeting requirements of
subsection 155.11.18(G); and



         (c)   Accessory structures less than 150 square feet
meeting requirements of subsection 155.11.18(H).



      (5)   A V-Zone certification with accompanying design plans
and specifications is required prior to issuance of a Floodplain Development
Permit within coastal high hazard areas. It shall be the duty of the permit
applicant to submit to the Floodplain Administrator said certification to
ensure the design standards of this section are met. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop or review the structural
design, plans, and specifications for construction and certify that the
design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section. This
certification is not a substitute for an Elevation Certificate.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.14  Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain
Administrator.



   The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the
following duties:



   (A)   Review all floodplain development applications and issue
permits for all proposed development within Special Flood Hazard Areas to
assure that the requirements of this section have been satisfied.



   (B)   Review all proposed development within Special Flood Hazard
Areas to assure that all necessary Local, State, and Federal permits have
been received.



   (C)   Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina Department
of Crime Control and Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State
Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program, prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).



   (D)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
maintained.



   (E)   Prevent encroachments into floodways and non-encroachment
areas unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of
Section 155.11.21 are met.



   (F)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new
or substantially improved structures, in accordance with subsection
155.11.13(C).



   (G)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to
which all new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been
floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 155.11.13(C).



   (H)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all
public utilities in accordance with subsection 155.11.13(C).



   (I)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure,
obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with subsections 155.11.13(C) and 155.11.18(C).



   (J)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard Areas, floodways, or non-encroachment
areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The
person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this Article.



   (K)   When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with Section 11.6, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any Base
Flood Elevation (BFE) data, along with floodway data or non-encroachment area
data available from a Federal, State, or other source, including data
developed pursuant to subsection 155.11.19(B)(2) in order to administer the
provisions of this Article.



   (L)   When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is provided but no
floodway or non- encroachment area data has been provided in accordance with
Section 155.11.6, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or
non-encroachment area data available from a Federal, State, or other source
in order to administer the provisions of this Article.



   (M)   When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a
structure or the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a Special Flood
Hazard Area is above the Base Flood Elevation, advise the property owner of
the option to apply for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) from FEMA. Maintain
a copy of the LOMA issued by FEMA in the floodplain development permit file.



   (N)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the
administration of this section and make these records available for public
inspection, recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy
Act of 1974, as amended.



   (O)   Make On-Site Inspections of Work in Progress. As the work
pursuant to a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain
Administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary
to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of the
local ordinance and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the
Floodplain Administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper
credentials, to enter on any premises within the jurisdiction of the
community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other
enforcement action.



   (P)   Issue Stop-Work Orders as Required. Whenever a building or
part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in
violation of this section, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to
be immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed
to the person doing the work or in charge of the work. The stop-work order
shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the
stoppage, and the condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation
of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor.



   (Q)   Revoke Floodplain Development Permits as Required. The
Floodplain Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain
development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the
reason(s) for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial
departure from the approved application, plans, and specifications; for
refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of State or local laws; or
for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any
floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable
State or local law may also be revoked.



   (R)   Make periodic inspections throughout all special flood hazard
areas within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator
and each member of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.



   (S)   Follow through with corrective procedures of Section 155.11.15.



   (T)   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance
requests.



   (U)   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not be
limited to, the FIS report, FIRM, and other official flood maps and studies
adopted in accordance with Section 155.11.6, including any revisions thereto,
including Letters of Map Change, issued by FEMA. Notify state and FEMA of
mapping needs.



   (V)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including
Letters of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) and Letters of Map Revision
(LOMR).



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.15  Corrective Procedures.



   (A)   Violations to be Corrected. When the Floodplain Administrator
finds violations of applicable State and local laws, it shall be his or her
duty to notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The
owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law
cited in such notification.



   (B)   Actions in Event of Failure to Take Corrective Action. If the
owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action,
the Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by
certified or registered mail to the owner’s last known address or by
personal service, stating:



      (1)   That the building or property is in violation of the
flood damage prevention ordinance;



      (2)   That a hearing will be held before the Floodplain
Administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten days after
the date of the notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard
in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to
the matter; and



      (3)   That following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator
may issue an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove
fill as applicable.



   (C)   Order to Take Corrective Action. If, upon a hearing held
pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall
find that the building or development is in violation of the Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance, they shall issue an order in writing to the owner,
requiring the owner to remedy the violation within a specified time period,
not less than 60 calendar days, nor more than 90 calendar days. Where the
Floodplain Administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other
property, they may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser
period as may be feasible.



   (D)   Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective
action may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving
notice of appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the clerk
within ten (10) days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of
an appeal, the order of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The
local governing body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may
affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the order.



   (E)   Failure to Comply with Order. If the owner of a building or
property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no
appeal has been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body
following an appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished at the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.16  Variance Procedures.



   (A)   Variance process and procedure requirements are specified in
Section 155.4.4 of this Ordinance.



   (B)   Variances granted under the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
may be issued for:



      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon
the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
that the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure.



      (2)   Functionally dependent facilities if determined to meet
the definition as stated in Exhibit A, provided that the provisions of
subsection 155.11.16(E) have been satisfied, and such facilities are
protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and
create no additional threats to public safety.



      (3)   Any other type of development, provided that it meets
the requirements of this section.



   (C)   In passing upon variances, the Board of Adjustment shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards
specified in other sections of this Article, and:



      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
to the injury of others;



      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;



      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location,
as defined in Exhibit A, as a functionally dependent facility, where
applicable;



      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject
to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;



      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;



      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise,
and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and



      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities
and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets
and bridges.



   (D)   A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be
submitted with the application for a variance.



   (E)   Conditions for Variances.



      (1)   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will
make the structure in violation of other Federal, State, or local laws,
regulations, or ordinances.



      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated
floodway or non- encroachment area if the variance would result in any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge.



      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.



      (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship; and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



   (F)   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities,
hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage
facilities that are located in Special Flood Hazard Areas, provided that all
of the following conditions are met.



      (1)   The use serves a critical need in the community.



      (2)   No feasible location exists for the use outside the
Special Flood Hazard Area.



      (3)   The reference level of any structure is elevated or
floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood protection elevation.



      (4)   The use complies with all other applicable Federal,
State, and local laws.



      (5)   The town has notified the Secretary of the North
Carolina Department of Crime Control and Public Safety of its intention to
grant a variance at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to granting the
variance.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1706, passed 4-11-13)



Section 155.11.17  General Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction.



   In all Special Flood Hazard Areas the following provisions are required:



   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement of the structure.



   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.



   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.



      (1)   A maximum of 299 square feet of the first floor square
footage may be enclosed for means of egress and storage facilities in the A
and VE Zones. No finished wall may be longer in any direction than 20 feet.
No plumbing fixtures, electrical outlets, condensing units, etc., shall be
allowed below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. All construction of
this nature which is located in V and A Zones shall be breakaway type
enclosures limited to insect screening, open wood latticework, or breakaway
walls that have a design safe loading resistance of not less than ten and no
more than 20 pounds per square foot.



      (2)   In addition, enclosed garages may be allowed in the A
and VE Zones designated on the flood maps, provided that they have no
interior finish that enhances the structural stability of the wall to exceed
20 pounds per square foot and have working garage doors on the enclosed area.
Garages may not be designed or constructed as habitable space. Refer to
subsection 155.11.13(A)(5) for required non-conversion agreement.



   (D)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so
as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of flooding to the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
These include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units,
bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes,
utility/cable boxes, appliances (washers, dryers, refrigerators, freezers,
etc.), hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches.



   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.



   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.



   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.



   (H)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a
structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this Article, shall
meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this Ordinance.



   (I)   Nothing in this Article shall prevent the repair,
reconstruction, or replacement of a building or structure existing on the
effective date of this Ordinance and located totally or partially within the
floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback, provided that there is no
additional encroachment below the regulatory flood protection elevation in
the floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback, and provided that
such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other
requirements of this Ordinance.



   (J)   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall
not be permitted, except by variance as specified in subsection 155.11.16(F).
A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an allowed use
or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater treatment
facility may be located in a Special Flood Hazard Area only if the structure
or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood
protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of
subsection 155.11.13(C).



   (K)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.



   (L)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.



   (M)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



   (N)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall have received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies
for which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404
of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334.



   (O)   When a structure is partially located in a Special Flood
Hazard Area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new
construction and substantial improvements.



   (P)   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or
in a flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the
provisions for the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest
base flood elevation shall apply.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.18  Specific Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction.



   In all Special Flood Hazard Areas where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data
has been provided, as set forth in Section 155.11.6, or Section 155.11.19,
the following provisions, in addition to Section 155.11.17, are required:



   (A)   Residential Construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the reference level,
including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory flood protection
elevation, as defined in Exhibit A of this Ordinance.



   (B)   Coastal High Hazard Areas; Nonconforming Uses; Development.



      (1)   Within those areas designated as coastal high hazard
areas by the flood maps, all nonconforming uses on land below the 100-year
flood level shall not be expanded.



      (2)   Within those areas designated as coastal high hazard
areas by the flood maps, no land below the level of the 100-year flood
elevation shall be developed unless the new construction or substantial
improvement shall:



         (a)   Be located landward of the reach of the mean high
tide. No man-made alteration of sand dunes and mangrove stands shall be
permitted within the V Zones as shown on the town’s flood insurance rate
map which would increase potential flood damage.



         (b)   Be elevated on adequately anchored piles or
columns and must be protected from hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy. The bottom of the lowest supporting
structural member, exclusive of piles, is at or above the applicable 100-year
flood level which shall be adjusted for wave height in appropriate zones. The
use of fill material for structural support of buildings shall be prohibited
within the V zones as shown on the town’s flood insurance rate map.



         (c)   Have no basement and have the space below the
lowest floor free of obstructions so that the impact of abnormally high tides
or wind driven water is minimized except as described in subsection
155.11.18(A).



   (C)   Non-Residential Construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure
shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than
the regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in Exhibit A of this
Ordinance. Structures located in A, AE, and A1 - 30 Zones may be floodproofed
to the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation, provided
that all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation are watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional
engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are
satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator as set forth in subsection 155.11.13(C), along with the
operational and maintenance plans.



   (D)   Elevated Buildings. Fully enclosed areas of new construction
and substantially improved structures, which are below the lowest floor:



      (1)   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but
shall only be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited
storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access
to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of
vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard
exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The
interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned
into separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas;



      (2)   Shall be constructed entirely of flood resistant
materials, at least to the regulatory flood protection elevation;



      (3)   Shall include, in Zones A, AE, and A1 - 30, flood
openings to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the
openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or
meet or exceed the following minimum design criteria:



         (a)   A minimum of two flood openings on different sides
of each enclosed area subject to flooding;



         (b)   The total net area of all flood openings must be
at least one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;



         (c)   If a building has more than one enclosed area,
each enclosed area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to
automatically enter and exit;



         (d)   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be
no higher than one foot above the adjacent grade;



         (e)   Flood openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic
flow of floodwaters in both directions; and



         (f)   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not
considered enclosures for regulatory purposes and, therefore, do not require
flood openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural
status, is considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined
above.



      (4)   Shall, in Coastal High Hazard Areas (Zone VE), either be
free of obstruction or constructed with breakaway walls, open wood
latticework, or insect screening, provided they are not part of the
structural support of the building and are designed so as to breakaway, under
abnormally high tides or wave action, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation or otherwise jeopardizing
the structural integrity of the building. The following design specifications
shall be met:



         (a)   Material shall consist of open wood latticework or
insect screening; or



         (b)   Breakaway walls shall meet the following design
specifications:



            1.   Design safe loading resistance shall be not
less than ten nor more than 20 pounds per square foot; or



            2.   Breakaway walls that exceed a design safe
loading resistance of 20 pounds per square foot (either by design or when so
required by State or local codes) shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect that the breakaway wall will collapse from
a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood event,
and the elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system
shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural damage
due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all
building components (structural and non-structural). The water loading values
used shall be those associated with the base flood. The wind loading values
used shall be those required by the North Carolina State Building Code.



   (E)   Additions/Improvements.



      (1)   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures
when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior
modifications to the existing structure are:



         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any
more nonconforming than the existing structure.



         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing
structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards
for new construction.



      (2)   Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications
to the existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall shall
require only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.



      (3)   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures
when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior
modifications to the existing structure are:



         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements only must comply with the standards for new construction.



         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing
structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards
for new construction.



      (4)   Where an independent perimeter load-bearing wall is
provided between the addition and the existing building, the addition(s)
shall be considered a separate building and only the addition must comply
with the standards for new construction.



   (F)   Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall either:



      (1)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be
fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently attached
additions); or



      (2)   Meet all the requirements for new construction.



   (G)   Temporary Non-Residential Structures. Prior to the issuance of
a floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such
structure(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash flood, or other type of flood
warning notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing
to the Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:



      (1)   A specified time period for which the temporary use will
be permitted. Time specified should not exceed three months, renewable up to
one year;



      (2)   The name, address, and phone number of the individual
responsible for the removal of the temporary structure;



      (3)   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure
will be removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane or
immediately upon flood warning notification);



      (4)   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with
the entity responsible for physical removal of the structure; and



      (5)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location
outside the Special Flood Hazard Area, to which the temporary structure will
be moved.



   (H)   Accessory Structures.



      (1)   When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages,
etc.) are to be placed within a Special Flood Hazard Area, the following
criteria shall be met:



         (a)   Accessory structures shall not be used for human
habitation (including working, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas);



         (b)   Accessory structures shall not be
temperature-controlled;



         (c)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low
flood damage potential;



         (d)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and
placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow
of floodwaters;



         (e)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with subsection 155.11.17(A);



         (f)   All service facilities such as electrical shall be
installed in accordance with subsection 155.11.17(D); and



         (g)   Flood openings to facilitate automatic
equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below regulatory
flood protection elevation in conformance with subsection 155.11.18(D)(3).



      (2)   An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150
square feet that satisfies the criteria outlined above does not require an
elevation or floodproofing certificate. Elevation or floodproofing
certifications are required for all other accessory structures in accordance
with subsection 155.11.13(C).



   (I)   New or Replacement Water and Sewer systems. Within those areas
designated as special flood hazard areas by the flood maps, all new or
replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems, including
on-site systems shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges
from the systems into flood waters. If in the opinion of town officials the
conditions warrant such action, certification may be required from a
professional engineer who is registered in the state that the systems
mentioned are so designed.



   (J)   Water to Air Heat Pumps.



      (1)   Any property owner may make application for construction
of wells, not for the purpose of or to be used for human consumption, to
supply water for and dispose of water from water to air heat pumps. Such
wells shall have a maximum depth of 40 feet. The property owner shall acquire
a building permit before commencing construction of the wells and shall
submit all supporting documents required by the Building Inspector.



      (2)   The line supplying water to the heat pump shall be
equipped with a filter and be capable of supplying 125% of the rated capacity
of the system. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to
dispose of all water from water to air heat pumps by means of a separate well
of a depth not to exceed 40 feet. This disposal system shall consist of a
disposal line the minimum size of which shall be two inches in diameter. The
disposal line shall contain a strainer. In no case may water from the heat
pump be disposed of in sewer lines, storm drains, or estuarine waters.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.19  Standards for Floodplains without Established Base Flood
Elevation.



   Within the Special Flood Hazard Areas designated as Approximate Zone A
and established in Section 155.11.6, where no Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data
is available, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of
Section 155.11.17, shall apply:



   (A)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements or new development shall be permitted within a
distance of twenty (20) feet each side from top of bank or five times the
width of the stream, whichever is greater, unless certification with
supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.



   (B)   The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be determined based on the following criteria:



      (1)   When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is available from
other sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such
areas shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance and
shall be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in Sections
155.11.17 and 155.11.18.



      (2)   When floodway data is available from a Federal, State,
or other source, all new construction and substantial improvements within
floodway areas shall also comply with the requirements of Sections 155.11.18
and 155.11.21.



      (3)   All subdivision and other development proposals shall
provide Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data if development is greater than five
(5) acres or has more than fifty (50) lots. Such Base Flood Elevation (BFE)
data shall be adopted by reference in accordance with Section 155.11.6 and
utilized in implementing this Ordinance.



      (4)   When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is not available
from a Federal, State, or other source as outlined above, the reference level
shall be elevated or floodproofed (nonresidential) to or above the Regulatory
Flood Protection Elevation, as defined in Exhibit A. All other applicable
provisions of Section 155.11.18 shall also apply.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.20  Standards for Riverine Floodplains with BFE but without
Established Floodways or Non-Encroachment Areas.



   Along rivers and streams where BFE data is provided by FEMA or is
available from another source but neither floodway nor non-encroachment areas
are identified for a Special Flood Hazard Area on the FIRM or in the FIS
report, the following requirements shall apply to all development within such
areas:



   (A)   Standards of Sections 155.11.17 and 155.11.18; and



   (B)   Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment area is
designated, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development, shall be permitted unless certification
with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is
provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.21  Floodways and Non-Encroachment Areas.



   Areas designated as floodways or non-encroachment areas are located
within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in Section 155.11.6. The
floodways and non-encroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas due to the
velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and
potential projectiles. The following provisions, in addition to standards
outlined in Sections 155.11.17 and 155.11.18, shall apply to all development
within such areas:



   (A)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless:



      (1)   It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would
not result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice and presented to the Floodplain
Administrator prior to issuance of floodplain development permit, or



      (2)   A Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) has been
approved by FEMA. A Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) must also be obtained upon
completion of the proposed encroachment.



   (B)   If subsection 155.11.21(A) is satisfied, all development shall
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this
ordinance.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.22  Coastal High Hazard Areas (Zones VE).



   Coastal High Hazard Areas are Special Flood Hazard Areas established in
Section 155.11.6, and designated as Zones VE. These areas have special flood
hazards associated with high velocity waters from storm surges or seismic
activity and, therefore, all new construction and substantial improvements
shall meet the following provisions in addition to the provisions of Sections
155.11.17 and 155.11.18.



   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall:



      (1)   Be located landward of the reach of mean high tide;



      (2)   Be located landward of the first line of stable natural
vegetation; and



      (3)   Comply with all applicable CAMA setback requirements.



   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
elevated so that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the
lowest floor (excluding pilings or columns) is no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation. Floodproofing shall not be utilized on any
structures in Coastal High Hazard Areas to satisfy the regulatory flood
protection elevation requirements.



   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall have
the space below the lowest floor free of obstruction so as not to impede the
flow of flood waters, with the following exceptions:



      (1)   Open wood latticework or insect screening may be
permitted below the lowest floor for aesthetic purposes only and must be
designed to wash away in the event of abnormal wave action and in accordance
with subsection 155.11.18(D)(4)(a). Design plans shall be submitted in
accordance with subsection 155.11.13(A)(4)(c)(2); or



      (2)   Breakaway walls may be permitted, provided that they
meet the criteria set forth in subsection 155.11.18(D)(4)(b). Design plans
shall be submitted in accordance with subsection 155.11.13(A)(4)(c)(1).



   (D)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
securely anchored to pile or column foundations. All pilings and columns and
the structures attached thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement due to the effect of wind and water loads
acting simultaneously on all building components.



      (1)   Water loading values used shall be those associated with
the base flood.



      (2)   Wind loading values used shall be those required by the
current edition of the North Carolina State Building Code.



   (E)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify
that the design, specifications, and plans for construction are in compliance
with the provisions contained in Section 155.11.13, subsection 11.22(C),
subsection 11.22(D) and subsection 11.22(F), above, on the current version of
the North Carolina V-Zone Certification form.



   (F)   Fill shall not be used for structural support. Limited
non-compacted and non-stabilized fill may be used outside the perimeter of a
building for landscaping/aesthetic purposes, provided that it is demonstrated
through coastal engineering analysis that the proposed fill would not result
in any increase in the Base Flood Elevation and not cause any adverse impacts
by wave ramping and deflection to the subject structure or adjacent
properties.



   (G)   There shall be no alteration of sand dunes which would
increase potential flood damage.



   (H)   Recreational vehicles may be permitted in Coastal High Hazard
Areas, provided that they meet the recreational vehicle criteria of
subsection 155.11.18(F).



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.23  Effect on Rights and Liabilities under the Existing Flood
Damage Prevention Ordinance.



   This Article in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the
provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance enacted November 21,
1974, as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to
re-enact and continue to enforce without interruption of such existing
provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder
are reserved and may be enforced. The enactment of this Article shall not
affect any action, suit, or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions
of the flood damage prevention ordinance of the town enacted on November 21,
1974, as amended, which are not reenacted herein are repealed.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.24  Effect Upon Outstanding Floodplain Development Permits.



   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size, or designated use of any development or any part thereof
for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain
Administrator or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of
this ordinance, provided, however, that when construction is not begun under
such outstanding permit within a period of six months subsequent to the date
of issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



PART II.
SEDIMENTATION AND SOIL EROSION CONTROL



Section 155.11.25  General Regulations.



   (A)   Adoption of County Ordinance. The county “Ordinance to
Provide for the Control of Soil Erosion and Sedimentation,” as revised and
amended, is adopted by the town, and it shall be complied with in those terms
and as it has been revised and amended and adopted by the County
Commissioners.



   (B)   Obstruction of Public Streams, Channels, and
Detention/Retention Basins Prohibited.



      (1)   No person shall place or cause to be placed in any
public stream, channel, detention/retention basin or drainage way any
material of any type or nature, the placement of which tends to alter,
impede, block or otherwise restrict or impair the flow of drainage or the
retention capacity of such public stream, channel, detention/retention basin
or drainage way.



      (2)   The Building Inspector or his designated representative
shall be responsible for enforcement of this section.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



PART III.
OCEANFRONT PROPERTY



Section 155.11.26  Oceanfront Policies.



   (A)   This section is adopted to preserve and promote the protection
of the oceanfront area of environmental concern by maintaining the existence
of vegetation and natural or constructed dunes, which provide a protective
barrier from the actions of the Atlantic Ocean, other surrounding waters,
sand, wind, and pedestrians. The past practice of destroying this barrier
system constitutes a serious threat to the safety of oceanfront properties
and the public. These requirements are therefore adopted for the health,
safety, and welfare of persons living and visiting in the town and for the
protection of public and private property. Section 160A-174 of the North
Carolina General Statutes authorizes and empowers the town under general
ordinance-making powers to regulate the protection of natural or constructed
dunes within the town. The 2005 CAMA Land Use Plan for the town includes
policies that support the purpose and intent of these ordinances. The
applicable policies are listed below:



      (1)   Policy 9.1.A.18: “suitable land uses in ocean hazard
areas include ocean shoreline erosion control activities and dune
establishment and stabilization.”



      (2)   Policy 9.3.A.3: “Public pedestrian access is limited
to designated crossover areas in order to minimize damage to dunes and
vegetation.”



      (3)   Policy 9.4.A.7: “the Town shall avoid ‘approving of
any activity which would destroy remaining habitat for loggerhead turtle
nesting.’”



      (4)   Policy 9.4.A.8: “tree cover at Wrightsville Beach,
whether maritime or otherwise, is a highly valued asset.”



   (B)   When this section conflicts with Coastal Resources Commission
regulations and provisions of the Coastal Area Management Act, the more
restrictive rule shall apply.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.27  Shoreline Development Boundary General Requirements.



   (A)   Permission to construct and maintain an access structure which
is located east of the established shore line development boundary on the
oceanfront shall be obtained by filing an application with the UDO
Administrator and obtaining a development permit for the structure.
Commercial structures are allowed one beach access structure per 150 linear
feet with a maximum of three beach access structures per lot.



   (B)   If no dune system or first line of stable vegetation exists,
an access structure may only be built west of the Shore Line Development
Boundary. A successful dune restabilization plan shall be implemented to
revegetate the lot to meet minimum requirements for allowing beach access
structures. Consistent with CAMA guidelines, a moratorium on the construction
of beach access structures will be implemented until the first line of stable
vegetation is established.



   (C)   The overall appearance of development east of the Shore Line
Development Boundary should be minimally intrusive upon its surroundings by
way of construction, materials and color. Access structures east of the
shoreline development boundary shall be limited to natural wood tones. No
painting of access structures east of the shoreline development boundary
shall be permitted. Any materials utilized should not impact the environment
nor the barrier system and its components; flora and fauna.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.28  Procedures for Development East of the Shoreline
Development Boundary.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or their
agents, to undertake development east of the shoreline development boundary
without first obtaining from the Code Enforcement Official a zoning permit
and an approved mitigation plan for such development.



      (1)   The property owner, as well as his or her agents,
contractors, subcontractors, or employees, may be held liable for the proper
execution of any portion of work performed under the permit or permits issued
for such work.



      (2)   There shall be on display in the Town Building
Inspector’s office or thereabouts the 1939 property line map and the 1980
Photo-Line map which provide a control for determining the eastern limits of
development.



      (3)   Fees will be required for the filing of a permit in
accordance with the town’s adopted fee schedule.



   (B)   Shore line mitigation plan required. Development shall not
interfere with the protective nature of a barrier system. Upon application
for development east of the Shore Line Development Boundary, the Code
Enforcement Official shall review the proposal for shore line stabilization,
restoration and management as set forth in the Mitigation Plan to ensure
maintenance of the barrier system. The Mitigation Plan shall include all
information required to verify compliance with the provisions of this
subsection and shall indicate compliance with the following requirements:



      (1)   Access structures shall be in accordance and compliant
with all provisions of this section.



      (2)   A mechanism shall be required for the trapping of sand
and, by nature of construction and location, be consistent with CAMA
regulations. Such mechanism may include sand fences, approved vegetation or
other acceptable methods.



      (3)   Dune and vegetation restoration shall be in accordance
with the Department of Environment and Natural Resources, and with North
Carolina Cooperative Extension research and policy. Dune breaches, erosion
and washover areas shall be remedied with the establishment or alteration of
dunes in accordance with State regulation. The following vegetation is
encouraged in connection with vegetation installation and restoration east of
the Shore Line Development Boundary:



         (a)   Frontal dunegrasses - American Beachgrass, Sea
Oats, Bitter Panicum, Seashore Elder, Saltmeadow Cordgrass.



         (b)   Middle dunegrasses - American Beachgrass, Sea
Oats, Bitter Panicum, Coastal Panicgrass, Saltmeadow Cordgrass, Switch Cane,
Rock Fingergrass, Seacoast Bluestem, Longlawn Virginia Wildrye, Hairline
Muhlygrass.



      (4)   Development or the installation of an access structure
east of the Shore Line Development Boundary shall be accompanied by a
Mitigation Plan to include the introduction and replacement of sand
stabilizing vegetation in accordance with subsection (3), above, and the
requirements outlined below:



         (a)   For every one square foot of area disturbed one
plant shall be planted on site.



         (b)   Alternatively, for every one square foot of area
disturbed, an amount equal to the cost of purchase of one dune plant,
fertilization and installation of the plant shall be charged to the property
owner. This money shall be placed in the Beach Strand Supplies Fund and used
for re-vegetation or dune establishment.



      (5)   In the absence or destruction of original or natural
vegetation, a Mitigation Plan shall be implemented to include the
re-vegetation of a lotto meet minimum requirements for development, as set
forth by CAMA and local regulations. A moratorium on construction in
accordance with CAMA regulation will be adopted until the first line of
stable vegetation is established. A permit will not be issued during this
moratorium.



      (6)   Efforts to revegetate areas exposed by development
approved through the permit process must be undertaken prior to the
completion of the corresponding, authorized development. Failure to complete
this requirement will prohibit the issuance of a final inspection and/or
Certificate of Compliance. Further non-compliance constitutes a violation of
this section.



      (7)   The Code Enforcement Official is authorized to impose
additional conditions to insure the Mitigation Plan complies with the
provisions of this section.



   (C)   Site staking. The Code Enforcement Official shall perform a
site inspection for the purpose of staking the location of the current line
of stable vegetation, suspected primary dune locations, any and all other
significant features of the lot. This recorded inspection shall be valid for
60 days.



   (D)   Survey. All permit applications shall include a registered
land surveyor's plat, current within one year of date of application. Said
survey plat shall clearly show the flood zone, block number, the lot number,
section and property identification number (PIN) as shown on the New Hanover
County Tax Maps for the Town of Wrightsville Beach, all applicable facets of
the Shore Line Development Boundary, and the elevation of any existing
primary dunes or dune systems.



   (E)   Inspection. The Code Enforcement Official shall inspect every
project approved under this section at least one time after completion of the
work and completion of any restoration or protection of vegetation which he
may prescribe.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.29  Access Structure Specifications.



   (A)   Access structures shall be in accordance with the following
standards:



      (1)   Piling depth for the installation of access structures
may not penetrate grade more than four feet.



      (2)   The height of access structures east of the Shore Line
Development Boundary must be maintained no more than 30 inches above grade.



      (3)   Any portion of an access structure to include walkway,
stair or ramp east of the Shore Line Development Boundary must run in a
west-east direction with no north-south turns and shall be a maximum of three
feet wide.



      (4)   No horizontal or vertical development is allowed in
addition to the access structure east of the Shore Line Development Boundary.
Horizontal development shall include gazebos, benches and similar
appurtenances. Handrails shall be optional except where required by North
Carolina Building Code. Refer to Section 155.11.34, below, for Handicap
exceptions. (See Illustrations A and B)







 







 



      (5)    Developme nt shall be constructed in accordance with
North Carolina Building Code.



   (B)    Access structures can have only one deck and the following
provisions, as represented in Illustrations C.1 and C.2, apply to the decking:







 







 



      (1)   Shall be placed westward of the Shore Line Development
Boundary.



      (2)   Can be no greater than ten feet by ten feet.



      (3)   Must meet the building setbacks for structures on
private property west of the Shore Line Development Boundary.



      (4)   Must be built in accordance with the open space
requirements of Section 155.2.10 for that property.



      (5)   For decks in which the access structure does not extend
over the frontal dune, then the portion of the access structure constructed
west of the Shore Line Development Boundary must be included as deck area in
the calculation of the F.A.R. for the primary structure on the lot.



      (6)   If a ten-foot by ten-foot deck area as part of an access
structure is connected to the principal structure by less than four feet,
that deck must be included in the deck area ratio of the F.A.R. requirement
outlined in Section 155.7.17.



   (C)   No electric circuits connected to commercial power sources and
no water or sewer lines or fixtures may extend east of the Shore Line
Development Boundary.



   (D)   Access structures shall terminate landward of the first line
of vegetation.



   (E)   Access structures shall be manipulated so as to accommodate
any change in elevation occurring in proximity to the access, and done so in
accordance with the provisions of Sections 155.11.30 and 155.11.33.



   (F)   Commercial beach access structures must meet commercial
structure Americans with Disabilities Act requirements according to the North
Carolina Building Code.



   (G)   Any commercial structure located east of the Shore Line
Development Boundary must comply with all applicable provisions of North
Carolina State Building Codes and nothing contained herein shall be construed
to eliminate the requirement for compliance with such codes.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.30  Removable Structures.



   (A)   All structures which are westward of the Shore Line
Development Boundary and which are a part of an access system are not
required to be removable; however, they may be removable at the owner's
option.



   (B)   All structures which are a substantially permanent structural
type, such as walkovers and accesses located west of the Shore Line
Development Boundary, shall be in conformity with all regulations of the
building code of the town and the North Carolina State Building Code.



   (C)   All structures located east of the Shore Line Development
Boundary are to be removable and shall conform to all regulations of this
section.



   (D)   The owner of any structure located east of the Shore Line
Development Boundary shall, upon a 30-day written notice served by mail or in
person by the Code Enforcement Official of the town, remove the structure for
the purpose of beach maintenance and repair. These structures must be
relocated from the beach area onto private property westward of the Shore
Line Development Boundary. Failure on the part of the owner to respond
reasonably to such notice shall result in penalties as per Section
155.1.12.9. In addition, 30 days after the Town mailed such written notice,
the Town may remove such structures.



   (E)   Removable structures shall be in accordance with the following
construction standards:



      (1)   Each removable unit of access structures shall be
demountable and as a self-contained unit shall have no length greater than
eight feet.



      (2)   The connections of all removable units shall be by
pintype connections using a minimum diameter 1-1/2-inch galvanized pipe or a
minimum diameter one-inch galvanized bolt having large washers with suitable
bolts or pipe caps as the case may be. All other fasteners shall be hot
dipped galvanized nails, spikes, drifts, bolts, lags, stainless steel
fasteners, or other acceptable fasteners as may be suitable or required to
properly connect members.



      (3)   The width of all stairs, ramps, or walkways and the
number of risers in any flight of stairs shall be a minimum width of three
feet. All stairs shall be built in conformity with applicable requirements of
the North Carolina Building Code.



      (4)   Concrete shall not be used to secure pilings east of the
shoreline development boundary.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.31  Maintenance of Oceanfront Systems and Structures.



   (A)   Each owner shall be responsible for the proper and
satisfactory maintenance of any structure privately erected east of the
Shoreline Development Boundary. All structures shall be subject to inspection
by the Code Enforcement Official or his designee, in accordance with Section
155.11.33, and where faulty maintenance is found, the Code Enforcement
Official shall confer with the Building Inspector and the owner notified in
writing as to the remedy required. Provisions of the North Carolina Building
Code shall be applied. The owner shall promptly apply for a permit to
accomplish all requirements and shall proceed within 90 days of the written
notice. Non-compliance with the provisions of this ordinance shall result in
the removal of the structure as per Section 155.11.32, and the assessment of
civil penalties as per Section 155.1.12.9.



   (B)   All structures east of the Shore Line Development Boundary
must be maintained in an operable condition, and within standards promoting
health, safety and welfare. Commercial fishing piers shall be maintained in
accordance with Chapter 95, Garbage, Trash and Rubbish of the Wrightsville
Beach Code of Ordinances and in compliance with the following additional
provisions:



      (1)   Commercial piers must provide a trash barrel every 50
feet along the length of the pier. Trash barrels must also be located near
the tackle shop and on the approach ramp thereto.



      (2)   Signs notifying patrons of the penalty for littering,
including the depositing of litter in the water, shall be posted every 50
feet along both sides of the pier.



      (3)   Pier owners, proprietors or employees are required to
notify the police in the event that any person shall litter on the pier or
from the pier into the water or shoreline surrounding the pier.



      (4)   Pier owners or proprietors shall insure that trash
barrels are emptied into the regular refuse receptacle to be collected by the
town’s Sanitation Department.



   (C)   Failure to properly maintain or utilize a structure permitted
east of the Shore Line Development Boundary in accordance with this section,
or failure to satisfy the objectives of this section, may result in a penalty
as provided in Section 155.1.12.9.



   (D)   The removal of an approved dune stabilization device such as
sand fencing or pedestrian control mechanisms in a manner constituting a
willful destruction of private or town property shall be a violation
punishable as provided pursued under the enforcement provisions as set forth
in Section 155.11.35.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.32  Authority to Remove Structures.



   In the event that a structure now exists or will exist in the future,
and the owner of the structure has failed to repair or bring the structure
into compliance as per Section 155.11.31 after notification by the Code
Enforcement official or his designee, the town may require the property owner
to remove the structure. In the case that the structure is not removed, the
town may remove the structure and its appurtenances and dispose of all
materials, refuse, and wreckage therefrom. The town may assess civil
penalties in accordance with Section 155.1.12.9, and all costs of the removal
against the property owner, which shall become a lien upon his property
payable immediately. After a period of 60 days there shall be assessed an
additional interest rate of 6% until the cost is paid.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.33  Damaging Dunes or Vegetation.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation in any manner
to damage, destroy, or remove any sand dune or part thereof, or to kill,
destroy, or remove any trees, shrubbery, or other vegetation growing east of
the Shore Line Development Boundary without having first obtained a zoning
permit and mitigation plan approval from Planning and Inspections Department
as specified in this section for the proposed damage, destruction, or removal.



   (A)   Removal of sand/soil prior to construction or lot clearing for
marketing or other purpose will not be permitted and is subject to a civil
penalty as identified in Sections 155.1.12.9 and 155.11.35.



   (B)   Private vehicles authorized through the Town of Wrightsville
Beach Police Department and public vehicles are allowed to access the public
beach by way of designated, improved vehicular accessways.



   (C)   Exempted from provisions of this section:



      (1)   Removal for personal use only of sand, seashells or
similar small materials of souvenir value in such amounts as may be carried
easily upon the person, so long as such act does not involve and is not for
commercial or business and does not provide monetary gain to the person
removing such materials.



      (2)   The normal, non-impacting maintenance of lawns,
commercial, office, and institutional tracts which are already developed.
Maintenance shall include lawn maintenance, the relocating and replacement of
shrubs, the cutting and removal of poisonous or harmful plants, briers, and
dead foliage. In accomplishing the foregoing, the use of equipment which
limits damage to surrounding vegetation is encouraged; the use of heavy
commercial equipment is discouraged. The removal or destruction of vegetation
referenced in subsection 155.11.28(B)(3) is prohibited.



      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to allow any
acts which shall willfully damage or destroy vegetation as an exemption. It
is specifically the intention of this subsection that any such action shall
be considered a violation and pursued under the enforcement provisions as set
forth in Section 155.11.35.



   (D)   Signage less than one square foot instructing persons to avoid
trespassing into the dunes, and rope fence for pedestrian traffic control may
be placed east of the Shore Line Development Boundary. Construction of such
devices shall only be permitted with the prior written consent of the Code
Enforcement Official. Willful removal or damage to any public or private
approved dune stabilization device such as sand fencing or pedestrian control
mechanisms shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.34  Compliance, Non-Conformities, Exceptions, and Exemptions.



   (A)   Nonconforming structures. Except as otherwise provided in this
subsection (A), access structures and beach walkovers that are damaged or
destroyed greater than 50% of their replacement value may only be built back
in conformance with current requirements as set forth in this section. Access
structures and beach walkovers for single-family and duplex lots that are
damaged or destroyed greater than 50% of their replacement value may not be
built back. All determinations of replacement value under this section shall
be made by the building inspector.



   (B)   Exception for Handicapped accessible beach access structures.
The Board of Aldermen or their designee may grant an exception for private
residential beach access structures regarding horizontal and vertical
development for purposes of allowing a handicapped accessible structure to be
built. These structures must meet the provisions of the NC Building Code.



   (C)   Exception for hotels and housing development located in
Commercial District IV zoning district. The provisions regulating
construction east of the Shore Line Development Boundary and found in Article
155.11, Part III, shall not apply to any hotel or housing development (as
defined in Exhibit



      A) located adjacent to the Atlantic Ocean and in a Commercial
District IV zoning district, provided, that such hotel or housing development
shall comply with any and all provisions of any conditional use permit issued
for such property and all other applicable local, state and federal rules,
regulations, ordinances, statutes and laws.



   (D)   Shared beach access structures. The town encourages adjoining
property owners to construct centrally located shared beach access structures
where appropriate in order to reduce the overall number of structures on the
beach. In cases where shared structures are proposed, the property owners
must submit a site plan and restrictive covenants that indicate the location
of the proposed structure and the proper restrictions against construction of
additional individual structures.



   (E)   Reconstruction of Beach Access Structures as the dune system
develops. The Code Enforcement Official will annually identify existing
access structures and beach walkovers and identify those as non-compliant
with the provisions of this section. Walkovers and accesses that are being
covered by sand due to a growing dune system will be encouraged to
reconstruct those sections of the structure to bring them into compliance
with the provisions of applicable ordinances. The Code Enforcement Official
will notify the property owner by certified mail, including photos of the
structure and a recommended Stabilization Plan.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.11.35  Enforcement Provisions.



   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, in
addition to the penalties set forth in Article 155.1, Section 155.1.12.9,
Penalties and Remedies for Violations, immediately undertake restoration or
replacement of such items in accordance with requirements of the Code
Enforcement Official. In the event such restoration or replacement is not
completed within 30 days of the initial violation, the town is authorized to
undertake such restoration. All costs of such restoration or repair incurred
by the Town shall be deemed an additional civil penalty to be collected from
the violator as specified in Section 155.1.12.9.



   (B)   In the event that an individual fails to comply with the
requirements set forth in this subsection, the Town shall have the authority
to revoke all issued permits and issue stop work orders on the real property
on which the offense occurred until such time as the offender has come into
compliance with the provisions of this section.



   (C)   Failure of an applicant and/or owner to comply with the
provisions of this section may result in penalty as provided in Section
155.1.12.9. First time offenders of subsection 155.11.28(B) are granted the
option of attending a two-hour class sponsored by the North Carolina
Cooperative Extension Services on Dune Ecology and Protection in lieu of fine.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



ARTICLE 155.12
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



PART I.
SUBDIVISION PLATS



Section 155.12.1  Plat Required for Land Subdivision.



   Parcels may not be subdivided by deed alone. All subdivision of parcels
requires recordation of a plat.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.2  Approval of Subdivision Plats Required.



   No subdivision plat of land within the platting jurisdiction shall be
filed or recorded until it has been submitted to and approved by the Board of
Aldermen, and the approval has been entered in writing on the plat by the
Town Clerk. The Register of Deeds, upon receipt of a copy of this Ordinance,
shall not file or record a plat of a subdivision of land located within the
platting jurisdiction without the approval of the plat as required in this
section.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.3  Plat Approval Required for Building Permit.



   No building permit may be issued for any construction on any proposed
lot shown on a plat until a final plat has been approved and recorded, except
that a building permit may be issued for one (1) structure on one (1) lot
shown on any approved preliminary plat prior to recordation of a final plat.
The Building Inspector shall deny building permits for subdivision lots
created in violation of the terms and conditions of this Ordinance.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.4  Plat Approval Not to Constitute Acceptance of Dedication.



   The approval of a plat by the Board of Aldermen shall not be deemed to
constitute or affect the acceptance by the town or the public of the
dedication of any street or other ground, public utility line, or other
public facility shown upon the plat.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.5  Transfer of Lots in Unapproved Subdivision Plats.



   Any person who, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land
located within the jurisdiction of the town, thereafter subdivides his land
in violation of applicable town ordinances or transfers or sells land by
reference to, exhibition of, or any other use of a plat showing a subdivision
of the land before the plat has been properly approved under applicable town
ordinances and recorded in the office of the New Hanover County Register of
Deeds, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. The description by metes and
bounds in the instrument of  transfer or other document used in the process
of selling or transferring land shall not exempt the transaction from this
penalty. The town may bring an action for injunction of any illegal
subdivision, transfer, conveyance, or sale of land, and the court shall, upon
appropriate findings, issue an injunction and order requiring the offending
party to comply with the subdivision ordinance. Building permits required
pursuant to NCGS 160A-417 may be denied for lots that have been illegally
subdivided. In addition to other remedies, the town may institute any
appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the unlawful subdivision of
land, to restrain, correct, or abate the violation, or to prevent any illegal
act or conduct.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.6  Plat Approval Required Before Extension of Service.



   No street shall be accepted and maintained by the town, no street
lighting, water, or sewer shall be extended to or connected with any
subdivision of land, and no permit shall be issued by any administrative
agent or department of the town for the construction of any building or other
improvement requiring a permit, upon any land concerning which a plat is
required to be approved, unless and until it has been approved by the Board
of Aldermen and the requirements set forth in this Ordinance have been
complied with.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.7  Coordination of Street System.



   The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall provide for the
continuation of the principal existing streets in adjoining subdivisions or,
when adjoining property is not subdivided, their proper projection insofar as
necessary for public requirements by providing new streets of a width deemed
necessary by the Planning Board and approved by the Board of Aldermen. In
general, the streets shall be at least as wide as existing streets; except,
that in no case shall the width be less than the minimum specified in Section
155.12.13. The street and alley arrangement shall be such as to cause no
hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their own land and
seek to provide for convenient access to it and shall provide for continuing
a reasonable number of through utility lines. When a new subdivision adjoins
unsubdivided land susceptible to being subdivided, the new streets shall be
carried to the boundaries of the tract proposed to be subdivided, except
where it is determined by the Planning Board and approved by the Board of
Aldermen that certain streets may not be required to be so extended.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.8  Parcels of Land to Consist of Multiples of Normal Blocks.



   When a parcel of land is subdivided into tracts larger than normal for
building lots, the parcels shall be divided, so far as practicable, into
normal block multiples so as to allow for the opening of major streets and
the making of satisfactory arrangements with the town for the ultimate
extension of streets.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.9  Preliminary Plats.



   (A)   In seeking to subdivide land and to dedicate streets, alleys,
or other lands for public use, the owner shall submit a preliminary plat, so
marked, which plat may be in pencil, to the Planning Board for its review.
The Planning Board will review the proposed plat and forward it to the Board
of Aldermen with its recommendations. Final approval of the preliminary plat
shall be made by the Board of Aldermen, and such plat may not be filed in the
Office of the Register of Deeds until such final approval is given. The
provisions of this section shall not prohibit any owner or its agent from
entering into contracts to sell or lease by reference to an approved
preliminary plat for which a final plat has not yet been approved under the
provisions of the subdivision ordinance or recorded with the Register of
Deeds, provided the contract does all of the following:



      (1)   Incorporates as an attachment a copy of the preliminary
plat referenced in the contract and obligates the owner to deliver to the
buyer a copy of the recorded plat prior to closing and conveyance.



      (2)   Plainly and conspicuously notifies the prospective buyer
or lessee that a final subdivision plat has not been approved or recorded at
the time of the contract, that no governmental body will incur any obligation
to the prospective buyer or lessee with respect to approval of the final
subdivision plat, that changes between the preliminary and final plats are
possible, and that the contract or lease may be terminated without breach by
the buyer or lessee if the final recorded plat differs in any material
respect from the preliminary plat.



      (3)   Provides that if the approved and recorded final plat
does not differ in any material respect from the plat referred to in the
contract, the buyer or lessee may not be required by the seller or lessor to
close any earlier than five days after the delivery of a copy of the final
recorded plat.



      (4)   Provides that if the approved and recorded final plat
differs in any material respect from the preliminary plat referred to in the
contract, the buyer or lessee may not be required by the seller or lessor to
close any earlier than 15 days after the delivery of the final recorded plat,
during which 15-day period the buyer or lessee may terminate the contract
without breach or any further obligation and may receive a refund for all
earnest money or prepaid purchase price.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not prohibit any owner or
its agent from entering into contracts to sell or lease land by reference to
an approved preliminary plat for which a final plat has not been properly
approved under the subdivision ordinance, or recorded with the Register of
Deeds where the buyer or lessee is any person who has contracted to acquire
or lease the land for the purposes of engaging in the business of
construction of residential, commercial, or industrial buildings on the land,
or for the purpose of resale or lease of the land to persons engaged in that
kind of business, provided that no conveyance of the land may occur and no
contract to lease it may become effective until after the final plat has been
properly approved under the subdivision ordinance and recorded with the
Register of Deeds.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.10  Contents of Preliminary Plats.



   The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale not smaller than one
inch to 100 feet and shall show:



   (A)   Name. The subdivision name, the names and addresses of the
owners, and the designer of the subdivision and his qualifications.



   (B)   Date, approximate North arrow, and scale.



   (C)   Lot Lines.



   (D)   Lot Dimensions.



   (E)   Boundaries. The boundary line of the tract to be subdivided
drawn accurately to scale and with accurate linear and angular dimensions.



   (F)   Location Map. A map showing the location of the subdivision.



   (G)   Primary Dunes. The location of the primary dunes as
established by the CAMA regulations.



   (H)   Heritage Trees. The location of all heritage trees.



   (I)   Existing Property Lines. The location of existing and platted
property lines, streets, buildings, water courses, railroads, bridges, water
mains, sewers, culverts, drainpipes, and public utility easements, and the
names of record owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land.



   (J)   Flood hazard zones, wetland delineation and CAMA jurisdiction
all must be indicated on the preliminary plat.



   (K)   Proposed Improvements. The names, proposed location, and
approximate dimensions of proposed improvements. Structural encroachments,
such as gate houses, mail boxes and entrance signs, etc., within private
rights-of-way must show the dimensions of the structure and not be located in
the site visibility triangle. Provision of legal agreements stating the
responsibility as to the maintenance of the structures will be accomplished.



   (L)   Location of the proposed streets, alleys, culs-de-sac, or
other public ways.



   (M)   Private Areas within Subdivisions.



      (1)   The Planning Board shall be assured, prior to final plat
approval, that adequate provisions have been made through legal covenants and
restrictions which shall govern a homeowners’ association, or through other
legal agreements, that the responsibility as to the maintenance of the
streets, utilities or other areas designated as private areas or as a common
area will be accomplished by a source other than by public maintenance.



      (2)   The subdivider shall provide and sign an acknowledgment
of compliance as specified in Section 155.12.15. Such acknowledgment shall
appear on the final plat of the subdivision.



   (N)   Sidewalks, Walkways, and Bikeways. Sidewalks, walkways and
other pedestrian ways shall be provided by the subdivider within or adjacent
to a subdivision, as deemed necessary by the Board of Aldermen upon
recommendation of the Planning Board, upon reasonable evidence that the
sidewalks, walkways or other pedestrian ways would be essential for
pedestrian access to community facilities, that such is necessary to provide
safe pedestrian movement outside the street or street rights-of-way area or
that such is an extension or could reasonably become an extension of existing
sidewalks, walkways and other pedestrian ways. All sidewalks, walkways, and
other pedestrian ways shall be aligned as required by the Board of Aldermen
upon recommendation of the Planning Board and designed and constructed to
conform to Chapter 99 of the Town Code of Ordinances. Sidewalks shall be
indicated on all preliminary plans.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.11  Conformity of Plat to Requirements.



   Preliminary plats shall be checked for:



   (A)   Conformity to the general street or thoroughfare plan.



   (B)   Conformity to the probable development of adjacent properties.



   (C)   Conformity to the existing street system.



   (D)   Street names.



   (E)   Lot size and arrangement.



   (F)   Necessary public utility easements.



   (G)   Improvements required within town limits.



   (H)   Conformity to policies, requirements, recommendations, and
general content of the town’s land use plan, access plan, or any other
plans, reports, or feasibility studies the Planning Board considers relevant
to its review, and other physical development features which may from time to
time be determined by comprehensive physical development plans of the
planning area. In the event of a conflict in the recommendations of a plan or
between plans, the Planning Board may apply the more stringent
recommendations if it deems this necessary to protect the public interest.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.12  Approved Plats to be Kept on File.



   A copy of the approved preliminary plat shall be kept on file for
public examination. Approval of the preliminary plat shall be valid for a
period of 60 days.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.13  Service Facilities Required Prior to Final Approval.



   (A)   Pursuant to NCGS 160A-371 et seq., the following requirements
for service facilities or improvements shall be fulfilled by the owner of a
subdivision located within the corporate limits prior to the time a final
plat is approved by the Board of Aldermen:



      (1)   Streets and Alleys. Shall be graded to finish section
and grade, as approved, with pavement of 20-foot minimum width, consisting of
not less than three-inch crushed stone base and 1-1/2-inch bituminous
concrete or approved equivalent, completed. Curbs, sidewalks, and driveways
shall be provided by the developer.



      (2)   Storm Drainage. A storm drainage system shall be
installed which is capable of alleviating runoff waters of a ten year
frequency storm. Inlets shall be installed at intervals as needed and at not
more than 400 feet intervals. Pipe shall be extended to high water line at
discharge.



      (3)   Utilities.



         (a)   Water. Shall be as provided for in Chapter 50 of
the Town Code of Ordinances, together with any amendments subsequently
adopted by the Board of Aldermen.



         (b)   Sanitary Sewer. Shall be as provided for in
Chapter 50 of the Town Code of Ordinances, together with any amendments
subsequently adopted by the Board of Aldermen.



         (c)   Electric and Telephone. Services may be provided
either overhead or underground. All services shall be installed subject to
the franchise rights of the town and to its control.



         (d)   Gas. No underground gas system shall serve more
than one lot or one facility. Tank containers may be used as set out in
provisions of this code and other ordinances governing the same.



   (B)   All service facilities or improvements required to be
installed or constructed shall be installed or constructed in accordance with
the specifications standards, policies, or other requirements of the town
applicable thereto.



   (C)   Performance Guarantees. In lieu of requiring the completion,
installation and dedication of all improvements prior to final plat approval,
the Town of Wrightsville Beach may enter into an agreement with the
subdivider whereby the subdivider shall agree to complete any remaining
required improvements as specified by the approved preliminary plat for that
portion of the subdivision to be shown on the final plat within a mutually
agreed upon specified time period not to exceed one (1) year. The total cost
of the remaining improvements and administration for which the surety is
offered shall not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) except for minor
subdivisions that require the extension of sidewalks along existing streets.
The surety limit stated in this section shall be adjusted annually, at the
beginning of each calendar year or fiscal year, to compensate for
construction costs, inflation, or other factors, in accordance with an
appropriate established index, as approved by the Town Attorney. Once agreed
upon by both parties and the security required herein is provided, the final
plat may be approved by the Board of Aldermen, if all other requirements of
this Ordinance are met. The Town shall require a certified cost estimate from
a licensed contractor or engineer for the cost of completion of such
improvements.



      (1)   The subdivider shall provide one of the following
Performance Guarantees, elected at the subdivider’s discretion, in lieu of
installation:



         (a)   Surety Performance Bond(s). The subdivider shall
obtain a performance bond(s) from a surety bonding company authorized to do
business in North Carolina. The bond(s) shall be payable to the Town of
Wrightsville Beach, and shall be in an amount not to exceed 11A times the
entire cost, as estimated by the subdivider in conjunction with the Board of
Aldermen, and approved by the Board of Aldermen for installing all required
improvements. The duration of the bond(s) shall be until such time as the
improvements are completed and accepted as such by the Town of Wrightsville
Beach.



         (b)   Cash or Equivalent Security. The subdivider shall
deposit cash, an irrevocable letter of credit, or other instrument readily
convertible into cash at face value, either with the Town or in a
non-interest bearing escrow account with a financial institution designated
as an official depository of the Town. The use of any instrument other than
cash shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Aldermen. The amount of
deposit shall not exceed 11 times the cost, as estimated by the subdivider in
conjunction with the Board of Aldermen for installing all required
improvements. If cash or other instrument is deposited in escrow with a
financial institution as provided above, then the subdivider shall file with
the Town an agreement between the financial institution and himself
guaranteeing the following:



            1.   That said escrow account shall be held in
trust until released by the Board of Aldermen and may not be used or pledged
by the subdivider in any other matter during the term of the escrow; and



            2.   That in the case of a failure on the part of
the subdivider to complete said improvements, the financial institution
shall, upon notification by the Town and submission by the Town to the
financial institution of an engineer’s estimate of the amount needed to
complete the improvements, immediately either pay to the Town of Wrightsville
Beach the funds estimated to complete the improvements, up to the full
balance of the escrow account, or deliver to the Town any other instruments
fully endorsed or otherwise made payable to the Town.



      (2)   Upon default, meaning failure on the part of the
subdivider to complete the required improvements in a timely manner as
spelled out in the performance bond or escrow agreement, then the surety, or
the financial institution holding the escrow account shall, if requested by
the Town, pay all or any portion of the bond or escrow fund to the Town of
Wrightsville Beach up to the amount needed to complete the improvements based
on an engineering estimate. Upon payment, the Wrightsville Beach Board of
Aldermen, in its discretion, may expend such portion of said funds as it
deems necessary to complete all or any portion of the required improvements.
The Town shall return to the subdivider any funds not spent in completing the
improvements.



      (3)   The Town may release a portion of any security posted as
the improvements are completed and recommended for approval by the UDO
Administrator. Within thirty (30) days after receiving the UDO
Administrator's recommendation, the Board of Aldermen shall approve or not
approve said improvements. If the Board of Aldermen approves said
improvements, then it shall immediately release any security posted.



      (4)   For subdivisions which are underwritten or constructed
with federal funds and for which the specifications for facilities or
improvements are equal to or of a higher standard than those required by the
Town, the bond-posting requirement may be waived and the final plat approved
prior to completion of facilities or improvements.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.14  Final Plat.



   The original tracing and two copies of the final plat shall be filed
with and approved by the UDO Administrator. In the event the final plat is
approved, a statement of that fact shall be transcribed to the tracing and
one copy returned to the subdivider for recording, and one copy shall be
retained by the town. The approval shall be void unless the final plat is
offered for filing and recording in the Office of the Register of Deeds
within 90 days of date of approval.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.15  Contents of Final Plat.



   (A)   Final plats submitted for approval shall be in accordance with
NCGS 47-30, as amended and to the State Board of Registration for
Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors “Manual of Practice for Land
Surveying.” The final plat shall conform with the approved preliminary plat.



   (B)   A certified copy of the private or subdivision restrictions or
covenants proposed to be applied to the subdivision, if any, shall accompany
the submittal of the final plat.



   (C)   Required Statements, Certificates, and Forms.



      (1)   Certificate of Dedication. A certificate of ownership
and dedication shall be shown properly completed and signed by the owners and
all other interested parties, similar in wording to the following:



         “The undersigned hereby acknowledge(s) this plat and
allotment to be (his, her, their) free act and deed, and hereby dedicate(s)
to public use as streets, playgrounds, parks, open spaces, and easements
forever all areas so shown or indicated on said plat.



         Signed ..... “



      (2)   All property shown on the plat as dedicated for a public
use shall be deemed to be dedicated for any other public use authorized by
the Town Charter or any general, local, or special law pertaining to the
town, when such other use is approved by the Board of Aldermen as in the
public interest.



      (3)   Street, utility and drainage maintenance disclosure
statements signed by the owner and/or subdivider for private development.



      (4)   All structures to be constructed, improved, or
rehabilitated within the area delineated as the one-hundred-year flood area
on the “Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, Town of



         Wrightsville Beach” shall be constructed, improved or
rehabilitated in conformance with the Town’s flood management regulations
(Article 155.11, Part I).



      (5)   All lots as depicted on the plat meet or exceed the
minimum area and dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which
located.



      (6)   The availability of water and/or sewer service to the
lots in this subdivision is subject to the completion of certain water and/or
sewer line extensions by the town, and certificates of occupancy will not be
issued for structures on such lots until such extensions are completed.



      (7)   Certificate of Registration by Register of Deeds.



         State of North Carolina



         County of New Hanover



         Filed for registration on the ____________ day of
___________________________, 20_____



         at _________________ (am/pm) and duly recorded in Map Book
_________________ at Page



                                         .



         Register of Deeds



      (8)   Certificate of Accuracy and Mapping.



         I, _____________________________ certify that this map was
(drawn by me) (drawn under my



         supervision) from (an actual survey made by me) (an actual
survey made under my supervision); deed description in Book _________, Page
___________, Book __________, Page _________, etc. (other); that the error of
closure as calculated by latitudes and departures is 1:______; that the
boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken lines plotted from information
found in Book _____________, Page _____________; that this map was prepared
in accordance with NCGS Section 47-30 as amended.



         Witness my hand and seal this ______ day of
____________________, 20_____.



         Surveyor



         State of North Carolina



         County of New Hanover



         I, ________________________, a Notary Public for said
County and State, do hereby certify that _______________________ personally
came before me this day and acknowledged the due



         execution of the foregoing instrument.



         Witness my hand and official seal, this ______ day of
_________________, 20_____.



         Official Seal



         Notary Public



         My Commission Expires: __________________



   (D)   Form of Endorsement. A form for the endorsement of the Town
shall be stamped on the Final Plat before recording.



   (E)   Certificate of Ownership and Dedication.



      I (we) hereby certify that I am (we are) the owner (s) of the
property shown and described hereon and that I (we) hereby adopt this plan of
a subdivision with my (our) own free consent, establish minimum setback
lines, and dedicate all streets, alleys, walks, parks and other sites to
public or private use as noted.



      Further, I (we) certify the land as shown hereon is within the
platting jurisdiction of the Town of Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina.



      Date_____________                   Owner
______________________________



   (F)   Enforcement - No Service or Permits Until Final Plat Approved.
No street shall be accepted and maintained by the town nor shall any street
lighting be installed and added to the existing town systems until the final
plat is approved.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



PART II.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section 155.12.16  Minimum Requirements.



   The requirements set forth in this Article shall be considered the
minimum requirements and shall be varied only in specific cases.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.17  Street Plans, Rights-of-Way, and Blocks.



   (A)   General Street Plan. All subdivision streets shall conform as
to width and location to the general street or thoroughfare plan for the town.



   (B)   Right-of-Way. The minimum right-of-way for streets shall be 60
feet. Additional right-of-way may be required for other than residential
streets in accordance with the general street plan as adopted by the Board of
Aldermen. Streets or lanes having length of 400 feet or less and being open
or connected at one end only shall be not less than 50 feet. A partial width
street, so designated, may be dedicated when adjoining undeveloped property;
provided, that the width of the dedication, when permitted by the Planning
Board and approved by the Board of Aldermen, shall be such as to permit the
installation of the public facilities as may be necessary to serve the lots
abutting thereon. The owner of a subdivision of land abutting an existing
partial width street shall be required to dedicate the remainder of the full
required width of the street.



   (C)   Alleys. The minimum width of any alley shall be 20 feet,
except in commercial districts where the minimum width shall be not less than
22 feet. Alleys shall be required in all blocks along the rear line of
business property.



   (D)   Easements. Where alleys are not provided, easements of not
less than five feet in width shall be provided on each side of all rear lot
lines where necessary or in other locations as may be directed by the
Planning Board, subject to final approval by the Board of Aldermen, for
poles, wires, conduits, storm or sanitary sewers, telephone, and water lines.
Easements of greater width may be required along the lines of or across lots
where necessary for storm drainage channels, surface overflow or for the
extension of main sewers or similar utilities.



   (E)   Culs-de-Sac. Culs-de-sac and dead-end streets shall terminate
in a circular right-of-way having a minimum radius of 40 feet. This provision
may be modified by the Planning Board, subject to final approval by the Board
of Aldermen. The culs-de-sac shall not exceed 400 feet in length.



   (F)   Intersecting Streets. Intersecting streets shall be laid out
at intervals that block lengths are not more than 800 feet, except where the
principal street serves lots fronting upon water areas and access by
intersecting street is not required; or where the principal street serves a
narrow island, strip of land, peninsula or is a cul-de-sac; or where, in the
opinion of the Planning Board, subject to final approval by the Board of
Aldermen, existing conditions justify a modification of this requirement.



   (G)   Block Widths. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers
of lots of minimum depth, plus alleys if needed and easements, except when
prevented by topographical conditions or the size of the property in which
case the Planning Board may approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth.



   (H)   Public Access. Public access shall be provided in accordance
with the recommendations of the town’s land use plan and access plan,
and/or the present amount of public access and public parking as exists
within the town now. If any recommendations are found to conflict, the system
requiring the greatest quantity and quality of public access, including
parking, shall govern.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.18  Requirements for Streets.



   (A)   Street Intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly
to right angles as possible, and no intersections shall be at an angle less
than 45 degrees.



   (B)   Street Off-Sets. Off-sets at street intersections shall not be
approved, except where deemed justifiable by the Planning Board and approved
by the Board of Aldermen.



   (C)   Reserve Strips for Limited Access Roads. Subdivisions showing
reserve strips controlling access to public ways shall not be approved,
except when the control and disposition of land comprising the strips is
definitely placed within the town’s jurisdiction under conditions meeting
the approval of the Planning Board and Board of Aldermen.



   (D)   Street Names. Determinations regarding new street names, or
changes in street names must be reviewed by the New Hanover County 911
Administrator. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the Board of
Aldermen upon recommendation of the Planning Board.



   (E)   Monuments. Permanent monuments shall be placed at all
intersections or at the tangent points of curves connecting intersecting
street lines, at the points of curvature and tangency in curved street lines,
at all corners in the exterior boundary of the subdivision, and at other
points as may be  necessary to make the retracing of the lines as shown upon
the final plat thereof reasonably convenient. The location of all monuments
shall be clearly designated on the final plat. All lot corners shall be
marked by permanent markers.



   (F)   Curves. Street lines within the block deflecting from each
other at any one point more than 5 degrees shall be connected by a curve, the
radius of which shall be as determined after considering the factors of
sight-distance, type, and importance of street, anticipated traffic volume,
and convenience of traffic movement.



   (G)   All streets shall be constructed to the specifications of the
Town (see Chapter 99 of the Town Code of Ordinances).



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.19  Lot Sizes and Side Lines.



   (A)   Area, Width. All lots shall conform to Section 155.6.5, Zoning
District Development Standards.



   (B)   Side Lines of Lots. Side lines of lots shall be at right
angles or radial to the street lines, unless a variation from the rule will
give a better street and lot plan.



   (C)   Double Frontage Lots and Corner Lots. Lots with double
frontage running through the block from the street, shall be avoided where
practicable. Corner lots should be so designed as to prevent the rear of a
building on a corner lot from protruding beyond the setback line of a
building fronting the street which constitutes the side of the corner lot.



   (D)   Radius of Property Lines at Intersections. Property lines at
corners of all intersecting streets shall generally be rounded by an arc
having a radius of not less than 15 feet except that property lines at major
street intersections or at other locations where traffic hazards and
congestion may be anticipated shall be designed as special cases, and the
necessary street rights-of-way shall be provided therefor at the direction of
the Planning Board, subject to final approval by the Board of Aldermen.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.20  Setback Lines, Unusable Lots, and Land Elevation.



   (A)   Building Setback Lines. Building setback lines may be required
to be shown and properly designated which shall be not less than those
required by zoning provisions of this UDO.



   (B)   Unusable Lots. Where property is so platted as to leave
unusable lots, the lots shall be included within the subdivision and
designated by the words “reserve lot” followed by a numeral or letter to
distinguish them from other normal lots in the subdivision.



   (C)   Land Elevation Requirements. No lands shall be platted for
subdivision, the building and street areas of which are less than 7-1/2 feet
mean sea level (MSL Beaufort Datum).



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.21  Modification of Certain Requirements.



   The regulations concerning street widths, block lengths and widths, and
dead-end streets set forth in Section 155.12.17 and Section 155.12.18 may be
modified by the Planning Board, subject to final approval by the Board of
Aldermen in the case of a subdivision of a tract of land large enough to be
developed as a relatively complete development or group housing project in
accordance with a well-studied plan, properly safeguarded by restrictions and
which adequately provide for traffic circulation, light and air needs, and
recreational requirements for the maximum anticipated population and
containing other requirements as may be recommended by the Planning Board and
approved by the Board of Aldermen.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



PART III.
GROUP HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS



Section 155.12.22  Commonly Owned Areas.



   All planned developments shall contain commonly owned land equal in
area to 20% of the entire development, exclusive of streets and parking
areas. Common areas shall not be less than one acre in size and shall be held
in non-profit corporate ownership by the owners of lots within the
development or by the developer in a renter occupied development. In
consideration of the purpose served by a group housing development, the title
to the common areas or property shall be preserved for the perpetual benefit
of the private properties in the development and shall be restricted against
private ownership for any other purpose. If the corporation desires,
landscaping and recreational improvements may be made within the common
areas; provided, that maximum coverage of the improvement shall not exceed
25% of the entire common property. The developer shall submit and, after
approval by the Town, record a declaration of the covenants and restrictions
that will govern the ownership, management, and maintenance of common areas.
All property owners’ associations shall comply with Section 155.2.12.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.23  Density.



   The overall density of a group housing development shall not exceed
that permitted by applicable zoning requirements contained in Article 155.6.
All remaining land not shown as lots, streets, or parking area shall be
designated as common areas.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.24  Unit Ownership and Condominiums.



   Before a declaration establishing a condominium or unit ownership
development may be recorded, the declaration plan and restrictions shall be
approved by the UDO Administrator and comply with Section 155.2.12 as
preliminary and final plats are approved.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.25  Site Plans.



   Site plans for all group housing developments shall show the location
of the buildings, streets, alleys, walks, parking areas, recreation areas,
tree cover, and planting. The site plan shall number and show the dimensions
of all building sites and all streets and utility easements to be dedicated
to the public. All areas on the site plan other than public streets, parking
areas, easements or private building sites shall be shown and designated as
common areas.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.26  Public Access, Easements, and Private Party Walls.



   Building lots may abut or be provided with frontage on common areas,
properly restricted through a property owners association to assure adequate
access, if in the opinion of the UDO Administrator, a public street is within
an acceptable distance and would allow adequate community services. Easements
over the common area for access, ingress, and egress from and to public
streets and walk-ways and easements for enjoyment of the common areas, as
well as for parking, shall be granted to each owner of a residential site.
All common walls between individual residences shall be party walls and
provisions for the maintenance thereof and restoration in the event of
destruction or damage shall be established. Refer to NC State Building Code.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



Section 155.12.27  Utilities and Improvements Required.



   All planned developments shall include town water and sewer utilities,
sidewalks, streets, and parking. All utilities, sidewalks, streets, and
parking shall be on dedicated rights-of-way and all streets and parking shall
be paved and shall have proper curb, gutter, and storm drainage. In lieu of
requiring the completion, installation and dedication of all improvements
prior to final plat approval, the subdivider may provide a Performance
Guarantees as outlined in subsection 155.12.13(C).



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12)



EXHIBIT A
DEFINITIONS



Section A.1  Purpose.



   For the purposes of this Ordinance, certain words, concept, and ideas
are defined herein. Except as defined herein, all other words used in this
Ordinance shall have their customary dictionary definition.



Section A.2  Interpretation.



   (A)   As used in this Ordinance, words importing the masculine
gender include the feminine and neuter.



   (B)   Words used in the singular in this Ordinance include the
plural and words used in the plural include the singular.



   (C)   Words used in the present tense include future tense.



   (D)   The word “person” includes a firm, association,
organization, corporation, company, trust, and partnership, LLC, and any
other legal entity, as well as an individual.



   (E)   The words “may” and “should” are permissive.



   (F)   The words “shall” and “will” are always mandatory and
not merely directive.



   (G)   The word “used for” shall include the meaning “designed
for.”



   (H)   The words “used” or “occupied” shall mean “intended,
designed, and arranged to be used or occupied.”



   (I)   The word “lot” shall include the words “plot,”
“parcel,” “site,” and “premises.”



   (J)   The word “structure” shall include the word “building.”



   (K)   The word “street” includes the word “alley,”
“road,” “cul-de-sac,” “highway,” or “thoroughfare,” whether
designated as public or private.



   (L)   The word “includes” shall not limit the term to specified
examples, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or
circumstances of like kind or character.



   (M)   The word “Aldermen” shall mean “Board of Aldermen” of
Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina.



   (N)   The word “administrator” shall mean the UDO Administrator
or his/her designee.



   (O)   The words “Planning Board” shall mean the “Wrightsville
Beach Planning Board.”



   (P)   The word “Town” shall mean the “Town of Wrightsville
Beach,” a municipality of the State of North Carolina.



   (Q)   The words “map,” “zoning map,” and “Wrightsville
Beach Zoning Map” shall mean the “Official Zoning Map for the Town of
Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina.”



   (R)   The words “Board of Adjustment” shall mean the
“Wrightsville Beach Board of Adjustment.”



Section A.3  Definitions.



1939 Line



   A line established by the Town in 1939 pursuant to the authority set
forth in Public Laws of North Carolina, session 1939, Chapter 246, adopted by
the North Carolina General Assembly in 1939. This line runs from
approximately Jack Parker Boulevard north to Heron Street and is designated
more specifically on those maps recorded in Map Book 3 pages 71, 71A and 71B,
New Hanover County Registry.



    A



Access Structure



   A built upon surface allowing access to the beach area.



Accessory Building



   A building where it is incidental to that of the main building and is
detached and located on the same lot. Garages, carports, and storage sheds
are common urban accessory buildings.



Accessory Equipment



   Any equipment serving or being used in conjunction with a
telecommunication facility or support structure. This equipment includes, but
is not limited to, utility or transmission equipment, power supplies,
generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets and storage
sheds, shelters or other structures.



Accessory Structure



   A structure located on the same parcel of property as the principal
structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal
structure. Garages, carports, and storage sheds are common urban accessory
structures. Pole barns, hay sheds, and the like qualify as an accessory
structure on farms and may or may not be located on the same parcel as the
farm dwelling or shop building.



Accessory Use



   A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or
building and located on the same lot with the principal use or building.



Addition (To an Existing Building)



   An extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building or
structure.



Adjacent Property



   Properties immediately adjacent to the property of a request, including
properties and any portions of properties directly opposite from the property
of the request but separated by a street right-of-way.



Adult Care Home



   An assisted living residence in which the housing management provides
24-hour scheduled and unscheduled personal care services to two or more
residents, either directly or for scheduled needs, through formal written
agreement with licensed home care or hospice agencies. Some licensed adult
care homes provide supervision to persons with cognitive impairments whose
decisions, if made independently, may jeopardize the safety or well-being of
themselves or others and therefore require supervision. Medication in an
adult care home may be administered by designated trained staff. Adult care
homes that provide care to two to six unrelated residents are commonly called
family care homes.



Alteration



   As applied to a building, means any change or modification in
construction exit facilities, building equipment, or permanent fixtures which
does not include an addition to the building.



Antenna



   Any structure or device used to collect or radiate electromagnetic
waves for the provision of cellular, paging, personal communications services
(PCS) and microwave communications. Such structures and devices include, but
are not limited to, directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes
and satellite dishes, and omnidirectional antennas, such as whips.



Apartment



   A portion of a building consisting of one or more rooms with bath and
kitchen designed for use as a single-family residence.



Appeal



   A request for a review of the UDO Administrator's interpretation of any
provision of this Ordinance.



Approval Authority



   The Board of Aldermen shall be the approval authority for all
applications for the establishment of vested rights.



Approved



   Approved by the UDO Administrator or his/her designee.



Area of Shallow Flooding



   A designated Zone AO on a community’s flood insurance rate map (FIRM)
with base flood depths determined to be from one to three feet. These areas
are located where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be
evident.



Auditorium



   A building or structure designed or intended for use for the gathering
of people as an audience to hear music, lectures, plays, or other
presentations.



Average Foot-Candles



   The average of a number of points of foot-candle calculations or
foot-candle readings, either horizontal or vertical, in a given area. The
calculations may be initial or maintained foot-candles. Average foot-candles
are calculated from measurements on a grid.



Awning



   A structure made of cloth, metal, or other material affixed to a
building in such a manner that the structure may be raised or retracted from
a building to a flat position against the building, but not a canopy.



    B



Banner



   A sign made of flexible materials and supported along one or more sides
or at two or more corners by one or more fixed, rigid supports, such as
poles, rods, or a wall.



Barber or Beauty Shop



   A commercial enterprise or business established for the purpose of
providing hair cutting services and accessory services which are typical of
barber and beauty shops.



Basement



   Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level)
on all sides.



Base Flood



   The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.



Base Flood Elevation (BFE)



   The elevation of surface water resulting from a flood that has a 1%
chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. The BFE is
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).



Beach Access (a)



   A naturally occurring or built upon surface facili tating pedestrian
access to the public beach area.







 



Beach Access Structure



   An access structure or beach walkover or other permitted structure
permitting or facilitating access to the beach area.



Beach Walkover



   A means of providing access from the landward side of a dune or dune
system to the public beach without disturbing the nature of the dune or
surrounding vegetation; access is facilitated by way of a structure installed
upon pilings over the dune and terminating at the toe of the dune.



Billboard



   An independent advertising device used to disseminate information
concerning a place, activity, or thing not pertaining to the use of the land
upon which the advertising device is located.



Board of Aldermen



   The governing body of the Town of Wrightsville Beach, North Carolina.



Boat Rental Facility



   A location where boats are made available for rent. Except as otherwise
provided herein, for purposes of this definition, a boat shall mean a motor
boat as defined in NCGS § 75A-2, a vessel as defined in NCGS § 75A-2 with
no means of propulsion other than drifting, manual paddling, poling or rowing
or a sailboat. For purposes of this definition a boat or vessel shall not
include jet skis or personal watercraft as defined in NCGS § 75A-13.3. See
Section 155.7.21 for additional conditions.



Boat Sales and Service



   A business that sells and services boats with no multi-level storage,
no gas sales and no direct water access.



Breach



   A break or gap in the continuity of a dune caused by wind, water or
pedestrians.



Breakaway Wall



   A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and
is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific
lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the
building or the supporting foundation system.



Bufferyard (a)



   A required open space, containing only screening and other uses as
provided by this Ordinance. Both rear yards and side yards shall be
considered bufferyards.







 



Building



   Any structure enclosed and isolated by exterior walls constructed or
used for residence, business, industry, or other public or private purpose,
or accessory thereto.



Building Front



   The side of a building parallel to, or most nearly parallel to, the lot
frontage line or the side of the building containing the primary entrance as
designated by the owner. A building front may not face a side or rear lot
line.



Building, Height of



   The vertical distance measured from a point in the center line of the
street (whether public or private) adjoining the front of the lot on which a
structure is to be built or improved that is an equal distance from the side
lines extended to the center line of the adjoining street to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof; to the ridge line of a mansard roof; to
the ridge of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof; or to the highest point of a roof
deck or hand rail. Elevator penthouses and necessary mechanical service
equipment are exempt from this height limitation provided they are properly
screened. Also exempt are chimneys, solar panels, and church steeples. For
corner lots adjoining two streets or for those lots that do not adjoin a
street, the adjoining street for purposes of this definition shall be the
street which is the address of the lot. Features which increase the height of
the street at its center above its average grade, such as speed bumps, shall
be omitted in determining building height.







 



Building Inspector



   The town Building Inspector who is charged by the UDO Administrator
with enforcement of this Ordinance, where applicable.



Building Permit



   All land use, development, or building of any sort, excluding
agricultural uses, shall be required under this Ordinance to make application
for, receive approval of, and obtain a permit for said land use, development,
or building. This shall include but not be limited to any land disturbing
activities other than that stated above.



Building, Principal



   A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which
it is situated.



Building Setback Line



   A line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the property
line and the nearest portion of any structure or building constructed on a
lot. No building or structure or portion of a building or structure of any
kind shall be permitted between the building setback line and the property
line, either below, at, or above ground level, except as set forth herein, in
Section 2.10, or elsewhere in this Ordinance.







 



Bulkhead



   A vertical wall structure designed to retain shoreline material and
prevent erosion due to wave activity.



    C



Caliper



   The measurement of the diameter of a tree trunk. Measurement shall be
taken six inches above grade.







 



CAMA



   North Carolina’s Coastal Area Management Act. This act, along with
the dredge and fill law and the federal Coastal Zone Management Act, is
managed through the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural
Resources (NCDENR), Division of Coastal Management (DCM).



CAMA Local Permit Officer (Code Enforcement Official, LPO)



   Staff of the Planning and Inspections Department of the town trained by
the Division of Coastal Management to implement the CAMA regulations for
minor permits. The Code Enforcement Official referred to in this Ordinance is
also a CAMA Local Permit Officer.



Cane



   The slender, strong but often flexible stem of a shrub.



Canopy



   A structure other than an awning made of cloth, metal, or other
material which may be totally or partially attached to a building for the
purpose of providing shelter to patrons or automobiles, or as a decorative
feature on a building wall. A canopy is not a completely enclosed structure.



Carrier on Wheels or Cell on Wheels (COW)



   A portable self-contained cell site that can be moved to a location and
set up to provide personal wireless services on a temporary or emergency
basis. A COW is normally vehicle-mounted and contains a telescoping boom as
the antenna support structure.



Cellar



   A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground having an
inadequate access to light and air from windows located partly or wholly
below the level of the adjoining ground.



Chemical Storage Facility



   A building, portion of a building, or exterior area adjacent to a
building used for the storage of any chemical or chemically reactive products.



Child Care Center



   An arrangement where, at any one time, there are three or more
preschool-age children or nine or more school-age children receiving child
care.



Coastal Barrier Resources System (CBRS)



   Undeveloped portions of coastal and adjoining areas established by the
Coastal Barrier Resources Act (COBRA) of 1982, the Coastal Barrier
Improvement Act (CBIA) of 1990, and subsequent revisions, and includes areas
owned by federal or state governments or private conservation organizations
identified as otherwise protected areas (OPA).



Coastal High Hazard Area



   A special flood hazard area extending from offshore to the inland limit
of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to
high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. The area is
designated on a FIRM, or other adopted flood map as determined in Article
155.11, Part I of this Ordinance, as Zone VE.



Collocation



   The act of siting telecommunications facilities in the same location on
the same support structure as other telecommunications facilities.
Collocation also means locating telecommunications facilities on an existing
structure (i.e., buildings, water tanks, towers, utility poles, etc.) without
the need to construct a new support structure.



Computation of Time



   The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day is
Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded.



Conditional Use Process or Permit



   Required for all stated conditional uses including building,
development, land use, and the like. The process as set forth in this
Ordinance requires that certain stipulations, projections, prerequisites,
qualifications, and the like will be fulfilled if the proposed project is to
be permitted.



Construction, Light Marina Related



   An activity whose principal business is the co nstruction of marina
related structures such as floating docks, piers and other accessory st
ructures, excluding the construction of b oats and other water vessels.



Coppice Mounds



   The initial stages of dune growth formed as sand accumulates on the
downwind side of plants and other obstructions on or immediately adjacent to
the beach seaward of the foredunes. Coppice mounds may be unvegetated.







 



County



   The County of New Hanover, in the State of North Carolina, except as
otherwise provided.



    D



Damaged Trees



   Trees with structural defects are considered to be damaged. Some
indicators of damaged trees are:



   (1)   Burlwood. Indicates abnormal wood growth and is associated
with strength loss.



   (2)   Cavities and Decay. These ‘bad spots’ in a tree are great
for wildlife but are often cause for removal near structures.



   (3)   Construction Injury. Roots, trunk and branches can be severely
damaged by grading equipment. Many times this damage is extensive enough that
the tree should be removed.



   (4)   Dead Branches. Large dead branches and hangers should be
removed if there is no other damage to the tree. Long overextended branches
also should be removed. Dead branches by themselves are not cause for removal.



   (5)   Dead Tree. If more than 50% of the major limbs are dead or
dying and the tree is in a declining state, it shall be removed.



   (6)   Edge Tree. If an edge tree is leaning and it has a potential
target, it should be removed. Natural lean and leans where the ground is
being heaved are both considered leans.



   (7)   Fungal Fruiting Bodies (Mushrooms and Conks). This can mean
significant strength loss and should be investigated by a professional and
removed if it is warranted.



   (8)   Roots, Cankers, Cracks. These can be signs of significant
structural strength loss. Either removal or further professional
investigation is needed.



Deteriorated



   That a dwelling is unfit for human habitation and can be repaired,
altered, or improved to comply with all the minimum standards established by
this Ordinance, at a cost not in excess of 50% of its value, as determined by
findings of the UDO Administrator.



Development



   Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, includin g
but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredgin g, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment
or materials.



Diameter Breast Height (DBH)



   A measure of the size of a tree. Diameter is measured by finding the
circumference of the tree trunk with a tape measure and dividing the result
by pi (3.14159). The circumference measure shall be taken at breast height -
four and one-half feet above existing grade (the base of the tree). In the
event of a multitrunk tree, the DBH of each trunk shall be summed to
determine a total DBH for that tree.







 



Dilapidated



   That a dwelling is unfit for human habitation and cannot be repaired,
altered, or improved to comply with all the minimum standards established by
this Ordinance at a cost not in excess of 60% of its value, as determined by
findings of the Inspector.



Disposal



   As defined in NCGS 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit, injection,
dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste into or on any land
or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the solid waste
may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any
waters, including groundwaters.



Dock and Piers



   Platforms that extend into public waters for purposes such as mooring
watercraft, loading and unloading watercraft, water access, and seating
areas. Private docks and piers include those structures associated with
residentially zoned areas and for which no rent or fees are charged for use.
Commercial docks and piers are those structures associated with commer cially
zoned areas or for which rents or other fees are charged for use, or for
which membership is required for use, such as private clubs.



Drip Line (a)



   The ground area under a tree, directly under the tips of its outermost
branches, where it sheds rain or irrigation water.







 



Dune



   Dynamic sand deposition(s) representing a fluctuation in elevation
within that area of the beach having development limitations as prescribed
within this Ordinance. The word “dune” as used in this Ordinance shall
mean frontal or single dunes, dune ridges, and dune systems or any part
thereof, both old and new, and shall include the vegetative cover related to
these dunes.



Dune Ridge (Dune System)



   The continuous line of dunes which are usually well vegetated and rise
landward of the beach area but may also rise directly from a flat, wave-cut
beach immediately after a storm. A continuous line of dunes having primary
dune height is called a primary dune system (see Primary Dune).



Duplex



   A building consisting of two dwelling units arranged or designed to be
occupied by two families living independently from each other. The units
shall share a common and contiguous wall, where the units are side by side,
or abutting ceiling and floor, where one unit is above the other.







 



Dwelling



   Any building which is wholly used or intended to be used for living or
sleeping by human occupants whether or not such building is occupied or
vacant; provided that temporary housing as hereinafter defined shall not be
regarded as a dwelling.



Dwelling, Multi-family



   A building or portion thereof used or designed as a residence for three
or more families living independently of each other and doing their own
cooking therein on a site of less than one acre. See also Housing Development.



Dwelling Unit



   A single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one
or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating,
cooking, and sanitation.



    E



Elevated Building



   A non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised
above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings,
or columns.



Encroachment



   The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings,
permanent structures, or development into a floodplain (which may impede or
alter the flow capacity of a floodplain), or into a required setback.



Eroding Area



   A portion of the shoreline which is experiencing an historical erosion
rate of greater than two feet per year based on published data.



Erosion



   The wearing away of land or the removal of beach and/or dune sediments
by wave action tidal currents, wave currents, drainage, or wind. Erosion
includes, but is not limited to, horizontal recession and scour and can be
induced or aggravated by human activities.



Extermination



   The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by
eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping or by other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved
by the UDO Administrator.



    F



Family



   One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living as
a single housekeeping unit, and having a recognized head of household, or not
more than four persons not so related, occupying a dwelling unit and living
as a single housekeeping unit.



Family Care Home



   An adult care home having two to six residents. The structure of a
family care home may be no more than two stories high, and none of the aged
or physically disabled persons being served there may be housed in the upper
story without provision for two direct exterior ground-level accesses to the
upper story.



Family Child Care Home



   A child care arrangement located in a residence where, at any one time,
more than two children, but less than nine children, receive child care.



Fence



   Any constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials
serving as an enclosure or boundary. A fence shall include all supporting and
associated structures such as columns, decorations, gates, and berms. Fences
may be open or solid provided the natures of the construction does not
violate the provisions of Section 155.7.10.



Festoon



   A chain or garland of flowers, leaves, ribbons, or similar material
hung or strung as a decoration.



Fixture



   Assembly that houses the lamp or lamps and can include all or some of
the following parts: a housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp
holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror, and/or a refractor or lens.



Floating Home



   (1)   Any vessel in fact used, designed, or occupied as a permanent
dwelling unit, business office, or source of any occupation or for any
private or social club of whatsoever nature, including, but not limited to, a
structure constructed upon a barge primarily immobile and out of navigation
or which functions substantially as a land structure while the same is
anchored, moored, or docked within the zoning jurisdiction of the town,
whether such vessel is self propelled or not and whose volume coefficient is
greater than 3,000 square feet. Volume coefficient shall be determined by
dividing the habitable space of a vessel measured in cubic feet by the draft
of a vessel measured in feet of depth.



   (2)   Where the dead weight of a vessel is excessive from the use of
ballast or the extensive use of materials not reasonably needed to provide a
safe and durable hull, the weight of such ballast or additional hull
thickness shall be computed and any draft resulting from such excess weight
or from keels or other projections from the vessel's bottom shall not be
included in the vessel draft used to compute the volume coefficient of the
vessel.



Flood or Flooding



   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:



   (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or



   (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters
from any source.



Flood Insurance



   The insurance coverage provided under the National Flood Insurance
Program.



Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)



   An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, on which both the special flood hazard areas and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community are delineated.



Flood Insurance Study (FIS)



   An examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards,
corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate), flood hazard risk
zones, and other flood data in a community issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. The flood insurance study report includes flood insurance
rate maps (FIRMs).



Flood Prone Area



   See Floodplain.



Floodplain



   Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.



Floodplain Administrator



   The UDO Administrator or his/her designee appointed to administer and
enforce the floodplain management regulations.



Floodplain Development Permit



   Any type of permit that is required in conformance with the provisions
of this Ordinance prior to the commencement of any development activity.



Floodplain Management



   The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where
possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations, and open space plans.



Floodplain Management Regulations



   Article 155.11, Part I, and other zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances,
and other applications of police power which control development in flood
prone areas. This term describes federal, state, or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing
flood loss and damage.



Flood Proofing



   Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real
estate or improved real property, water, and sanitation facilities,
structures, and their contents.



Floodway



   The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.



Flood Zone



   A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or flood
insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area.



   (1)   Zone A. Areas subject to inundation by the
1-percent-annual-chance flood event generally determined using approximate
methodologies. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed,
no Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) or flood depths are shown. Mandatory flood
insurance purchase requirements and floodplain management standards apply.



   (2)   ZoneAEandA1-30. Areas subject to inundation by the
1-percent-annual-chance flood event determined by detailed methods. Base
Flood Elevations (BFEs) are shown. Mandatory flood insurance purchase
requirements and floodplain management standards apply.



   (3)   Zone VE. Areas subject to inundation by the
1-percent-annual-chance flood event with additional hazards due to
storm-induced velocity wave action. Base Flood Elevation (BFEs) derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown. Mandatory flood insurance purchase
requirements and floodplain management standards apply.



Floor



   A floor shall be the base or supporting surface of a building or the
lower most horizontal plane of an enclosed area located between the interior
surfaces of the exterior building walls and shall include: (i) all areas
whether finished or unfinished; (ii) all open area on each level for the
landings of interior stairwells, elevator shafts and interior chases and
voids; and (iii) the area under any walls or other supports of any kind.



Floor Area



   The total area of the floor as defined herein of a building.



Floor Area Ratio (FAR)



   The ratio of the mea sured area of a stru cture to the lot on which it
is buil t expressed as a decimal. Only the measured area abo ve the Base Floo
d Elevation shal l be included in the calc ulation. The mea sured area and
the lot size are always measured in square feet. Applies to single-family and
duplex structures only.







 



Foot-Candle



   Illuminance produced on a surface as measured by a calibrated light
meter.



Freeboard



   The height added to the base flood elevation (BFE) to account for the
many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater that the
height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as
wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization on
the watershed. The base flood elevation plus the freeboard establishes the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.







 



Frontal Dune



   The first mound of sand located landward of that area extending from
the mean low water line to a point where vegetation or a change in elevation
occurs having sufficient vegetation, height, continuity and configuration to
offer protective value.



Full Cut-Off Lights (a)



   An outdoor light fixture that emits no light rays above the horizontal
plane of the fixture.   







 



Functionally Dependent Facility



   A facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is
located in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding,
or ship repair. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture,
sales, or service facilities.



    G



Garage



   An area used or capable of being used for normal automobile storage
with normal automobile access.



Garbage



   The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



General Maintenance Activities



   Activities related to a structure that involve cleaning and painting
and repair or replacement of existing components of the structure with like
components in such a way that the existing design of the structure is not
altered.



Glare



   Light emitted from a light fixture with intensity great enough to
reduce a viewer's ability to see, and in extreme cases, causing momentary
blindness; the eye’s direct line-of-sight contact with a light source.



Green Space



   An area consisting solely of dirt, mulch, or other similar natural
ground cover and natural planting materials.



Guest Home or Tourist Home



   Any dwelling occupied by owner or operator in which rooms are rented
for guests and for lodging of transients and travelers for compensation,
where not more than four rooms are used for these purposes.



    H



Habitable Room



   A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living,
sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet
compartments, laundries, heater rooms, foyers or communicating corridors,
closets and storage spaces.



Habitable Space



   Suitable for habitation and/or housing with a controlled physical
environment in which people can live under surrounding hospitable conditions.
Habitable space shall also include any space below the 100-year base flood
elevation which is finished and which enhances the structural stability of
the walls to exceed 20 pounds per square foot. Examples of finished space
shall include but not be limited to furniture in place, no floodway openings,
and used in the manner described in this definition.



Hazardous Waste Facility



   As defined in NCGS 130A, Art. 9, a facility for the collection,
storage, processing, treatment, recycling, recovery, or disposal of hazardous
waste.



Health Club



   A commercial enterprise or business established for the purpose of
providing facilities for physical exercise with the use of athletic equipment
and accessory services which are typical of health clubs.



Heritage Species



   Any live oak tree or eastern red cedar tree.



Highest Adjacent Grade (HAG)



   The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to
construction, immediately next to the proposed walls of the structure.



Highway



   A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic. A
Highway shall include all of the dedicated right-of-way and shall not be
limited to the paved surface only.



Historic Structure



   Any structure that is:



   (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;



   (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;



   (3)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks
in communities with a Certified Local Government (CLG) Program; or



   (4)   Certified as contributing to the historical significance of a
historic district designated by a community with a Certified Local Government
(CLG) Program. Certified Local Government Programs are approved by the U.S.
Department of the Interior in cooperation with the North Carolina Department
of Cultural Resources through the State Historic Preservation Officer as
having met the requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966
as amended in 1980.



Holiday Lighting



   Temporary seasonal lighting, in the nature of decorations, clearly
incidental to and customarily associated with nationally recognized holidays.



Home Occupation



   Occupations described herein which are carried out within a dwelling
unit for the purpose of gain or support by a person or resident of such
premises in accordance with the regulations of this Ordinance. Permitted home
occupations shall be limited to office and professional use and homecrafts.



Horizontal Illuminance



   Light falling on a horizontal surface measured in foot-candles.



Hotel andMotel



   A building designed for occupancy for transients and having 16 or more
rooms or suites of rooms for rent to such transients. Such hotel or motel
shall contain an on-site office of the purpose of renting rooms and such
other operational functions normal to a hotel or motel. Single rooms shall
contain no more than 500 square feet including one bathroom. Suites shall
consist of no more than two rooms not to exceed a total of 600 square feet
with one bathroom. Suites may consist of two or more units in combination;
however, when this is the case, each unit shall be counted separately for
density and parking requirements. (See Apartment, Dwelling-Multifamily.)



Hotel and Motel Suite



   A suite shall be defined as two rooms sharing bath facilities not to
exceed a total of 600 square feet.



Hotel and Motel Unit



   A unit shall be defined as one room and a bath with or without kitchen
facilities not exceeding 500 square feet.



Household Appliance



   White goods or large electrical appliances that are typically, but not
necessarily, finished in white enamel. Household appliance includes, but
shall not be limited to, a stove, refrigerator, washing machine, clothes
dryer and dishwasher.



Housing Development



   A group of three or more dwelling units on property designed for
occupancy by separate families. Examples would be: cluster-type subdivisions;
planned unit developments; apartments; and housing projects, a project
constructed for unit ownership as permitted by the North Carolina
Unit-Ownership Act, (NCGS Ch. 47A) when approved under the requirements for
group housing developments as set forth in the subdivision regulations of the
town. Zero setback single-family housing may be allowed provided the housing
complies with the conditional use standards and the setback of the opposite
lines shall be double that required for the zone.



    I



IESNA



   Illuminating Engineering Society of North America.



Indirect Illumination



   Illuminated as a result of the glowing element(s), lamp(s), globe(s),
or reflector(s) of an artificial light source that is not visible to an
observer.



Infestation



   The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents, or
other pests in such numbers as to constitute a menace to the health, safety,
or welfare of the occupants or to the public.



In the Town



   Any territory, jurisdiction of which for the exercise of its regulatory
power has been conferred on the town by public or private law.



    J



   None



    K



   None



    L



Landlocked Waterfront Lot



   Lots not abutting any streets, but abutting a public beach or waterway.



Levee



   A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.



Levee System



   A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and
associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.



Level of 100-Year Flood



   The highest level of flooding that, on the average, is likely to occur
once every 100 years (or has a 1% chance of occurring each year). In no case,
however, shall any structure have habitable space below a minimum of two feet
above the base flood elevation as shown on the federal flood insurance rate
maps in both the A and V Zones and in both residential and non-residential
structures. Both new construction and/or substantial improvement of existing
structures shall comply with the requirements of this Ordinance at the lowest
supporting structural member in the V Zone and at the finished floor
elevation in the A Zone.



Light(ing)



   Light emanating from any human-made device.



Light Pollution



   General sky glow caused by the scattering of artificial light in the
atmosphere.



Light Source (Lamp)



   Any light or lighting that directly radiates visible light; part of the
fixture that produces actual light.



Light Trespass



   Shining of light produced by a light fixture, other than a municipal
street light on a public right-of-way, beyond the boundaries of the property
on which it is located. A calibrated measurement above 0.1 foot-candles on
the receiving property (the property of the person complaining of the
trespass) is "Light Trespass." The measurement is made at adult eye level
five feet within the boundary of the receiving property with a calibrated
light meter.







 



Line of Vegetation



   The extreme seaward boundary of natural vegetation which spreads
continuously inland. If unable to identify the stable vegetation line, then
the line can be extrapolated from the next nearest point of stable vegetation
on both the north and south of the area in question.



Lot



   A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a building or
group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the customary
accessories and open spaces belonging to same.



Lot, Corner



   A lot or portion of a lot at the junction of and abutting upon two or
more streets. For nonconforming lots, only the street which the lot is
addressed is subject to the front yard setback. See Section 155.2.6,
Visibility on Corner Lots.



Lot, Depth of (a)



   The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.







 



Lot Frontage



   The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the
street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on throug h lots,
all sides of a lot abutting parallel or approximately parall el streets shall
be considered frontages. For landlocked waterf ront lots, the side of the lot
abutting the water shall be consid ered the rear lot line and the side
opposite this rear lot line shall be considered the front lot line.



Lot Line



   The line bounding a lot as defined herein.



Lot, Through



   A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.



Lot Width



   The mean horizontal distance between side lot lines.



Lowest Adjacent Grade (LAG)



   The elevation of the ground, sidewalk, or patio slab immediately next
to the building, or deck support, after completion of the building.



Lowest Floor



   The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that
such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this Ordinance.



Lumen



   Total quantity of light produced by a light source, according to the
manufacturer's ratings. One foot- candle is one lumen per square foot.



    M



Maintained Foot-Candle



   Average foot-candles that are calculated with an adjustment for a
maintenance factor that includes dirt build-up, lamp lumen loss over time,
ballast factor, and so on. Immediately after installation, the system may
have higher illumination levels, which over time will decrease to the average
maintained level.



Manufactured Home



   A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term Manufactured
Home does not include a Recreational Vehicle.



Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision



   A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.



Market Value



   The building value, not including the land value and that of any
accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. Market value may be
established by independent certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated
for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash value), or
adjusted tax assessed values.



Marina or Boatominium



   A place where boats are stored, serviced, or supplied with any type of
marine and service a contiguous group of two or more boat slips, each of
which is or may be separately owned and with common ownership of the land,
piers, walkways, and any other structures necessary for service of the slips.
Projects approved under the North Carolina Unit Ownership Act (NCGS Ch. 47A)
and having an approved conditional use permit are excluded from this
definition.



Marquee



   A roof-like structure or awning projecting over an entrance to a
building.



Mayor



   The Chief Elected Official of Wrightsville Beach.



Mean Sea Level



   The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as
a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. Refer
to each FIRM panel to determine datum used.



Measured Area



   The total area of the floor of a building that is located above the
Base Flood Elevation. Where a floor lies below a ceiling height of greater
than 15 feet (as in a vaulted ceiling), then that area of the floor under the
vertical height of greater than 15 feet shall be counted twice in computing
measured area. Attics, with or without a laid floor, with structural headroom
of five feet or greater shall be included in the measured area. The following
shall be excluded from the computation of measured area:



   (1)   One access corridor in the attic of a building if it:



      (a)   Runs parallel to the center roof ridge;



      (b)   Is no wider than three feet; and



      (c)   Does not exceed five feet in height.



   (2)   Staircases and stair treads.



Meeting and Events Center



   A facility in which space and ancillary services, which may include
food services, are furnished to groups holding functions including, but not
limited to, meetings, weddings, and receptions. Food may be prepared on site,
but food service shall not be provided to members of the general public who
are not members of a group holding a function at which the food service is
provided.



Meeting Rooms



   A structure or portion of a structure, area or other facility privately
owned and utilized for general meeting and conference activities. The use may
include an administrative office used solely for the purpose of leasing the
meeting room; however, no cooking facilities of any kind shall be permitted
in the meeting room or administrative office. Meeting or conference rooms
that qualify as accessory uses to a hotel or motel shall be excluded from
this definition.



Minimum Foot-Candle



   The minimum foot-candle reading for a given area.



Mixed Use Commercial-Residential



   A type of use providing for commercial use on the first finished floor
of the structure facing the public right-of-way or other public space and
residential use on the second and any additional permitted floors. No
residential use shall be permitted on the first finished floor of the
structure. Commercial use shall be permitted on the second or higher finished
floors of the structure. Those commercial uses permitted in a mixed used
development shall be the commercial uses permitted in the applicable zoning
district. Each residential unit permitted in a mixed use development shall
have a minimum of 1,500 square feet of heated space and shall comply with all
other provisions of this Ordinance.







 



Modifications, Major



   Improvements to existing telecommunications facilities or support
substantial change to the facility or structure. Collocation of new
telecommunications facilities to an existing support structure without
replacement of the structure shall not constitute a major modification. Major
modifications include, but are not limited to, extending the height of the
support structure by more than twenty (20) feet or ten percent (10%) of its
current height whichever is greater, and the replacement of the structure.



Modifications, Minor



   Improvements to existing telecommunications facilities and support
structures that result in some material change to the facility or support
structure but of level, quality, or intensity that is less than a
“substantial” change. Such minor modifications include, but are not
limited to, extending the height of the support structure by less than twenty
(20) feet or ten percent (10%) of its current height, whichever is greater,
and the expansion of the compound area of for additional accessory equipment.



Multiple Dwelling



   Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented,
leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied as the home or
residence of two families or more, living independently of each other and
doing their own cooking in the said building and shall include flats and
apartments.



Multi-Unit Assisted Housing with Services



   An assisted living residence in which hands-on personal care services
and nursing services which are arranged by housing management are provided by
a licensed home care or hospice agency through an individualized written care
plan. The housing management has a financial interest or financial
affiliation or formal written agreement which makes personal care services
accessible and available through at least one licensed home care or hospice
agency. The resident has a choice of any provider, and the housing management
may not combine charges for housing and personal care services. All
residents, or their compensatory agents, must be capable, through informed
consent, of entering into a contract and must not be in need of 24-hour
supervision. Assistance with self-administration of medications may be
provided by appropriately trained staff when delegated by a licensed nurse
according to the home care agency’s established plan of care.



    N



Natural Area



   Those portions or areas of each lot, tract, or parcel which are
designated, or required, to retain the original vegetation and existing
topography.



Natural Vegetation



   Any vegetation, whether original or planted, that is compatible with
the property according to Article 9, Part III.



Natural Water Feature



   This area shall include the ocean front, all natural and man-made water
courses, and all wetlands.



New Construction



   Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after
June 9, 1970, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.



Nonconforming Building



   A building that does not comply with the yard, area, and height
requirements of this Ordinance.



Nonconforming Lot



   A lot existing on the effective date of this Ordinance or any amendment
hereto that cannot meet the minimum area or lot width or depth requirements
of the district in which the lot is located.



Nonconforming Situation



   A situation that occurs when, on the effective date of this Ordinance
or any amendment hereto, an existing lot or structure, or lawful use of an
existing lot or structure, does not conform to one or more of the regulations
applicable to the district in which the lot or structure is located. Among
other possibilities, a nonconforming situation may arise because a lot does
not meet minimum acreage requirements, because a structure does not satisfy
maximum height limitations, because the relationship between existing
buildings and the land (in such matters as density and setback requirements)
is not in conformity with this Ordinance, or because land, buildings or other
areas subject to this Ordinance are used for purposes made unlawful by this
Ordinance or any amendment hereto.







 



Nonconforming Structure



   A structure that legally existed prior to the adoption date of this
Ordinance, but which is not in compliance with the requirements of this
Ordinance for the district in which the structure is located.



Nonconforming Use



   Any building, land or other areas subject to this Ordinance lawfully
occupied by a use on the effective date of this Ordinance or amendment hereto
which does not conform after the passage of this Ordinance or amendment with
the use requirements of the district in which it is situated. For example, a
commercial retail use in a residential district may be a non-conforming use.
The term also refers to the activity that constitutes the use made of the
property. For example, the use of property as a duplex in an area zoned
exclusively for single-family residences is a nonconforming use.



Non-Encroachment Area



   The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot as
designated in the flood insurance study report.



Non-Glare



   Materials with a finish which does not produce a brightness sufficient
to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility.



Nursing Home



   A facility, however named, which is advertised, announced, or
maintained for the express or implied purpose of providing nursing or
convalescent care for three or more persons unrelated to the licensee. A
nursing home is a home for chronic or convalescent patients, who, on
admission, are not as a rule, acutely ill and who do not usually require
special facilities such as an operating room, X-ray facilities, laboratory
facilities, and obstetrical facilities. A nursing home provides care for
persons who have remedial ailments or other ailments, for which medical and
nursing care are indicated; who, however, are not sick enough to require
general hospital care.



    O



Oath



   Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words swear and sworn
shall be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed.



Oceanfront Lot



   A lot of record which is adjacent to the Atlantic Ocean or the Property
Line or other inlet hazard area. An oceanfront lot shall also include lots
adjacent to town, state or US Government owned property that adjoins the
Atlantic Ocean.



Oceanfront Pier



   A pier constructed wholly or in part east of the Property Line as
established by Chapter 246 of the Public Laws of North Carolina, Session
1939, as amended.



Ocean Hazard Area



   Those AECs that are considered natural hazard areas along the Atlantic
Ocean shoreline where, because of their special vulnerability to erosion or
other adverse effects of sand, wind, and water, uncontrolled or incompatible
development could reasonably endanger life or property. Ocean hazard areas
include beaches, frontal dunes, inlet lands, and other areas in which
geologic, vegetative, and soil conditions indicate a substantial possibility
of excessive erosion or flood damage.



Ocean-Related Business



   A business activity limited solely to teaching participants to surf,
paddleboard, or kite board and the rental of chairs and umbrellas by hotels
located immediately adjacent to the beach front.



Occupant



   Any person over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or eating
in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.



Occupancy



   The purpose for which a building is used or intended to be used. Change
of occupancy is not intended to include change of tenants or proprietors.



Official Time Standard



   Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean standard
time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this town.



OPA



   An Otherwise Protected Area.



Opaque Fence



   Any six foot minimum fence which creates complete visual separation
between adjoining properties.



Opaque Wall



   Any six foot minimum wall which creates complete visual separation
between adjoining properties.



Openable Area



   That part of a window or door which is available for unobstructed
ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.



Open Air Market



   Any temporary display of goods in an open or partially open setting as
requested by the applicant and approved by the Board of Aldermen.



Operator



   Any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part
thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.



Ordinary Maintenance



   Ensuring that telecommunications facilities and support structures are
kept in good operating condition. Ordinary maintenance includes inspections,
testing, and modifications that maintain functional capacity, aesthetic and
structural integrity; for example, the strengthening of a support
structure’s foundation or of the support structure itself. Ordinary
maintenance includes replacing antennas and accessory equipment on a
like-for-like basis within an existing telecommunications facility and
relocating the antennas of approved telecommunications facilities to
different height levels on an existing monopole or tower upon which they are
currently located. Ordinary maintenance does not include minor modifications
or major modifications.



Original Vegetation



   Plant life that existed on the site at its first stage of existence.



Outdoor Lighting



   Night-time illumination of an outside area, object, or building by any
man-made device located outdoors or indoors that produces light by any means.



Owner



   Any owner of a legal or equitable interest in real property, including
heirs, devisees, successors and assigns, having a vested estate and the agent
or personal representative of such owner. For purposes of this Ordinance,
owner shall include a person holding a valid and recorded option to purchase
the real property with respect to which he seeks to establish a vested right.



    P



Parking Facility



   Area used for the storage of vehicles. Interior shall mean the area
within the parking facility curb or pavement.



Parking Lots



   Lands outside of the public right-of-way, properly improved in
accordance with Article 155.9, Part I, Off-Street Parking Requirements, with
suitable ingress from and egress to a public street, for the sole use of
parking motor vehicles.



Parking Space (a)



   A clearly marked storage space for one automobile, plus the necessary
access space. Such parking space shall always be located outside the
dedicated street right-of-way and conform to the standards set forth in
Article 155.9, Part I.







 



Parties in Interest



   All individuals, associations, and corporations who have interests of
record in a dwelling or any who are in possession thereof; or shall have
charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent
of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix,
trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus
representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of
this Ordinance, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the
same extent as if he were the owner.



Person



   A corporation, firm, partnership, limited liability corporation (LLC),
association, organization, and any other group acting as a unit, as well as
an individual.



Personal Property



   Every type of property except real property, as herein defined.



Platting Jurisdiction



   The land located within the corporate limits and the land located
within one mile in every direction from the corporate limits and not located
in any other incorporated city or town. However, the platting jurisdiction
shall extend only to a point equidistant from the corporate limits of the
town.



Plumbing



   The labor, materials, and fixtures used in the installation,
maintenance, extension, and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances,
and appurtenances in connection with any of the following: sanitary drainage
or storm drainage facilities, the venting system and public or private
water-supply system, within or adjacent to any building, structure, or
conveyance; also the labor and material used in the installation,
maintenance, extension, or alteration of storm water, liquid waste, or
sewage, and water supply systems on any premises to their connection with any
point of public disposal.



Post-FIRM



   Construction or other development for which the start of construction
occurred on or after June 12, 1970, the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map for the area.



Pre-FIRM



   Construction or other development for which the start of construction
occurred before June 12, 1970, the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map for the area.



Premises



   A lot, plot, or parcel of land including the buildings or structures
thereon.



Primary Dune



   The Coastal Area Management Act defines a primary dune as “the first
mounds of sand located landward of the ocean beaches having an elevation
equal to the mean flood level for the area plus six feet. The primary dune
extends landward to the lowest elevation in the depression behind that same
mound of sand.







 



Primary Frontal Dune



   A continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of sand with
relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and
adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and overtopping from high tides
and waves during major coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary
frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change from a
relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope.



Principally Above Ground Building



   A building that has at least 51% of its actual cash value, including
machinery and equipment, above ground.



Private Access Easement



   A private access easement is an easement crossing private property and
providing access to four or fewer residential lots, all of which were
existing lots of record as of May 13, 2014 and are located in the R-1 or R-2
Zoning Districts. A private access easement shall be constructed in
accordance with the standards set forth in Section 155.7.21.



Private Club



   An establishment that is organized and operated solely for a social,
recreational, patriotic, or fraternal purpose and that is not open to the
general public, but is open only to the members of the organization and their
bona fide guests. This provision does not, however, prohibit such an
establishment from being open to the general public for raffles and bingo
games as required by GS 14-309.11(a) and GS 14-309.13. No organization that
discriminates in the selection of its membership on the basis of religion
shall be eligible to receive any permit issued under this Ordinance. A
private club does not include permanent or temporary residential occupancy.



Protected Trees



   The following shall be considered protected trees and shall be subject
to the provisions of this Ordinance.



   (1)   Trees planted or retained in order to meet the requirements of
Article 9, Part III; or



   (2)   Any heritage tree having a DBH measurement of at least eight
inches on town-owned property, any public right-of- way, or private property.



Public Easement



   As used in this code, means an unoccupied open space adjoining a
building and on the same property, that is permanently maintained accessible
to the Fire Department and free of all encumbrances that might interfere with
its use by the Fire Department.



Public Safety and/or Nuisance



   Anything which is injurious to the safety or health of an entire
community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or
unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any
navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.



Public Trust Waters



   All waters of the Atlantic Ocean from the mean high water mark seaward;
all natural bodies of water subject to measurable tides; and all navigable
waters.



    Q



   None



    R



Real Property



   Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.



Recreational Vehicle (RV)



   A vehicle, which is:



   (1)   Built on a single chassis;



   (2)   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;



   (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck; and



   (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.



Reference Level



   The top of the lowest floor for structures within special flood hazard
areas designated as Zone A1-30, AE, A, A99, or AO. The reference level is the
bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor for
structures within special flood hazard areas designated as Zone VE.



Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation



   The Base Flood Elevation plus the Freeboard. In Special Flood Hazard
Areas where base flood elevations (BFEs) have been determined, this elevation
shall be the BFE plus two feet of freeboard.



Remedy a Violation



   To bring the structure or other development into compliance with state
and community floodplain management regulations or, if this is not possible,
to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced
include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood
damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this Ordinance, or
otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial
exposure with regard to the structure or other development.



Remove (Including Removing or Removal)



   The cutting down or digging up of any live or dead vegetation; the
cutting of any portion of a protected tree that has the dimensions of a
protected tree at the point of the cut; and all other acts that cause the
death or destruction of any protected tree.



Repair



   The replacement of existing work with the same kind of material used in
the existing work, not including additional work that would change the
structural safety of the building, or that would affect or change required
exit facilities, a vital element of an elevator, plumbing, gas piping, wiring
or heating installations, or that would be a violation of a provision of law
or ordinance. The term repair or repairs shall not apply to any change of
construction.



Replacement



   Constructing a new support structure of proportions and of equal height
or such other height as would be allowed under the definition of minor
modification to a pre-existing support structure in order to support a
telecommunications facility or to accommodate collocation and removing the
preexisting support structure.



Replacement Tree



   A tree replanted and surviving for at least one year to compensate for
the removal of a tree of greater diameter. Replacement trees shall have a DBH
of at least three inches when planted.



Required



   Required by some provision of this Ordinance.



Residence



   A building or portion thereof designed, arranged, or used for permanent
living quarters for one or more families.



Residence, Single-family



   A detached building designed for occupancy by or occupied exclusively
by one family.



Residential Child-Care Facility



   A staffed premise with paid or volunteer staff where children receive
continuing full-time foster care.



Residential Occupancy



   Buildings in which families or other households live or in which
sleeping accommodations are provided. Such buildings include, among others,
the following: dwellings, multiple dwellings, and lodging houses, and all
dormitories.



Residential Piers



   Piers owned by the contiguous landowner in residential zones or the
shore zone which portion of the shore zone would be an extension of the
residential use of the owners lot.



Residential Unit



   A building or portion thereof designed, arranged, or used for living
quarters for one family.



Restaurant



   An establishment whose principal business is the sale, to customers, of
foods, frozen desserts, or beverages, in a ready-to-eat state, and whose
design and principal method of operation determines its classification as
follows:



   (1)   Standard: In standard restaurants, food and beverages are
usually consumed within the restaurant building and;



      (a)   Customers are provided with an individual menu and
served by an employee at the same table or counter at which their food and
beverages are consumed; or



      (b)   Customers make their selections of food and beverages
from a counter where ready-to-eat items are displayed, as in cafeteria or
buffet service, and carry their selections to a table for consumption.



   (2)   Carry-out: Foods and beverages are usually served in edible
containers or in paper, plastic, or other disposable containers by an
employee at a standing counter or drive-in window, and consumption is
normally off the premises but may be allowed within a motor vehicle parked on
the premises or at other facilities on the premises outside the principal
building.



   (3)   Fast-food: A fast-food restaurant is the same as carry-out but
in addition allows consumption of food and beverages within the principal
building.



Retaining Wall



   A wall or similar structural device used at a grade change to hold the
soil on the uphill side from slumping, sliding, or falling.



Rooming House



   Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more
rooming unit, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or more
persons who are not members of the family of the owner or operator.



Rooming Unit/Rental Unit



   Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or
intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating
purposes.



Root Protection Zone



   The land area around the base of a tree in which disturbances are
prohibited in order to protect the roots of the tree and aid in the tree’s
survival.



Rubbish



   Combustible and non-combustible waste materials except garbage, and the
term shall include ashes, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass, crockery and dust.



    S



Salvage Yard



   Any non-residential property used for the storage, collection, and/or
recycling of any type of equipment, and including but not limited to
vehicles, appliances, and related machinery.



Schools, Limited Public Classroom Leases



   Leasing of space by a public school system, as a tenant, in structures
owned by the Wrightsville Beach Baptist Church located at 601 Causeway Drive,
Wrightsville Beach, N.C. that were in existence on September 1, 2012, for use
only as public school classrooms and related storage and restroom areas. No
more than two classrooms may be leased by such landlord in all property owned
by such landlord within the Town. Any lease entered into in accordance with
Ordinance 1742, passed April 8, 2015, shall permanently end on or before June
20, 2019.



Service Station



   Any building or land used for the dispensing, sale, or off ering for
sale at retail of any automobile fuels, lu bricants, or tires; however,
indoor car-washing, minor me chanical adjustment, and tire repair are only
performed inc idental to the conduct of the service station.



Shielding



   A design feature or a device that is applied to a light fixture or to a
structure on which a light fixture is mounted to prevent its light output
from being visible from selected locations or horizontal and/or vertical
angles.







 



Shopping Center Complex



   A building or buildings located on the same site having three or more
commercial uses with a minimum of 16,000 square feet of gross leasable area,
planned and constructed as a single project with appropriate parking and
loading facilities located on-site.



Shore Line Development Boundary



   The eastern-most boundary for development on oceanfront lots at
Wrightsville Beach. The exact location of the Shore Line Development Boundary
is dependent upon a comparison of varying enforcement factors with the most
restrictive applying.



Shrub, Intermediate



   Deciduous or evergreen plants installed at a minimum height of 36
inches, a minimum of 5 canes, and a minimum spread of roots or rootball
diameter of 14 inches.







 



Shrub, Large



   Deciduous and/or evergreen plants, as required in the applicable
sections, installed at a minimum height of 5-feet, a minimum of 6 canes, and
a minimum spread of roots or rootball diameter of 24-inches. Large shrubs
shall be maintained at a height of 6 to 10 feet.



Shrub, Small



   Deciduous and/or evergreen plants, as required in the applicable
sections, installed at a minimum height of 18-inches, a minimum of five
canes, and a minimum spread of roots or rootball diameter of 10 inches. Small
shrubs shall be maintained at a height of 2 to 4 feet.







 



Sidewalk (a)



   Any portion of a street, between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.







 



Sign



   Any words, lettering, numerals, parts of letters or numerals, figures,
phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade names, or trade marks by
which anything is made known, including any surface, fabric, or other
material or structure designed to carry such devices, such as are used to
designate or attract attention to an individual, a firm, an association, a
corporation, a profession, a business, or a commodity or product, which are
exposed to public view, and used to attract attention.



Sign Alteration



   Any change of copy, sign face, color size, shape illumination,
position, location, construction, or supporting structure of any sign.



Sign Area (a)



   The surface area of a sign shall be computed as including the entire
area visible from any one point, within a regular geometric form or
combinations of regular geometric forms comprising all of the display area of
the sign including lattice work, wall work, and individual letters & spaces
between letters comprising part of the sign. Computations of sign area shall
include only one side of a double-faced sign structure. If a sign has two
sides joined at an angle of greater than 60 degrees, the surfaces of both
sides of the sign shall be included in the computation of area.







 



Sign, Balloon



   One or more balloons used as a permanent or temporary sign or as a
means of directing attention to any business or profession, or to a commodity
or service sold, offered, or manufactured, or to any entertainment.



Sign, Business



   An advertising device used to disseminate information concerning a
person, place, or thing, pertaining to the use of the land upon which it is
located.







 



Sign, Cabinet



   A sign that contains all the text and/or logo symbols within a single
enclosed cabinet and may or may not be illuminated.







 



Sign, Combination



   A sign incorporating any combination of the features of freestanding,
projecting, and wall signs.







 



Sign, Fixed



   Any lighter-than-air or gas-filled balloon attached by means of a rope
or tether to a definite or fixed location.







 



Sign, Freestanding



   A sign that is attached to, erected on, or supported by some structure
(such as a pole, mast, frame, or other structure) that is not itself an
integral part of or attached to a building or other structure whose principal
function is something other than the support of a sign.



Sign, Illegal



   Any of the following:



   (1)   A sign erected without first obtaining a permit and complying
with all regulations in effect at the time of its construction or use;



   (2)   A sign that was legally erected but whose use has ceased
because the business it identifies is no longer conducted on the premises;



   (3)   A sign that is a danger to the public or is unsafe; or



   (4)   A sign that pertains to a specific event that has not been
removed within seven days after the occurrence of the event.



Sign, Independent (Billboard)



   One advertising device used to disseminate information concerning a
person, place, or thing not pertaining to the use of the land upon which it
is located.







 



Sign, Kiosk



   A sign consisting of three to five sides that lists names of businesses
located on a property or in a building.







 



Sign, Marquee



   A sign designed to have changeable copy, either manually or
electronically. Marquee signs may be a principal identification sign, a
freestanding sign, or a wall sign.



Sign, Memorial



   A sign, tablet or plaque memorializing a person, event, structure or
site.







 



Sign, Menu



   A temporary sign used to inform the public of the list of entrees,
dishes, foods, and entertainment available in a restaurant.







 



Sign, Mobile



   A sign attached to, mounted, pasted, painted, or drawn on any vehicle,
whether motorized or drawn, that is placed, parked, or maintained at one
particular location for the express purpose and intent of promotion or
conveying an advertising message.



Sign, Monument



   A freestanding sign supported primarily by an integral structural
framework or integrated into landscaping or other solid structural features
other than support poles.







 



Sign, Moving



   Any sign which in part or in total rotates, revolves, or otherwise is
in motion.



Sign, Off-Premises



   A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or
entertainment not exclusively related to the premises where such sign is
located or to which it is affixed.



Sign, Painted Wall



   A sign applied to a building wall with paint and which has no sign
structure.



Sign, Permanent



   A sign attached to a building, structure, or the ground in some manner
that requires a permit from the Planning and Inspections Department and which
is made of materials intended for long term use.



Sign, Portable



   A sign designated or intended to be moved easily that is not
permanently embedded in the ground or affixed to a building or other
structure, including any sign that rests upon the ground, a frame, a
building, or other structure. Including but not limited to the following
signs: trailer signs (with or without wheels), menu and sandwich boards,
signs mounted for advertising purposes on a vehicle that is parked and
visible from the public right-of-way (except signs identifying the related
business when the vehicle is being used in the normal day-to-day operation of
that business), sidewalk or curb signs, A-frame signs, and signs worn or held
by a person.



Sign, Public Information



   A sign, usually erected and maintained by a public agency, that
provides the public with information and in no way relates to a commercial
activity. Includes, but not limited to, speed limit signs, stop signs, city
limit signs, street name signs, and directional signs.



Sign, Real Estate, Off-site



   A readily removable sign announcing the proposed sale or rental of
property other than the property upon which the sign is located and providing
directions to the subject property.



Sign, Rotating or Revolving



   A sign which in its entirety or in part move in a revolving or similar
manner. Such motion does not include methods of changing copy.



Sign, Searchlight (Beacon)



   Search-lights shall be considered signs that are used to announce,
direct attention to, or advertise businesses.



Sign, Snipe



   An off-premises sign that is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or
otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, fences, or to other objects.







 



Sign, Temporary



   An attached on-premises sign made of nonrigid material, designed and
dis played for a seasonal or brief activity such as, but not limited to,
sales, spe cials, promotions, holidays, auctions, business grand openings,
and signs adv ertising the lease or vacancy or rental units in multi-unit
residential dev elopments. Symbols, figures, balloons, and other similar
items shall be con sidered temporary signs.



Sign, Third-Party



   Any sign identifying an enterprise and including a sponsoring
advertisement, such as Coca Cola or 7-Up.



Sign, Wind



   Any display or series of displays, banners, flags, balloons, or other
objects designed and fashioned in such a manner as to move when subjected to
wind pressure.



Signature or Subscription



   Includes a mark when the person cannot write.



Site Plan



   A document setting forth certain required information which shall
include visual locations, accurate dimensions, and all other requirements
necessary to determine the scope, impact, design, and the like of a project.



Site Specific Development Plan



   A plan that has been submitted to the town by an owner, describing with
reasonable specificity the type and intensity of use for a specific parcel or
parcels of property. At a minimum, the plan must include the approximate
boundaries of the site; significant topographical and other natural features
affecting development of the site; approximate location on the site of
proposed buildings, structures and other improvements; approximate
dimensions, including height, of the proposed buildings and other structures;
and the approximate location of all existing and proposed infrastructure on
the site, including water, sewer, roads and pedestrian walkways. Included
within this definition are plans submitted pursuant to the following specific
provisions, and meeting the requirements specified therein: Preliminary
Subdivision Plan as required by Article 155.12; and Conditional Use Permits
as required by Section 155.4.5. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any document
that fails to describe the type and intensity of use for a specified parcel
or parcels with sufficient particularity to allow a determination to be made
as to whether the proposed use meets current zoning standards shall
constitute a site specific development plan.



Solid Waste Disposal Facility



   As defined in NCGS 130A-290(a)(35), any facility involved in the
disposal of solid waste.



Solid Waste Disposal Site



   As defined in NCGS 130A-290(a)(36), any place at which solid wastes are
disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill, or any other method.



Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)



   The land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of being
flooded in any given year, as determined in Article 155.11, Part I.



Specimen Tree



   Any heritage tree, such as a live oak or eastern red cedar, which
usually has one main stem or trunk and a DBH measurement of at least 20
inches.



Stable Vegetation



   All natural vegetation in all areas of the town to include original
vegetation as defined in this section; the CAMA Local Permit Officer shall
determine stability.



Stairway



   One or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings and platforms
connecting them, to form a continuous and uninterrupted passage from one
story to another in a building or structure.



Start of Construction



   Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building
permit was issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was
within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, the actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.



State



   The State of North Carolina, except as otherwise provided.



Stealth Telecommunications Facility



   Any telecommunications facility that is integrated as an architectural
feature of a structure so that the purpose of the facility for providing
wireless services is not readily apparent to a casual observer.



Story



   That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost
story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface
of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.



Street



   Includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard,
parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge, and the approaches thereto within the
town and shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way between abutting
property lines.



Street Yard (a)



   Area, except for driveways, parallel and contiguous. The public
right-of-way which is measured perpendicular to the public right-of-way.



   If a lot is located on the corner of two public rights-of-way, the
owner shall designate one yard as the street yard and one yard as a side yard.







 



Structure



   Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less
permanent location on the ground, or attached to something having more or
less permanent location on the ground.



Subdivision



   All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots,
building sites, or other divisions when any one or more of those divisions is
created for the purpose of sale or building development (whether immediate or
future) and shall include all divisions of land involving the dedication of a
new street or a change in existing streets; but the following shall not be
included within this definition nor be subject to the regulations authorized
by this definition:



   (1)   The combination or recombination of portions of previously
subdivided and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased
and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the
municipality as shown in its subdivision regulations.



   (2)   The division of land into parcels greater than ten acres where
no street right-of-way dedication is involved.



   (3)   The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the
widening or opening of streets or for public transportation system corridors.



   (4)   The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area
is no greater than two acres into not more than three lots, where no street
right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to
or exceed the standards of the municipality, as shown in its subdivision
regulations.



Substantial Damage



   Damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any one-year
period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred. See definition of Substantial Improvement.



Substantial Improvement



   Substantial improvement shall include improvements and/or additions to
a residential, commercial, or other building or structure the cost of which
exceeds 50% of the assessed tax value of the structure as listed by the New
Hanover County Tax Office or as determined by a certified appraisal. For
purposes of this Ordinance, the term “assessed value” shall mean the
value of the structure before the improvement is started. The cost of the
substantial improvement shall be determined by adding together the cost of
all proposed construction.



Supplied



   Paid for, furnished, or provided by, or under control of the owner or
operator.



Support Structures



   A structure designed to support telecommunications facilities
including, but not limited to monopoles, towers utility poles, and other
freestanding self-supporting structures.



    T



Telecommunications Facility



   Any unmanned facility established for the purpose of providing wireless
transmission of voice, data, images or other information including, but not
limited to, cellular telephone service, personal communication service (PCS)
and paging service. A telecommunications facility can consist of one or more
antennas and accessory equipment or one base station.



Temporary Housing



   Any trailer or other structure used for construction or display
purposes.



Tenant or Occupant



   Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the
whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.



Threatened Trees



   Those trees that may have a problem in later years if left in their
current state and are not cared for properly. These are trees which exhibit:



   (1)   Stunted Growth. Small distorted leaves and twigs.



   (2)   Leaf Color. Abnormal leaf color is an indicator of a problem.
Fertilization is usually necessary to correct this problem unless it is a
drainage problem.



   (3)   Insects and Disease. Leaves, twigs and roots can be affected
by insects and diseases. Diagnosis and treatments should be provided by a
tree care professional.



   (4)   Bark. Peeling bark is an indicator of damage be it either
mechanical, fungal or cold related.



   (5)   Excessive Cut or Fill. Both are equally damaging and should be
evaluated thoroughly. Exposing the root flare to the air or covering the
trunk with soil are both detrimental.



Town



   Town of Wrightsville Beach, except as otherwise provided.



Tree Protection Fence



   Any fence material at least three feet in height with integrity to
survive the period of construction.



Tree Protection Plan



   An informal tree protection and mitigation plan submitted to the
Department of Planning and Parks staff to seek approval for removal of
protected trees. Tree heights may be estimated on the plan.



Tree, Shade



   Single stem deciduous or evergreen tree expected to reach a height in
excess of 30 feet at maturity. Installed shade trees shall be a minimum of a
12 to 14 foot height and a minimum 2 inch caliper.







 



Tree, Small



   Deciduous or evergreen tree expected to reach a height of not more than
30 feet at maturity. Installed tree shall be a minimum of 8 to 10 in height
with a minimum 1 inch caliper.







 



    U



Uniformity Ratio



   The ratio of the average foot-candle calculation to the minimum
foot-candle reading for a given area. This ratio is an indicator of lighting
uniformity.



Up-Lighting



   Any light including but not limited to pole mounted, wall mounted, or
ground mounted fixtures that project above an imaginary horizontal plane
through the fixture.







 



Use



   The specific activity or function for which land, a building, or a
structure is designated, arranged, intended, occupied, or maintained.



Use, Principal



   The primary use and chief purpose of a lot or structure.



Utility/Service Equipment Stands



   Elevated decks required to raise electrical and mechanical equipment,
including but not limited to HVAC units, electrical meters, and generators
above the regulatory flood protection elevation as defined in Article 155.11,
Part I.



    V



Variance



   A grant of relief from the requirements of this Ordinance.



Ventilation



   The process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical
means to or from any space.



Vertical Illuminance



   Light falling on a vertical surface measured in foot- candles.



Vessel for Hire



   A watercraft for hire meeting one of the following classifications:



   (1)   A water craft for hire approved by the US Coast Guard for the
carrying of seven or more persons; or



   (2)   A watercraft for hire approved by the US Coast Guard for the
carrying of six or fewer persons.



   A vessel for hire shall not include a personal watercraft as defined in
G.S. Chapter 75A.



Vested Right



   The right of an owner of property to undertake and complete the
development and use of property under the terms and conditions of an approved
site specific development plan.



Violation



   The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant
with the community's floodplain management regulations or other applicable
sections of this Ordinance. A structure or other development without the
elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required under Article 155.11, Part I of this Ordinance is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.



    W



Washover Areas



   Low areas that are adjacent to beaches and are inundated by waves and
stor m tides. Washovers may be found in abandoned tidal channels or where dun
e systems are poorly developed or breached by storm tides and erosion.



Water Surface Elevation



   The height, in relation to mean sea level of floods of various
magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.



Watercourse



   A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel, or other topographic
feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse
includes spe cifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may
occur.



Watercraft



   A boat, houseboat, jet ski, canoe, raft, surfboard, or other apparatus
designed for use on water, including trailers therefor, and motors, engines,
or sails designed to propel such craftor apparatus.



Writing or Written



   Includes printing and any other mode of representing words and letters.



    X



   None



    Y



Yard



   A required open space on the same lot with a principal building. No
structure or portion of a structure shall be permitted in any part of a
required yard, either below, at, or above ground level, except as set forth
in Section 155.2.10 or elsewhere in this Ordinance.



Yard, Front (a)



   An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building
between the front line of the building and the lot frontage line (as defined
herein) extending across the full width of the lot.







 



Yard, Rear (b)



   A yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between
the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the main building.







 



Yard, Side (c)



   An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building between the
side line of the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the
front yard line to the rear line. If there is no front yard, the front
boundary of the side yard shall be the front line of the lot and if there is
no rear yard the rear boundary of the side yard shall be the rear line of the
lot.







 



    Z



Zoning Enforcement Official



   The government officer who is charged by the UDO Administrator with
enforcement of this Ordinance, where applicable.



(Ord. 1695, passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 1705, passed 4-11-13; Am. Ord. 1725,
passed 3-19-14; Am. Ord. 1728, passed 5-13-14; Am. Ord. 1739, passed 3-12-15;
Am. Ord. 1742, passed 4-8-15; Am. Ord. 1764, passed 2-9-17)



EXHIBIT B
INSTALLATION DETAIL



Note: Exhibit B images are available in PDF. Please click HERE to view. You
must have Adobe Acrobat Reader installed to view the images in PDF.







 







 







 


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2015 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to General Statutes of North Carolina





References to Code of 1972





References to Ordinances




References to General Statutes of North Carolina



 

G.S. Section
 
Code Section




14-4
 
50.999, 74.99, 91.01, 91.99, 92.31, 92.99, 94.99, 95.99, 96.99, 97.99, 98.99,
100.99, 116.99, 130.99, 152.999


14-190.1
 
131.02


14-190.10
 
131.02


14-234
 
31.05


14-269
 
130.06


14-277.2
 
98.12


14-288.1
 
93.08


14-288.20A
 
93.99


14-409.39(2)
 
93.08


15-27.2
 
50.154


17C-10
 
32.25


18B-1000(5)
 
Ch. 155, Appendix


18B-1006.1
 
95.10


Ch. 20, Art. 7A
 
90.05


20-16
 
114.09


20-97
 
110.68


20-219.9 et seq.
 
90.05, 92.24


20-222
 
90.06


20-280
 
114.03


44A-2
 
74.55, 90.06


60A-493
 
91.27


62-260
 
114.01


69-1
 
94.32


69-12
 
94.04


Ch. 74C
 
100.02


Ch. 75A
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, Exh. A


75A-2
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, Exh. A


75A-13.1
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A


75A-13.3
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, Exh. A


77-20(e)
 
98.02, 150.07


Ch. 78A
 
110.65


Ch. 90, Art. 36
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A


Ch. 93B
 
110.25(B)


Ch. 95, Art. 12
 
32.06


103-4
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


105-37 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-37.1
 
110.65


105-45 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-49 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-53 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-54 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-58 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-61 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-61.1 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-62 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-64 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-64.1 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-65 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-65.2 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-66.1 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-67 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-74 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-75.1 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-80 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-82 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-85 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-88
 
110.65


105-89 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-89.1 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-90 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-91 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-97 [repealed]
 
110.65


105-98
 
110.65


105-109
 
110.54, 110.55


105-113.73
 
110.65


105-113.79
 
110.65


105-249
 
110.16(C)


105-249.1
 
110.16(C)


105-277.2
 
Charter § 7.5


105-349
 
Charter § 4.4


121-5
 
110.35, 110.53


121-22
 
92.01


121-23
 
92.01


Ch. 143, Art. 9
 
Charter § 7.6


Ch. 143, Art. 9C
 
Charter § 7.6


Ch. 143, Art. 33C
 
32.12, 32.51, 32.57


143-214.7
 
50.131


143-318.9
 
32.57


143-318.9 et seq.
 
32.12, 32.38


143-318.10
 
32.12


143-318.18
 
32.12


143B-282
 
94.07


146-12
 
Charter § 7.1


153A-121
 
132.01


159-2
 
33.04


159-18
 
50.080


159-18 - 159.22
 
33.06


159-24
 
31.21


159-25
 
33.05


159-28
 
33.04, 33.06


159-28.1
 
33.06


159-29
 
31.02


159-30
 
33.03


159-31
 
33.03


Ch. 159, Art. 3
 
33.03, 33.04


159-48(a)(17)
 
50.080


159-48(a)(21)
 
50.080


160-425 [repealed]
 
33.06


160-431 [repealed]
 
33.06


160.432(1) [repealed]
 
33.06


160.432(2) [repealed]
 
33.06


160.432(4) [repealed]
 
33.06


160.432(5) [repealed]
 
33.06


160.432(7) [repealed]
 
33.06


160.432(9) [repealed]
 
33.06


Ch. 160A
 
92.20


Ch. 160A
 
152.155


Ch. 160A, Art. 7, Part 2
 
Charter § 4.1, 30.04


Ch. 160A, Art. 10
 
Charter §§ 5.1 - 5.3


Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Part 3C
 
32.52


160A-1
 
Charter § 1.2


160A-58.5
 
50.111


160A-63
 
Charter § 2.7


160A-67
 
30.02


160A-71
 
30.06, 30.07


160A-72
 
30.10


160A-74
 
Charter § 2.6, 30.09, 32.38


160A-78
 
30.03


160A-146
 
30.01, 32.55


160A-175
 
10.99, 91.99, 151.999


160A-175(b)
 
91.99, 92.31, 92.99, 96.99, 130.99


160A-175(D) and (E)
 
110.55


160A-175(d) and (e)
 
91.99


160A-175(F)
 
91.99


160A-185
 
50.056


160A-186
 
91.01, 91.20


160A-188
 
91.10


160A-189, 190
 
130.02


160A-193
 
50.159, 95.29, 97.10


160A-207
 
110.54


160A-209
 
93.17


160A-211
 
110.65


160A-212
 
91.21


160A-216
 
50.106


160A-281
 
32.20


160A-282
 
32.27


160A-282(a)
 
32.27


160A-284
 
32.25


160A-284
 
32.27


160A-285
 
32.22


160A-303
 
90.01


160A-303.1
 
94.99


160A-308
 
Charter § 7.4


160A-312
 
50.016


160A-317
 
50.017


160A-351
 
32.35


160A-352
 
32.35


160A-353
 
32.37


160A-360
 
Charter §§ 7.2, 7.5, 92.01, 92.20, 92.31


160A-361
 
32.10, 32.13


160A-381
 
Charter § 7.1


160A-388
 
Charter § 2.8


160A-393
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.4.4


160A-393(d)
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.4.4


160A-400.4
 
32.52


160A-400.5
 
32.52


160A-400.7
 
32.46


160A-411
 
151.110


160A-412
 
151.110


160A-417
 
Charter § 7.6, 50.017


160A-421
 
150.22


160A-435
 
94.02


160A-436
 
94.02


160A-441
 
152.00


163-292
 
Charter § 3.1


166A-13
 
93.04


166A-19.3
 
93.07


166A-19.15
 
93.17


166A-19.15(c)
 
93.01


166A-19.22
 
93.07


166A-19.22(b)(2)
 
93.18


166A-19.31
 
93.18


166A-19.71
 
93.16


Ch. 168
 
91.12


 
 
 




 



References to 1972 Code



 

Old Code Section
 
New Code Section




2-2
 
31.01


2-3
 
31.02


2-4
 
30.06


2-6
 
30.09


2-7
 
30.10


2-9
 
30.08


2-10
 
30.05


2-12
 
32.10


2-13
 
32.11


2-14
 
32.12


2-16
 
32.13


5-1
 
113.01


5-1
 
115.01


5-2
 
113.02


5-3
 
115.02


5-4
 
115.03


5-5
 
115.04


5-6
 
115.06


5-15
 
113.10


5-16
 
113.11


5-17
 
113.12


5-21
 
113.14


5-22
 
113.20


5-23
 
113.21


5-24
 
113.22


5-25
 
113.23


5-26
 
113.24


5-27
 
113.25


5-28
 
113.26


7-2
 
33.02


7-3
 
33.03


7-4.1
 
110.01


7-4.2
 
110.02


7-4.3
 
110.10


7-4.4
 
110.11


7-4.5
 
110.12


7-4.7
 
110.14


7-4.8
 
110.15


7-4.9
 
110.16


7-4.10
 
110.25


7-4.11
 
110.26


7-4.12
 
110.27


7-4.13
 
110.28


7-4.14
 
110.29


7-4.15
 
110.30


7-4.16
 
110.31


7-4.17
 
110.32


7-4.18
 
110.33


7-4.19
 
110.34


7-4.20
 
110.35


7-4.21
 
110.36


7-4.22
 
110.45


7-4.23
 
110.46


7-4.24
 
110.47


7-4.25
 
110.48


7-4.26
 
110.49


7-4.27
 
110.50


7-4.28
 
110.51


7-4.29
 
110.52


7-4.30
 
110.53


7-4.31
 
110.54


7-4.32
 
110.55


7-4.33
 
110.65


7-4.34
 
110.66


7-4.35
 
110.67


7-4.36
 
110.68


8A-1
 
94.02


8A-2
 
94.02


8A-3
 
94.03


8A-3
 
94.30


8-3
 
94.31


8-3
 
94.32


8-3
 
94.33


8A-4
 
94.04


8A-5
 
94.05


8A-6
 
94.06


8A-7
 
94.07


8A-8
 
94.08


8A-9
 
94.01


8A-10
 
94.09


8A-11
 
94.10


8A-15
 
94.12


8A-16
 
94.13


9-11
 
96.01


9-11.1
 
96.02


9-11.2
 
96.03


9-11.3
 
96.04


9-11.4
 
96.99


11-2
 
70.02


11-3
 
70.03


11-4
 
70.04


11-5
 
70.05


11-6
 
70.06


11-7
 
70.07


11-9
 
70.15


11-10
 
70.16


11-11
 
70.18


11-12
 
70.22


11-13
 
70.23


11-14
 
70.24


11-15
 
74.01


11-16
 
74.02


11-17
 
74.04


11-18
 
74.05


11-20
 
74.07


11-21
 
74.08


11-23
 
74.09


11-25
 
74.10


11-26
 
74.11


11-27
 
74.12


11-28
 
74.13


11-31
 
74.14


11-32
 
74.16


11-33
 
74.15


11-35
 
71.01


11-36
 
71.02


11-37
 
71.03


11-38
 
71.04


11-39
 
71.05


11-40
 
71.06


11-41
 
71.07


11-42
 
71.08


11-43
 
71.09


11-44
 
71.10


11-46
 
72.10


11-47
 
72.11


11-48
 
72.08


11-48
 
72.12


11-49
 
71.12


11-50
 
71.13


11-51
 
71.14


11-52
 
71.15


11-53
 
71.16


11-54
 
71.17


11-55
 
71.18


11-56
 
71.19


12-1
 
97.01


12-2
 
97.02


12-4
 
97.04


12-5
 
97.05


13-1
 
92.02


13-2
 
92.03


13-3
 
92.04


13-4
 
92.05


13-5
 
92.06


13-6
 
92.07


14-2
 
130.02


14-3
 
92.01


14-4
 
130.04


14-5
 
130.05


14-6
 
98.03


14-7
 
92.13


14-8
 
113.15


14-9
 
113.15


14-11
 
132.02


14-12
 
92.14


14-14
 
92.12


14-17
 
92.15


15-1
 
150.02


15-1
 
150.03


15-2
 
150.04


15-3
 
150.05


15-4
 
150.06


15-7
 
150.09


15-8
 
92.16


15-9
 
150.10


15-10
 
150.11


15-11
 
150.01


15-12
 
150.12


15-13
 
150.13


15-14
 
150.14


15-15
 
150.15


15-16
 
150.16


15-17
 
150.17


15-18
 
150.20


15-19
 
150.21


15-22
 
150.22


16-1
 
32.20


16-2
 
32.21


16-3
 
32.22


16-4
 
32.23


16-5
 
32.24


17-1
 
99.01


17-2
 
99.02


17-3
 
99.03


17-4
 
99.04


17-5
 
99.05


17-6
 
99.06


17-7
 
99.07


17-8
 
99.08


17-9
 
99.09


17-10
 
99.14


17-11
 
99.15


17-12
 
99.16


17-13
 
99.10


17-14
 
99.11


17-15
 
99.12


17-16
 
99.13


 
 
 




 



References to Ordinances



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




--
 
3-20-69
 
32.10, 32.11, 32.12, 32.13


--
 
7-22-70
 
151.002


--
 
4-13-72
 
94.13


--
 
7-27-72
 
33.06


--
 
1-11-73
 
33.03


--
 
2-22-73
 
152.115, 152.116, 152.117, 152.118, 152.119, 152.120, 152.121, 152.122, Ch.
152, App.


--
 
6-27-74
 
30.10, 32.11, 32.12


--
 
7-25-74
 
32.35, 32.36, 32.37, 32.38, 32.39, 32.40, 32.41, 32.42, 32.43, 32.44


--
 
1-9-75
 
71.20


--
 
3-13-75
 
32.36, 32.44


--
 
12-11-75
 
150.12, 150.18, 150.19, 151.035, 151.036, 151.037, 151.038


--
 
1-22-77
 
Ch. 152


--
 
1-11-78
 
152.115, 152.116, 152.117, 152.118, 152.119, 152.120, 152.121, 152.122, Ch.
152, App.


--
 
5-28-78
 
115.05


--
 
7-28-78
 
92.01


--
 
8-10-78
 
32.26


--
 
9-28-78
 
91.01, 91.02, 91.10, 91.11, 91.12, 91.13, 91.20, 91.21, 91.22, 91.23, 91.24,
91.25, 91.26, 91.27, 91.28, 91.99


--
 
10-26-78
 
92.01, 92.12


--
 
11-2-78
 
91.21


--
 
12-7-78
 
32.27


--
 
5-10-79
 
74.17


--
 
7-12-79
 
94.14


--
 
7-26-79
 
150.05


--
 
8-9-79
 
74.18


--
 
8-23-79
 
94.01, 94.02, 94.03, 94.04, 94.05, 94.30, 94.31, 94.32, 94.33


--
 
12-13-79
 
70.9996.01, 96.02, 96.03, 96.04, 96.99


--
 
3-27-80
 
152.025, 152.060


--
 
6-26-80
 
152.060


--
 
7-24-80
 
92.12


--
 
5-28-81
 
91.02, 91.12, 92.12, 92.16


--
 
6-25-81
 
92.08, 92.10


--
 
10-8-81
 
111.01, 111.02, 111.03, 111.04, 111.05, 111.07, 111.08, 111.98, 111.99


--
 
2-11-82
 
152.006, 152.007


--
 
7-22-82
 
92.12


--
 
5-26-83
 
74.99, 92.11, 130.02, 130.99, 132.98, 132.99


--
 
7-28-83
 
Ch. 50


--
 
10-4-84
 
93.01, 93.02, 93.03, 93.04, 93.04


--
 
9-5-85
 
151.003


--
 
8-11-88
 
92.08


1009
 
4-24-86
 
71.08


1011
 
4-24-86
 
74.50, 74.51, 74.52, 74.99


1012
 
4-24-86
 
74.23


1036
 
12-4-86
 
50.018, 50.080, 50.081, 50.082


1043
 
3-26-87
 
151.001, 151.002, 151.003, 151.004, 151.035, 151.036, 151.037, 151.038,
151.110


1048
 
4-9-87
 
92.12, 92.99


1068
 
12-17-87
 
92.16


1069
 
1-28-88
 
91.99


1072
 
4-14-88
 
50.042, 50.048, 50.056, 50.057, 50.058, 50.059, 50.070


1081
 
7-14-88
 
71.54, 74.35, 74.36, 74.37, 74.38, 74.39, 74.40, 74.41, 74.53, 74.99


1085
 
9-8-88
 
74.38


1090
 
1-12-89
 
Ch. 110


1091
 
3-9-89
 
50.080


1094
 
5-11-89
 
97.01, 97.02, 97.04, 97.05


1100
 
7-27-89
 
150.22


1101
 
7-27-89
 
Adopting Ordinance


1103
 
11-2-89
 
132.03


1104
 
10-12-89
 
152.060


1105
 
10-12-89
 
71.11, 92.18


1106
 
11-2-89
 
53.07


1107
 
11-16-89
 
Ch. 34


1108
 
1-11-90
 
31.20


1110
 
3-8-90
 
151.006


1112
 
3-8-90
 
92.19


1119
 
7-26-90
 
50.002


1123
 
9-13-90
 
92.03


1124
 
11-15-90
 
91.29, 91.30


1128
 
12-20-90
 
30.06


1131
 
1-10-91
 
74.23, 74.99


1132
 
1-10-91
 
33.03


1136
 
1-14-91
 
70.28, Ch. 76, Sch. III


1138
 
3-14-91
 
32.26


1144
 
5-23-91
 
92.20


1149
 
7-11-91
 
92.16


1152
 
8-22-91
 
150.01, 150.11, 150.12


1154
 
8-22-91
 
74.99


1156
 
9-12-91
 
50.080


1158
 
10-10-91
 
33.07


1161
 
11-21-91
 
92.20


1163
 
12-19-91
 
94.01, 94.08, 94.11, 94.30 - 94.33, 151.003, 152.004


1164
 
1-9-92
 
151.111


1170
 
3-12-92
 
32.11, 32.12, 32.13


1172
 
4-16-92
 
91.02


1176
 
4-30-92
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


1179
 
5-14-92
 
32.36, 32.37, 32.39, 32.40. 32.42, 32.43, 32.44


1182
 
6-17-92
 
50.080


1198
 
9-10-92
 
32.46 - 32.52


1201
 
10-22-92
 
91.12


1208
 
1-14-93
 
Repealing 150.08


1213
 
6-10-93
 
32.52, 32.53


1215
 
7-8-93
 
74.99


1216
 
8-26-93
 
Ch. 116


1217
 
8-26-93
 
93.01 - 93.08, 93.10 - 93.17, 93.99


1218
 
9-9-93
 
116.09


1219
 
9-9-93
 
92.21


1220
 
9-9-93
 
Ch. 76, Sch. III


1222
 
12-2-93
 
32.46 - 32.53


1224
 
1-20-94
 
30.06


1228
 
4-28-94
 
74.99, Ch. 76, Sch. IV


1230
 
4-28-94
 
Ch. 76, Sch. III


1233
 
5-26-94
 
Ch. 76, Sch. IV


1235
 
5-26-94
 
131.03


1239
 
8-25-94
 
92.07


1240
 
8-25-94
 
32.01 - 32.06


1245
 
1-12-95
 
150.052


1247
 
3-30-95
 
94.99


1250
 
5-18-95
 
33.02, 33.04, 33.05, 33.08


1252
 
5-25-95
 
32.12


1254
 
8-17-95
 
Ch. 100


1256
 
8-17-95
 
70.46 - 70.49, 131.04


1257
 
9-14-95
 
70.49


1258
 
9-14-95
 
92.10


1259
 
9-21-95
 
130.03


1263
 
11-16-95
 
151.035, 151.036, 151.039


1266
 
12-11-96
 
130.06


1267
 
1-11-96
 
92.19


1271
 
5-9-96
 
32.27


1274
 
6-13-96
 
70.35 - 70.39


1277
 
7-25-96
 
94.99


1278
 
8-8-96
 
116.01, 116.02, 116.06, 116.13, 116.17, 116.18, 116.99


1286
 
7-10-97
 
93.34, 93.35


1287
 
7-10-97
 
71.21, 71.22; Ch. 75, Sch. II


1288
 
7-10-97
 
Ch. 76, Sch. III


1291
 
7-31-97
 
50.020


1292
 
7-31-97
 
50.116


1293
 
9-11-97
 
33.02


1295
 
9-25-97
 
110.65


1297
 
1-8-98
 
50.080


1298
 
1-22-98
 
32.35


1299
 
1-22-98
 
151.112


1307
 
4-23-98
 
74.24


1309
 
5-28-98
 
74.41


1310
 
5-28-98
 
Ch. 76, Sch. III


1316-B
 
6-25-98
 
74.41


1318
 
9-24-98
 
151.007


1320
 
10-8-98
 
74.39


1328
 
2-11-99
 
94.45 - 94.47


1329
 
3-11-99
 
32.11


1330
 
4-8-99
 
70.16, 70.19, 70.28


1331
 
4-8-99
 
74.04


1332
 
4-8-99
 
Ch. 76, Sch. III


1333
 
4-8-99
 
Ch. 76, Sch. IV


1337
 
6-24-99
 
74.13; Ch. 76, Sch. III


1341
 
7-29-99
 
96.99, 97.06, 130.99


1342
 
7-29-99
 
100.03, 100.04, 100.99


1345
 
8-26-99
 
Delete 110.13


1346
 
8-26-99
 
95.01, 95.02, 95.10 - 95.20, 95.99, 96.05, 96.99


1348
 
11-18-98
 
91.12


1352
 
1-27-00
 
100.04


1353
 
2-10-00
 
92.16


1356
 
3-9-00
 
92.08, 92.99


1357
 
4-13-00
 
96.99


1359
 
4-13-00
 
130.99


1360
 
4-13-00
 
10.99


1364
 
4-13-00
 
92.99


1366
 
7-13-00
 
74.38, 74.41, Ch. 76, Sch. IV


1373-A
 
2-28-01
 
74.39


1374
 
2-22-01
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


1375-A
 
2-28-01
 
74.42


1377
 
3-22-01
 
33.07


1378
 
4-12-01
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


1378-A
 
4-26-01
 
116.04, 116.05, 116.07 - 116.09, 116.13


1379
 
5-10-01
 
74.38


1384
 
6-14-01
 
74.43


1385
 
6-14-01
 
74.38


1389
 
7-12-01
 
91.12


1401
 
1-24-02
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


1405
 
2-28-02
 
74.39, 74.41


1406
 
3-28-02
 
94.01


1407
 
3-28-02
 
91.02, 91.08


1408
 
3-28-02
 
91.12


1409
 
3-28-02
 
Ch. 76, Sch. III


1410
 
3-28-02
 
Ch. 76, Sch. III


1413
 
3-28-02
 
91.21, 91.99


1414
 
5-9-02
 
74.55


1416
 
6-13-02
 
32.27


1418
 
7-11-02
 
50.080, 95.18


1421
 
8-8-02
 
50.042


1422
 
8-8-02
 
50.999


1423
 
8-22-02
 
96.99, 130.99


1424
 
8-22-02
 
74.44, 74.99


1428
 
10-10-02
 
92.01, 92.22, 92.24, 92.25


1430
 
10-24-02
 
97.04, 98.02 - 98.05, 98.07, 98.13, 98.14, 98.99


1431
 
10-24-02
 
150.21


1442
 
4-24-03
 
74.08, 74.12, 74.39, 74.41, 74.55


1443
 
4-24-03
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


1444
 
4-24-03
 
74.19


1448
 
8-14-03
 
91.10


1454
 
1-8-04
 
98.02


1456
 
2-12-04
 
92.16


1458
 
3-25-04
 
74.38, Ch. 76, Sch. I


1459
 
5-27-04
 
96.05


1462
 
6-10-04
 
74.42, Ch. 76, Sch. IV


1465
 
8-12-04
 
97.04, 98.02 - 98.04


1469
 
9-30-04
 
31.06


1472
 
2-24-05
 
32.35


1474
 
4-14-05
 
92.12, 92.99


1475
 
4-14-05
 
32.26


1483
 
10-13-05
 
Ch. 76, Sch. III


1489
 
1-12-06
 
32.05


1490
 
1-26-06
 
92.12


1492
 
1-26-06
 
32.35


1495
 
2-9-06
 
97.02


1496
 
2-22-06
 
74.39, 74.41


1497
 
2-22-06
 
117.01-117.69


1504
 
3-23-06
 
32.55-32.59


1512
 
7-13-06
 
50.080, 50.082


1516
 
8-27-06
 
50.162


1520
 
9-14-06
 
30.06


1521
 
9-14-06
 
Ch. 76, Sch. III


1524
 
10-12-06
 
98.03


1525
 
10-26-06
 
130.01


1531
 
6-15-07
 
92.05, 92.18


1533
 
4-12-07
 
92.12


1534
 
3-28-07
 
91.99


1535
 
5-10-07
 
74.41


1536
 
6-14-07
 
50.101, 50.106


1537
 
6-28-07
 
50.080, 50.082


1538
 
5-24-07
 
50.130 - 50.161, 50.999


1541
 
8-9-07
 
150.02


1543
 
8-9-07
 
92.21


1544
 
8-9-07
 
92.26


1545
 
8-9-07
 
74.19, Ch. 75, Sch. I


1547
 
8-23-07
 
98.02 - 98.05, 98.13, 98.14, 98.99


1548
 
9-13-07
 
92.09


1549
 
9-13-07
 
92.17


1550
 
9-27-07
 
95.21


1551
 
9-27-07
 
74.38.1


1552
 
9-27-07
 
92.21


1561
 
10-25-07
 
95.10


1565
 
1-10-08
 
92.27, 150.05


1570
 
2-25-08
 
74.14


1571
 
2-25-08
 
74.40, 74.41


1572
 
3-13-08
 
74.38.1


1574
 
4-24-08
 
74.11


1575
 
5-5-08
 
92.12


1576
 
6-25-08
 
50.080


1578
 
7-17-08
 
92.21, 92.99


1583
 
8-28-08
 
98.03, 98.04


1584
 
9-25-08
 
95.25


1587
 
12-11-08
 
151.008, 151.009


1590
 
1-29-09
 
50.159, 50.999


1591
 
2-12-09
 
74.56


1592
 
2-26-09
 
32.36 - 32.43


1593
 
3-12-09
 
92.01, 92.28 - 92.30, 92.99


1594
 
4-9-09
 
32.38


1595
 
4-9-09
 
116.15


1596
 
4-9-09
 
91.99


1597
 
5-14-09
 
74.25


1598
 
5-14-09
 
Ch. 76, Sch. IV


1600
 
5-28-09
 
98.04


1601
 
6-11-09
 
99.01 - 99.03


1602
 
6-11-09
 
74.11


1603
 
6-11-09
 
115.05


1606
 
6-25-09
 
91.21


1607
 
6-25-09
 
50.080


1612
 
9-10-09
 
Ch. 76, Sch. III


1614
 
10-29-09
 
74.39


1616
 
1-14-10
 
98.01 - 98.15, 98.99


1617
 
2-11-10
 
32.56


1618
 
2-11-10
 
74.55


1619
 
2-11-10
 
74.41


1620
 
2-11-10
 
74.39


1621
 
2-11-10
 
Ch. 76, Sch. IV


1623
 
3-11-10
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


1624
 
4-8-10
 
150.07


1625
 
4-8-10
 
74.38


1626
 
4-22-10
 
70.01, 92.01, 92.18


1627
 
5-13-10
 
Ch. 76, Sch. III


1628
 
5-13-10
 
92.99


1629
 
5-13-10
 
92.27


1630
 
6-24-10
 
114.01 - 114.22


1632
 
7-15-10
 
95.13


1633
 
7-15-10
 
74.15, 74.99, Ch. 76, Sch. III


1634
 
7-15-10
 
114.13


1637
 
8-12-10
 
74.43


1638
 
8-12-10
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


1640
 
8-12-10
 
98.02, 98.05, 98.09


1641
 
10-14-10
 
92.99


1642
 
11-18-10
 
92.31


1643
 
11-18-10
 
32.55 - 32.59


1644
 
12-9-10
 
50.120 - 50.128


1645
 
12-9-10
 
95.13


1646
 
2-10-11
 
32.35, 32.38, 32.43


1647
 
2-10-11
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


1650
 
3-10-11
 
74.56


1651
 
3-10-11
 
74.39


1652
 
4-14-11
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


1654
 
4-14-11
 
32.11


1655
 
5-12-11
 
114.01


1656
 
5-12-11
 
Ch. 76, Sch. IV


1658
 
7-14-11
 
114.21


1660
 
7-14-11
 
74.26


1661
 
7-14-11
 
50.080


1663
 
8-11-11
 
92.01, 92.19, 92.22, 92.24


1664
 
11-16-11
 
114.01, 114.02, 114.05


1665
 
11-16-11
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


1668
 
1-12-12
 
32.35


1670
 
2-9-12
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


1675
 
3-8-12
 
74.42


1676
 
3-8-12
 
91.12


1678
 
5-10-12
 
74.35, 74.45 - 74.47


1679
 
5-10-12
 
Ch. 76, Schs. I, III, IV


1682
 
6-14-12
 
98.03


1683
 
6-14-12
 
50.002, 50.080, 50.082


1684
 
7-12-12
 
91.99


1685
 
7-12-12
 
92.99


1686
 
7-12-12
 
130.99


1687
 
7-12-12
 
92.32


1688
 
8-16-12
 
91.99


1689
 
8-16-12
 
114.01, 114.13


1691
 
8-16-12
 
92.26


1692
 
8-16-12
 
92.99


1693
 
8-16-12
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


1695
 
11-8-12
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§ 155.1.1 -  155.1.13, 155.2.1 - 155.2.15, 155.3.1 -
155.3.13, 155.4.1 - 155.4.7, 155.5.1 - 155.5.5, 155.6.1 - 155.6.5, 155.7.1 -
155.7.20, 155.8.1 - 155.8.18, 155.9.1 - 155.9.24, 155.10.1 - 155.10.15,
155.11.1 - 155.11.35, 155.12.1 - 155.12.27, Exh. A and B


1697
 
10-11-12
 
92.12


1699
 
2-14-13
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.8.11


1700
 
2-14-13
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.9.6


1702
 
2-14-13
 
74.46


1703
 
3-14-13
 
74.46


1704
 
4-11-13
 
92.33, 92.99


1705
 
4-11-13
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.6.4, Ch. 155, Appx. A, Exh. A


1706
 
4-11-13
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.11.16


1707
 
5-9-13
 
92.12, 92.99


1708
 
5-9-13
 
74.39


1710
 
5-9-13
 
91.22.1, 95.25, 97.06 - 97.10, 97.99


1711
 
6-13-13
 
96.99, 130.99


1712
 
6-13-13
 
114.01


1713
 
6-13-13
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.8.11


1715
 
8-8-13
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.10.6


1716
 
9-12-13
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.9.1


1717
 
9-12-13
 
114.05


1721
 
1-23-14
 
33.02


1722
 
2-18-14
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.6.5


1723
 
3-25-14
 
74.38.1, 74.41, 74.43, 74.51, Ch. 76, Sch. I


1724
 
3-19-14
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.2.4


1725
 
3-19-14
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§ 155.6.4, 155.9.1, Ch. 155, Appx. A, Exh. A


1726
 
3-25-14
 
Ch. 76, Sch. IV


1727
 
5-3-14
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§ 155.3.13, 155.4.4


1728
 
5-13-14
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§ 155.2.3, 155.7.21, Ch. 155, Appx. A, Exh. A


1729
 
4-10-14
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I, IV


1730
 
6-12-14
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.9.12


1731
 
6-12-14
 
50.080


1733
 
7-10-14
 
92.29


1734
 
9-11-14
 
93.01, 93.06 - 93.08, 93.10 -93.12, 93.16 - 93.18, 93.99


1735
 
11-13-14
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§ 155.8.12 - 155.8.19


1736
 
12-11-14
 
70.38


1737
 
1-8-15
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.2.4


1739
 
3-12-15
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.6.4, Exh. A


1740
 
3-12-15
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.6.5


1742
 
4-8-15
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.6.4, Exh. A


1744
 
5-7-15
 
98.03


1745
 
5-28-15
 
74.35, 74.38.1, 74.39, 74.43, 74.45, 74.46, 74.48, Ch. 76, Sch. IV


1746
 
6-11-15
 
92.26


1747
 
10-13-15
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.1.12


1748
 
8-13-15
 
97.02


1749
 
9-10-15
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.7.20


1750
 
10-13-15
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.4.1


1752
 
11-12-15
 
32.56


1753
 
12-10-15
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.9.6


1754
 
12-10-15
 
32.56


1756
 
2-11-16
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.8.4


1757
 
2-11-16
 
70.38, 74.38, 74.39, 74.40, 74.42, 74.49, Ch. 76, Sch. I


1758
 
4-14-16
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§ 155.6.4, 155.7.22


1759
 
5-12-16
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§ 155.6.4, 155.9.2


1760
 
5-12-16
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, § 155.9.1


1761
 
6-8-16
 
50.080


1762
 
1-12-17
 
50.080


1763
 
2-9-17
 
74.38, 74.42, 74.46, Ch. 76, Sch. I


1764
 
2-9-17
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, Exh. A


1765
 
2-9-17
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§ 155.6.4, 155.6.5


1766
 
5-11-17
 
97.06, 97.11, 97.12, 97.99


1767
 
6-8-17
 
Ch. 155, Appx. A, §§ 155.6.4, 155.7.23


 
 
 
 
 




 


